Title       : An Empirical Analysis of the Interaction between Inbreeding, Linkage and
               Selection in Wild Barley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2003    
File        : a0129247

Award Number: 0129247
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Clegg michael.clegg@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1113,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to assess the role of high levels of
              self-fertilization in enhancing the conditions for linkage disequilibrium
              within plant species. Linkage disequilibrium refers to a correlation in allelic
              state between two different genetic loci at the population or species level.
              The statistic used to measure this correlation provides an index of the
              non-random distribution of alleles at different loci or of different nucleotide
              sties within a locus. All other things being equal, sexually reproducing
              organisms are expected to reach a state of linkage equilibrium because
              recombination ultimately randomizes the genome at all scales of resolution (the
              correlation in allelic state approaches zero independent of genetic distance).
              However, the rate of approach to equilibrium may be slow because it depends on
              the breeding system and the extent of linkage between genes. A nonrandom
              distribution is important because selection on a gene will perturb the
              frequencies of all other genes in linkage disequilibrium with the selected
              gene. Such perturbations can reduce the efficiency of selection because
              selection at one locus may be contravened by selection at a second locus in
              linkage disequilibrium with the first. This situation is known as linkage drag.
              Self-fertilization and linkage interact to restrict recombination, because
              self-fertilization reduces heterozygosity and thereby reduces the effective
              rate of recombination between genes or between nucleotide sites within a gene.
              

It is obviously important to characterize the extent of linkage
              disequilibrium in inbreeding species to better understand how restricted
              recombination may affect adaptive potential. This project will investigate the
              extent of linkage disequilibrium within wild barley (Hordeum vulgare ssp.
              spontaneum), a species with a rate of self-fertilization greater than 98%. The
              project will sample nucleotide sequences from a number of loci and the
              accessions sequenced will be chosen to span the geographic range of wild
              barley. The genetic scale of the samples will permit a measure of linkage
              disequilibrium at different physical and genetic distances ranging from (a)
              physical distances up to approximately 5,000 base pairs; (b) moderately linked
              genes (recombination fraction < 0.01); and (c) loosely linked genes
              (recombination fraction > 0.1). This investigation will permit a direct
              empirical assessment of how the interaction between selection, linkage and
              recombination restricts adaptive potential in inbreeding species.

