Title       : U.S. - France Cooperative Research: Sulfide and Oxysulfide Glasses - Novel
               Optical Materials for Integrated Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0129235

Award Number: 0129235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Cerqua-Richardson kcr@creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alfons Schulte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5918,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0129235
Cerqua-Richardson

This three-year award for U.S.-France
              collaboration in novel optical materials involves students and faculty
              researchers at the University of Central Florida's School of Optics/CREOL and
              research groups at the University of Bordeaux I in France.  Kathleen T.
              Cerqua-Richardson, Alfons Schulte, and Thierry Cardinal at CREOL and Bordeaux
              respectively will lead the collaborative program.  The goal is to fabricate and
              characterize chalcogenide and oxysulfide glasses and their related waveguides
              for integrated optic applications.  Chalcogenide glasses have shown potential
              for use in linear and nonlinear optics.  They exhibit high optical
              nonlinearities, are photosensitive in the visible region and transparent in the
              telecommunication spectral region.  They suffer from limited long-term
              stability.  The research will address several current limitations associated
              with non-oxide chalcogenide glasses and extend knowledge in new oxysulfide
              glass systems.  The US researchers bring to this collaboration expertise in
              processing and optical fabrication of bulk chalcogenide materials, Raman
              spectroscopy using near infrared techniques for fiber and films.  This is
              complemented by French expertise in the synthesis and characterization of bulk
              oxysulfide materials and ab initio calculations.
 
This award represents the
              US side of joint proposals to the NSF and the French National Center for
              Scientific Research (CNRS).  NSF will cover travel funds and living expenses
              for the US investigators and graduate student.  CNRS will support the visits of
              the French researchers and graduate students to the United States. 

