Title       : SOFTWARE: Building High Performance and Reliable System Infrastructure for
               Clustered Scientific Data Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0129883

Award Number: 0129883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard S. Hirsh                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95075              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Voigt rvoigt@compsci.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Internet Data Centers are built by clustered high performance servers,
              workstations, and PCs, where the size of the cluster ranges from LAN (local
              area networks) to WAN (wide area networks for metasystems and for grid
              computing). The data centers not only provide data searching/storage services,
              but also provide large scale computing services. Effective resource management
              presents important and challenging research and development issues to be
              addressed in the areas of scalability and reliability. Cluster-based data
              centers provide us with tremendous opportunities for aggregating huge amounts
              of information and computing resources in a cost-effective way, but it is
              harder to build distributed data centers that are efficient. 

This
              exploratory award will investigate several areas of research in resource
              management in distributed systems based on the core technology of being able to
              monitor and predict the usage of resources in a distributed system: (1)
              development of a unified network and system information extraction tool for
              performance prediction, and data center resource utilization; (2) modeling of
              and profiling network behavior and activities; and (3) development of dynamic
              scheduling schemes and their implementations for optimal utilizations and
              management of global resources in Internet data centers including networks,
              memory, and I/O systems.  The result will be the identification of the most
              promising line of research for future investigations.

