Title       : Conditioning-Dependent Gene Expression in the Amygdala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0129809

Award Number: 0129809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389708             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey B. Rosen jrosen@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

One of the major goals of neuroscience is to delineate the neural
              and molecular mechanisms important for learning and memory.  A prominent type
              of learning is fear conditioning where one learns to be afraid of an aversive
              event and the signals that become associated with the event.  Learning and
              memory of fear has important biological and psychological implications for
              animal survival and human interactions in society.  Over the years, one part of
              the brain, called the amygdala, has been shown to be critical for fear learning
              as measured by numerous fear-related responses in animals and humans.  While
              the amygdala is an integral part of a fear circuit or system, little is known
              about the molecular mechanisms of fear conditioning within the amygdala. 
              Cascades of molecular events from neurotransmitters activating receptors and
              then signal transduction systems to the expression of genes and proteins are
              thought to underlie learning and memory.  The objectives of this proposed
              research are to investigate the cellular and molecular mechanisms of learning
              and memory of fear within the amygdala.  The participation of the major
              transduction systems in the amygdala will be investigated by selectively
              inhibiting four prominent transduction pathways pharmacologically and
              determining whether fear conditioning and gene expression are blocked. 
              Additional experiments will determine which types of neurons in the amygdala
              have these changes in gene expression.  The results will contribute important
              advances in our understanding of sequential cellular and molecular processes
              that underlie the phenomenon of learning and memory of fear.

