Title       : Technology in the Making of 20th Century Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0129823

Award Number: 0129823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. Misa misa@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gabrielle Hecht  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract
SES Proposal 0129823
Technology in the Making of 20th Century
              Europe
Thomas Misa, Illinois Institute of Technology


This proposal
              supports the participation of American historians of technology in a
              large-scale, European-based study seeking to understand the roles of technology
              in the making of European society across the 20th century.  The work undertaken
              focuses on conceptual and empirical research that will extend the European
              project -- and which is done in close collaboration with a network of European
              and North American scholars. The PIs intend the work outlined here, in both
              substantive and organizational ways, to help the field of STS speak to vital
              public concerns about the role of technology in society.  More specifically,
              the project is intended to generate new knowledge about technology's role in
              20th-century Europe, greater visibility and coherence for European studies of
              technology in the U.S., and a better comparative understanding of U.S.
              developments.   These collaborative efforts may serve as a model for STS
              research that is transnational in topic, organization, and method.

Specific
              activities include the following: [a] coordination and integration of the
              European project as a whole, with a goal of refining concepts and methods for
              conducting detailed empirical research related to "big" questions about
              technology in complex historical processes; [b] work on the "cities" theme of
              the larger project -- involving research, coordination, workshops, and
              publications; and [c] similar work on the "colonialism" theme of the project.
              The PI and co-PI are already deeply involved in the European network; through
              workshops and other efforts, the project seeks to encourage broader
              participation by other U.S. scholars.



