Title       : Phylogeny and Evolution of the Basal Genera of Mimosoid Legumes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0129228

Award Number: 0129228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299928             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Luckow   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0129228
Luckow
     Although the mimosoid legumes are an important component
              of tropical forests, especially in arid and semiarid regions, they have been
              understudied relative to the two other major legume groups, the papilionoid
              (pea-flowered) and caesalpinioid legumes.  The most recent evolutionary study
              of the legume family incorporated only 7 samples from an estimated 4000 species
              of mimosoids.  Proposed work by Dr. Melissa Luckow at Cornell University and
              colleagues is aimed at correcting the imbalance by intensive study of genera in
              the subfamily Mimosoideae.  Specifically, the goals of this study are: 1) to
              construct an evolutionary tree for 39 genera of mimosoid legumes using data
              from both morphology and DNA sequences (from nuclear and plastid genes), and 2)
              to write a revision of these genera, complete with keys for identification and
              detailed descriptions.  Field work will be undertaken to collect rare and
              unusual species in Africa, Madagascar, and South America.  Molecular and
              morphological data will be employed in a phylogenetic analysis that will
              clarify the relationships among the genera and shed light on the evolution of
              nitrogen-fixation and characters associated with adaptation to arid climates. 
              Interactive keys and descriptions will be constructed and incorporated into the
              Diversity of Life web site.  
     The legume family is the third largest
              flowering-plant family, and second only to grasses in economic importance to
              mankind.  The mimosoids are particularly important in tropical ecosystems as
              agroforestry and timber trees, providing wood and forage in marginal and arid
              regions of the world.  Much effort is currently being expended to improve and
              exploit species of Prosopis (mesquite), Acacia, and Leucaena for food and
              fodder in arid habitats.  Yet, currently there is little information on what
              the closest relative to Prosopis might be, or whether or not all species of
              Acacia in the New World are related to those in Africa and Australia.  A
              phylogenetic context will be indispensable to the agricultural evaluation and
              development of species in these genera; reliable identification keys to the
              genera, with comprehensive descriptions, will be widely used by taxonomists,
              foresters, plant breeders, and ecologists.  For example, most areas in Latin
              America lack comprehensive floras; legumes also tend to be one of the last
              groups to be worked on since the family is so large and diverse.  Creating
              web-based keys and descriptions that can be downloaded will insure wide
              availability and affordability to users in developing countries.  This format
              will also make it easy for instructors to integrate the material into their
              classrooms.  


