Title       : Environmental and Temporal Patterns in Land Plant Diversity Through Geologic
               Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0129208

Award Number: 0129208
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hallie J. Sims   (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott L. Wing  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia G. Gensel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              PROJECT ABSTRACT

ENVIRONMENTAL AND TEMPORAL PATTERNS IN PLANT DIVERSITY
              THROUGH GEOLOGIC TIME

PI's:  Hallie J. Sims, Patricia G. Gensel, and Scott
              L. Wing

Plants first appeared on land roughly 410 million years ago.  Since
              then, there clearly has been a massive increase in the number of plant species,
              the spatial complexity of terrestrial vegetation, and the range of habitats
              that plants occupy.  The taxonomic composition of terrestrial vegetation also
              has changed completely.  Although major trends and events affecting terrestrial
              plants have long been identified in a descriptive way and quantitative data
              exist for many local sites and short time intervals, there has been only one
              attempt to quantify the major Phanerozoic trends in plant diversity and floral
              composition.  Recent advances in the statistical analysis of diversity data,
              increasing recognition of the importance of spatial scale for interpreting
              diversity data, and growing acceptance of bioinformatic databases as important
              tools for maximizing the value of published data, make this the right time for
              a new quantification of long-term trends in the ecology of terrestrial plants.
              We have formed a working group of fifteen paleobotanists whose specialties span
              the temporal and biological spectrum to collect high-quality data on Silurian
              to Paleogene fossil plant localities, occurrences, and taxa as part of the
              Paleobiology Database (http://flatpebble.nceas.ucsb.edu/public/).  The result
              will be a public, web-based repository for fossil occurrence data- a "GenBank"
              for the plant fossil record.  With these data, we will assess the effects of
              sampling biases on changes in estimated global plant diversity, examine
              environmental correlates of diversity change, and track changes in diversity at
              local, regional, and global scales.

