Title       : A Five-Gene Region Phylogeny for Cordyceps and the Clavicipitaceae (Ascomycota)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  2002   
File        : a0129212

Award Number: 0129212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Spatafora spatafoj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5921,5942,5978,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0129212
Spatafora
Cordyceps is a genus of ascomycete fungi that includes over
              300 described species, most of which are pathogens of insects and other fungi. 
              It is a member of the family Clavicipitaceae, which also includes numerous
              species of plant pathogens.  The Clavicipitaceae are fascinating in that all
              species must associate with other organisms in nature in order to complete
              their life cycle.  This association is usually antagonistic, resulting in
              disease and death of the host organism.  Many of these fungal pathogens are
              only known from asexually reproducing states, which often inhibits accurate
              identification and inferences about their evolutionary origins.  Results from
              prior NSF supported research by Dr. Spatafora are consistent with an
              interpretation of host jumping through evolutionary time and multiple losses of
              sexual reproduction.  The data reject previous hypotheses pertaining to the
              evolution of this group of fungi, which is reflected in an outdated
              classification that does not reflect true relationships or possess predictive
              value.  Research funded by this grant will build upon previous data by
              collecting and analyzing DNA sequences from five nuclear and mitochondrial
              genes.  The overall goal of this research is to develop robust and testable
              hypotheses for the evolutionary relationships of Cordyceps and related fungi,
              which in turn will provide a basic understanding of the evolution of host
              association, pathogenicity, and mode of reproduction.  To develop such
              hypotheses, the diversity of Cordyceps species will be sampled with a special
              emphasis on East Asia, the most species rich region of the world for the genus.
               In order to sample this diversity, Dr. Spatafora will collaborate with
              researchers from Japan, Korea, and Thailand.  They will assist in collecting of
              species and he will provide training opportunities in molecular evolution of
              fungi for a limited number of graduate students from each of these countries. 
              The students will visit the laboratory at Oregon State University for a period
              of approximately six months, after which they will return to their home
              institutions with the goal of transferring this technology.
Many species of
              Cordyceps and related fungi of the Clavicipitaceae are important in both
              agriculture and medicine.  Numerous species of Cordyceps are pathogens of
              insects and are promising candidates for biological control of insect pests. 
              Biological control is an active area of research that may lessen the dependence
              on, and environmental impact of, pesticides.  Central to development of
              efficient biological control systems is an accurate understanding of both the
              relationships of candidate species and the overall pattern of host association
              and niche specialization.  In addition, many species of Cordyceps and the
              Clavicipitaceae produce biologically active compounds that function in
              pathogenicity.   Some of these compounds have been exploited for use in
              medicine (e.g., Cyclosporin A from Cordyceps subsessilis), but others likely
              await discovery.  An understanding of the evolutionary relationships of these
              fungi will provide a predictive framework in which more focused and directed
              research in other fields of biology (e.g., biological control, drug discovery,
              etc.) can proceed.


