Title       : Cells and Boundaries All Around Us
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0129804

Award Number: 0129804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Kamien kamien@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical research and education in the area of
              soft-condensed matter physics. Research will focus on two problems: (1) The key
              element in the theory of the self-assembly of macromolecular-and nano-crystals
              is a connection between purely repulsive potentials and area-minimizing,
              space-filling structures or honeycombs. This interaction is juxtaposed with
              entropic arguments that show that close-packed lattices are favored. While in
              two dimensions both close packing and perimeter minimization result in the same
              triangular lattice, in three dimensions there is a fundamental frustration
              between packing entropy and the area-minimizing lattices. The PI plans to
              further develop these ideas, to extend them to non-cubic lattices, and to make
              a closer connection between molecular details and this analogy. Molecular
              dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations provide tests of these ideas. (2) The PI
              plans to explore the nonlinear elasticity of layered systems. The energetics of
              defects is dramatically altered when one adds those nonlinearities required by
              rotational invariance -changing from exponentially decaying interactions to
              power laws. The PI will further explore this effect and employ novel linear
              decompositions of minimal surfaces as a starting point for variational
              calculations.  This activity also contributes to postgraduate education in the
              theory of soft-condensed matter.
%%%
This award supports theoretical research
              and education in the area of soft-condensed matter physics on two projects. The
              first involves the study of the wide variety of crystal structures exhibited by
              molecular assemblies, such as diblock copolymers, dendritic polymers, and
              hyperstar polymers. The PI seeks to extend his previous work to understand
              these structures as a consequence of an additional 'interfacial interaction'
              contribution to the free energy that arises from the interactions between the
              brush-like coats of these molecular assemblies. A firmer connection will be
              developed between this interaction and microscopic properties of polymers. This
              work has potential impact on fundamental science as well as on developing
              concepts to aid in designing structures in technologically important
              self-assembling materials.  The second project is concerned with studying the
              role of defects in elastic layered systems when the elasticity of the layer is
              nonlinear. 
***


















