Title       : Collaborative Research: Generic Relationships within Subfamily Bromelioideae
               (Bromeliaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0129446

Award Number: 0129446
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249828             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory K. Brown gkbrown@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tania Wendt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5913,9150,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Brown at the University of Wyoming and Dr. Evans
              at Hope College to examine evolutionary relationships among members of the
              tropical plant family Bromeliaceae subfamily Bromelioideae.  The Bromelioideae,
              with 30 genera and about 750 species, is the most poorly understood subfamily
              in Bromeliaceae.  Almost a third of the species in subfamily Bromelioideae are
              represented by the genus Aechmea, an extremely variable, and almost certainly
              artificial genus.  Several genera in Bromelioideae differ from Aechmea by only
              one or two characters, and the morphological boundaries among genera are very
              poorly defined.  Aechmea forms the core of a complex of as many as 20
              Bromelioideae genera for which evolutionary relationships and systematics are
              in complete disarray.  The primary goal of this project is to utilize
              morphological and molecular (DNA sequence) data to examine relationships within
              Bromelioideae, with an emphasis on Aechmea and closely related
              genera.
	Morphological information from individual plants will be collected
              during intensive field studies.  Because floral characteristics are poorly
              preserved in this family during the normal pressing and drying process,
              observation of live and/or liquid preserved material is critical for successful
              phylogenetic analysis.  Phylogenetic analyses using maximum-parsimony methods
              will be conducted on the taxon by character data matrices produced in this
              intensive reanalysis of morphology.  DNA sequence data from three non-coding
              regions (two chloroplast intergenic spacers, psbA-trnH and trnL-trnF, and
              nuclear ribosomal internal transcribed spacer regions) will be collected from
              the same individuals used for morphological studies.  Phylogenetic analyses of
              the molecular data will provide an independent assessment of the morphological
              phylogenies as well as a tool to examine the evolution of specific
              morphological characters.  Integration of multiple data sets is currently an
              area of much discussion and debate in systematics, and several methods for
              comparing and integrating the molecular and morphological data will be
              explored.  
	The proposed research will contribute significanly to several
              broader sceintific and educational goals, as follows: 1) It represents the
              first attempt to develop hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships within
              Bromeliaceae subfamily Bromelioideae from within an explicit phylogenetic
              paradigm.  2) It will make a significant contribution to biodiversity
              documentation for an ecologically important taxon (Bromelioideae) in one of the
              most endangered, yet biotically diverse biomes on Earth, the Atlantic Forest
              Biome of Brazil.  3) Ecologically, tank-forming bromeliads, which include most
              members of Bromelioideae, are keystone species in biodiversity maintenance. 
              They are an important resource for free-water in the canopy, and provide
              feeding sites, breeding sites, and habitat for many diverse organisms that
              represent all Kingdoms of life.  The resulting phylogenetic hypotheses will be
              important to biologists studying diversification, biogeography, and possible
              co-evolutionary patterns of any of the organisms that utilize bromeliad tanks. 
              4) Both U.S. and Brazilian students will be trained in modern systematic
              practice and theory.  5) The project will improve professional botanical
              systematics research and teaching infrastructure at an important Brazilian
              university.  6) DNA samples and sequences collected will be made available to
              other researchers.  7) The project will help to stimulate future collaborative
              U.S. - Brazil systematic and biodiversity-related research and education.  

