Title       : Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  2002   
File        : a0129848

Award Number: 0129848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $453000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric D. Siggia siggia@msc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research, Molecular and
              Cellular Biology, and Physics. The grant supports theoretical research in
              biological physics.

Many problems in biology have a component that involves
              statistical mechanics either directly because the question is on the molecular
              scale, or indirectly because a probablistic model is being used to decode a
              genomic sequence.

The internal Watson-Crick base pairing of RNA defines its
              secondary structure which is better delineated energetically than the
              corresponding elements in proteins.  A  kinetic Monte Carlo code has recently
              been written to follow the formation of secondary structure for RNA's up to ~
              400 bases in length and includes non-nested configurations (pseudoknots).  The
              code will be applied to the ends of the molecule as in recent
              experiments.

Protein trafficing in cells involves numerous steps where
              proteins are sorted and targeted, e.g., in the Golgi substrate as processed in
              successive cisternae by different enzymes.  In collaboration with a laboratory
              at NIH, models which allow for Golgi enzyme localization in a connected
              membrane system will be devised and tested.  These are alternatives to the
              prevailing ideas that either the substrate lives in fixed compartments and the
              enzymes flux through the compartments via an active process of sorting and
              vesicle transport, or the enzymes are fixed and the substrates are actively
              transported.

There are now multiple fluorescent proteins that can be
              expressed in live cells (sometimes as chimeras with native proteins), which
              allow for measurement of their number in one cell as a function of time.  In
              conjunction with an experimental group at Rockefeller, we are modeling the
              stochastic noise (due to a small number of molecules) in transcription and
              translation.  More generally we will collaborate on experiments and theory to
              assess whether stochastic effects impact the fitness of bacteria.

The
              regulation of gene transcription by short, e.g., 10-30 bp, motifs to which
              proteins bind and integrate environmental signals is important to many areas of
              biology.  An algorithm has been devised which finds improbable strings of
              bases, based on the frequency of shorter strings present in an iteratively
              constructed 'dictionary.'  It yielded many significant motifs when applied to
              yeast, and we intend to apply the algorithm to other organisms, as well as
              extend it to recognize fuzzy patterns.  The comparison of related species is
              another way to recover regulatory motifs and we intend to apply a probablistic
              alignment code both to fit the evolution rate in noncoding sequence and assign
              probabilities to the regions which are more conserved than chance and thus
              functional.  An algorithm to relate gene expression data directly to sequence
              and assign statistical significance has been tried on yeast and will be
              extended to other multicellualr organisms.
%%%
This grant is co-funded by the
              Divisions of Materials Research, Molecular and Cellular Biology, and Physics.
              The grant supports theoretical research in biological physics.

Many problems
              in biology have a component that involves statistical mechanics either directly
              because the question is on the molecular scale, or indirectly because a
              probablistic model is being used to decode a genomic sequence.  This research
              will investigate a variety of problems of current biological interest using
              techniques from theoretical condensed matter physics.
***

 

