Title       : Secure and Proactive DNS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2002   
File        : a0129627

Award Number: 0129627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Giuseppe Ateniese ateniese@cs.jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Domain Name System (DNS) is a hierarchically distributed
database that
              provides information fundamental to Internet
operations, such as translating
              between human readable host names
and Internet Protocol (IP) addresses. Due to
              the importance of
the information served by DNS, there is a strong demand
              for
securing communication within the DNS system. The current
(insecure) DNS
              does not prevent attackers from modifying or
injecting DNS messages. Users
              accessing hosts on the Internet
rely on the correct translation of host names
              to IP addresses by
the DNS. A typical attack, referred to as DNS spoofing,
              allows an
attacker to manipulate DNS answers on their way to the users.
If an
              attacker makes changes in the DNS tables of a single
server, those changes
              will propagate across the Internet as a
viral infection.  Increasingly, DNS is
              also being used to perform
load distribution among replicated servers. For
              instance,
companies such as Akamai have used DNS to provide Web
              content
distribution. Moreover, there is consensus that since DNS is a
global
              and available database, it can be employed as a Public Key
Infrastructure
              (PKI) which would enable e-commerce applications.

Securing DNS means
              providing data origin authentication and
integrity protection.  Existing
              proposals for securing DNS are
mainly based on public-key cryptography. In
              this proposal, the researcher
describes a new approach based on standard
              symmetric (or
secret-key) cryptographic techniques. The researcher introduces
              the concept of
DNS symmetric certificate that are used to create a trusted
              path
from the DNS root server to a server that is authoritative for a
portion
              of the DNS tree. This strategy is very similar to the one
introduced by Davis
              and Swick and symmetric certificates can be
seen as a sort of tickets in the
              Kerberos system which create a
trusted path from the authentication server to
              the destination
server going through the ticket-granting server. DNS
              symmetric
certificate are as manageable as public-key certificates with
              the
exception that they cannot be shared, which is not generally
required in
              the DNS system.  The project solution enables a wide range of
secure services
              previously believed impractical or too difficult
to manage, such as mutual
              authentication and key revocation.
Moreover, the gain in terms of
              computational complexity, network
traffic, and storage requirements is
              impressive when compared
with public-key cryptography based approaches.  The
              research has clear
ideas on how to define a secure DNS system based on
              symmetric-key
cryptography. The researcher proposes to build such a system and
              make public
the prototype implementation.

The second part of the proposed
              research, would focus on a still
unresolved problem: A DNS server represents a
              single point of
attack which could easily be compromised. The researcher would
              like to
investigate the possibility to distribute the role of a single
DNS
              server among several servers.  The research proposes a proactive DNS
system
              that can survive component failures (whether malicious or
not) by combining
              standard techniques of decentralized storage
and dynamic self-maintenance. The
              researchers approach would allow DNS
servers to automatically recover from
              possible, undetected
break-ins and then maintain uninterrupted security.  The
              researchers propose to
use the proactive security model, which provides a
              method for
maintaining the overall security of a system even when
              individual
components are repeatedly broken into and controlled by
              an
attacker, as long as not too many servers are compromised at the
same
              time. The approach employed by the proactive security model
is to first
              distribute the cryptographic capabilities among
several servers, next have the
              server periodically engage in a
refreshment protocol. Information gathered by
              an attacker before
a refreshment period becomes useless to attack the system
              in the
future. The researcher proposes to define, and build, an architecture
              that
combines decentralized storage system technologies, data
redundancy and
              encoding, and dynamic self-maintenance to create
survivable DNS servers based
              on the proactive security model.



