Title       : High Risk: Admixture/migrant based study approach to evaluate oxygen transport
               in Andean high altitude natives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0129377

Award Number: 0129377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7560               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom Brutsaert tbrutsae@csc.albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
     This is an exploratory research project to investigate the unique
              physiological characteristics of high altitude native populations in the Andes.
               An enduring question is the extent to which characteristics (such as large
              lung volume) are genetic, as the result of natural selection, or developmental,
              as the result of lifelong exposure to HA.  Many previous studies have had the
              goal to partition genetic from developmental effects in this regard, but with
              varying success.  In the present study we will apply a novel approach with this
              basic goal in mind.  The approach might be termed an admixture/migrant study
              design because it takes advantage of two fundamental realities in the Andes. 
              First, the majority of current Andeans are the admixed descendents of both
              European and Amerindian populations.  Second, current populations reside not
              only at high altitude, but also as recent migrants to large urban centers near
              sea-level.  If matched groups of highland and lowland born subjects are
              compared, this may allow us to better understand how lifelong altitude exposure
              affects physiology.  Further, if admixture rates are estimated for each
              individual within a group, then we may better understand how genetics and
              natural selection have affected physiology.  By quantifying both effects, we
              can explicitly test the idea that gene and environment interact to produce a
              given characteristic.  In collaboration with the Universidad Cayetano, Lima,
              Peru, we will measure pulmonary function and maximal oxygen consumption
              (VO2max) in at least 25 lowland born subjects in Lima (sea level) and also at
              Cerro de Pasco, Peru (4,300 m).  In Cerro de Pasco, we will perform the same
              measurements on at least 25 highland born subjects.  A blood sample will be
              used to determine admixture rate based on a panel of informative genetic
              markers developed for this purpose.  This study should provide crucial
              information regarding the feasibility of this promising new approach.

