Title       : Folate Synthesis, Catabolism, and Engineering in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  2003    
File        : a0129944

Award Number: 0129944
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Hanson adha@mail.ifas.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jesse F. Gregory  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1145,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Folates are essential cofactors for one-carbon transfer reactions in all
              organisms. Unlike plants and microorganisms, humans cannot synthesize folates
              and so require them in the diet. A lack of folates is the world's most common
              nutrient deficiency and has grave consequences that include neural tube defects
              in infants and vascular disease in adults. Since plant foods are the single
              largest source of folates in human diets, enhancing plant folate content by
              metabolic engineering is an appealing way to improve human nutrition worldwide.
               At present too little is known  about folate synthesis, catabolism, and
              regulation in plants to undertake the rational engineering of folate levels.
              This research  addresses the missing basic biochemical knowledge and will take
              the first steps towards engineering itself. 
Of the nine enzymes specific to
              folate synthesis, only three have been cloned from plants. It is therefore
              planned  to clone the other six enzymes by combining genomic approaches and
              functional complementation, and to biochemically characterize the recombinant
              proteins. Genomic sequence data indicate that some of these enzymes differ so
              strikingly in structure from their counterparts in other organisms that they
              are likely to have novel properties. 
The engineering work will explore the
              extent to which flux in the whole folate pathway is regulated via the
              committing enzymes of its pterin and p-aminobenzoate branches. These enzymes
              will be overexpressed singly and together, relying primarily upon non-plant
              enzymes that are expected to be insensitive to end-product inhibition. A second
              engineering approach will seek to divert folates towards overaccumulation in a
              stable form (5-formyltetrahydrofolate) by using antisense RNA to block
              recycling of this compound. Folates and pathway intermediates in engineered
              plants will be quantified by HPLC, and pathway flux will be measured using
              radiolabeled precursors. Folate catabolism will also be investigated using
              radiolabeled substrates to establish the degradative reactions that occur and
              the rate at which the folate pool turns over.
Tomato will be used for both the
              cloning and the engineering work, because: (a) Fruits have lower folate
              contents than leaves, showing that enhancement is in principle possible. (b)
              Folates are subject to huge losses during cooking, making fruits and fruit
              juices an efficient vehicle to deliver folates because they are consumed fresh.
              (c) Tomato is readily transformable and is a major world crop.  It is also
              possible that the tomato fruit will tolerate unphysiologically high folate
              levels because it is an organ programmed to die.

