Title       : Paleogene Plesiadapiform Skeletons from Wyoming and the Origin of Primates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0129601

Award Number: 0129601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregg F. Gunnell ggunnell@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip D. Gingerich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Primates include all living prosimians, monkeys, apes, and humans.  Much is
              known of the evolutionary history of this group but its origins remain obscure.
               The earliest recognized fossil primates appear suddenly on northern continents
              at the beginning of the Eocene, about 55 million years ago, but their place of
              origin and their relationships with other fossil mammal groups remains an
              unresolved question.  Tree shrews, dermopterans (flying lemurs), and
              chiropterans (bats) all have been suggested as the closest living relatives of
              primates.  Among fossil mammals, a Paleocene group called Plesiadapiformes has
              most often been cited as possible primate ancestors, based on shared tooth
              structures.  Alternatively, plesiadapiforms have been linked by skull and
              limited skeletal evidence to flying lemurs.  

Recently, exceptionally
              well-preserved plesiadapiform skeletons have been found in Paleocene and Eocene
              freshwater limestones in the Clarks Fork Basin of Wyoming.  These skeletons are
              remarkable for their completeness and their preservation of even the most
              delicate of anatomical structures.  These skeletons represent four different
              families of plesiadapiforms including Carpolestidae, Micromomyidae,
              Paromomyidae, and Plesiadapidae. Analysis of these skeletons will allow for:
              (1) new functional interpretations of the positional behavior and locomotor
              pattern of Plesiadapiformes, (2), a test of the hypothesized
              plesiadapiform-dermopteran link and (3) a re-analysis of plesiadapiform-primate
              relationships.  Initial results indicate that a diversity of unique positional
              behaviors is represented in the four plesiadapiform families represented.  All
              groups appear to have been arboreal and their skeletons show a variety of 
              adaptations for above-branch walking, vertical clinging, climbing, grasping,
              leaping, and suspension.  These diverse skeletal attributes parallel the wide
              variety of dental specializations developed in plesiadapiforms.  New data from
              these specimens will be used to reconstruct a model of the skeletal anatomy of
              primitive Primates.

