Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics of Neotropical Amaryllidaceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0129179

Award Number: 0129179
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan W. Meerow miaam@ars-grin.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USDA, ARS
	      950 College Station Road
	      Athens, GA  306040000    706/546-3410

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	A grant has been awarded to Dr. Meerow of USDA Agricultural Research Service in
              Miami, Florida to complete studies on the evolutionary relationships of the
              large flowering plant family Amaryllidaceae using DNA sequences and
              morphological characters.  The family, consisting almost entirely of
              showy-flowered plants that grow from bulbs, is highly valued in horticulture. 
              Meerow is noted internationally as a leading specialist in the family.  
              Previous work by him and co-workers using both chloroplast and nuclear DNA
              sequences has contributed to understanding the relationships of this family to
              other closely related groups such as the onion family (Alliaceae).  That the
              family is a natural unit was confirmed, and geographically based groups of
              common ancestry were resolved.  The earliest branch in the amaryllis family
              tree is found in Africa where the family likely originated.  However, three
              chloroplast DNA sequence data sets failed to resolve the relationships between
              two remaining African groups (or "tribes" in botanical lexicon), a small tribe
              restricted to Australasia, and the Eurasian and American genera of the family,
              the latter two groups sharing common ancestry.  Using a nuclear DNA sequence,
              Meerow and co-workers were able to present a highly resolved estimate of the
              relationships among the American genera which have resulted in a much more
              natural classification.  The current work to be funded by NSF has two
              objectives: 1) complete a family-wide data matrix of nucleotide sequences of
              the ndhF chloroplast gene for all genera of the Amaryllidaceae, with the
              express purpose of resolving the relationships of the major lineages, and 2)
              use sequences of the internal transcribed spacer (ITS) of 18S-26S nuclear
              ribosomal DNA to resolve the Eurasian group of the family, as proved to be so
              successful for the American group.  The Eurasian group includes the
              economically important genus Narcissus, one of the five most popular
              spring-flowering bulbs in the world.  For the family-wide analysis, gene
              sequences will be combined with morphological data.
Genomic DNA will be
              extracted from fresh or silica gel-dried leaf tissue of approximately 59
              species of Amaryllidaceae representing all genera (chloroplast ndhF), and 20-25
              species of the Eurasian group (nuclear ITS), using standard procedures.  Target
              sequences will be amplified using the polymerase chain reaction PCR).   Both
              strands of the target DNA sequences will be run on automated sequencers.  DNA
              sequences will be aligned, and subjected to phylogenetic analysis and
              confidence testing using various computer programs.  At the same time, analyses
              of the Amaryllidaceae using morphological and cytological characters will be
              completed. Comparative and combined analyses should elucidate a robust
              phylogeny upon which a final, accurate classification of the Amaryllidaceae can
              be based.
	Phylogenetic and taxonomic analyses of the Amaryllidaceae will
              improve documentation of biodiversity patterns in the tropics, facilitate study
              of biogeographic migrations and regions of endemism, guide selection of stocks
              for horticultural improvement, and identify clusters of related species and
              genera that may share biosynthetic capabilities, in a family well-known for
              producing novel alkaloids, some poisonous to humans, but others potentially of
              pharmaceutical interest.  As the family is highly valued in horticulture,
              especially genera of the Eurasian group, there is more than passing interest
              among non-scientists in understanding the evolutionary relationships of the
              genera.  In the course of conducting this research, undergraduate students
              recruited from local area universities will have the opportunity to become
              acquainted with techniques of molecular taxonomic analysis in Meerow's
              laboratory.


