Title       : Biological Information Technology Systems - BITS: Algorithms for Real-time
               Decoding and Modulation of Neural Spike Trains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0129895

Award Number: 0129895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mitra Basu                              
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400347            (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Miller jpm@cns.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ross K. Snider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tomas Gedeon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brendan M. Mumey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1705      BIOLOGY & INFORMATION TECHNOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0129895 -John P. Miller-Montana State University-Algorithms for real-time
              decoding and modulation of neural spike trains-A grand challenge in
              neuroscience is to understand the biological basis of information processing in
              nervous systems.  Three major goals facing sensory neuroscientists are a) to
              understand how sensory information is encoded in the activity patterns of
              neural ensembles, b) to understand how those activity patterns are decoded by
              cells at the subsequent processing stages, and c) to understand how
              computations (e.g. visual pattern recognition or oriented motor responses) are
              carried out on that decoded information.  Two major goals of the research
              proposed here are a) to develop a formal, general approach toward achieving
              those goals, and b) to test and refine that approach by characterizing the
              functional organization and neural encoding scheme of a simple sensory system. 
              These goals will be achieved through the development of a data-driven model of
              the system.  The model will be formulated in terms of information processing
              units and information channels, rather than in terms of individual neurons. 
              That is, the functional units in the model will be operators that carry out
              specific, independent computations (or information transformation operations)
              at a specific processing stage in the test nervous system, and the channels
              through which information is passed between these functional units will
              correspond to information channels in the Shannon sense.

