Title       : Vertebrate Taphonomy and Paleoecology of Lake-Margin Wetlands during Oldowan
               Times at Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2002      
File        : a0129812

Award Number: 0129812
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Blumenschine rjb@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, Mr. Jackson Njau will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of his research is to understand
              how early humans behaved and utilized the environment ca. 1.7 million years
              ago. For many years a multidisciplinary team jointly headed by Dr. Blumenschine
              has examined a single stratum representing a ca. 50,000 year interval at
              Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. The deposit contains early hominid stone tools as
              well as hominid and other faunal remains. It also offers a wealth of
              paleo-environmental data in the form of preserved animal tracks, fossil plant
              remains and geological and geochemical information. On this basis the team is
              working to reconstruct a detailed and accurate picture of the landscape and
              then to superimpose hominid-related remains on it. In this way one can gain
              insight into early human behavioral adaptations. Based on multiple lines of
              evidence the group knows that a significant portion of the region consisted of
              river and lake margin as well as other types of wetlands. However it lacks the
              ability to distinguish accurately among these. 

Mr. Njau will conduct a
              multipronged investigation to provide the necessary refinement. He will study a
              number of modern analog environments which range from alkaline lakeshore to
              spring fed marshes and in particular note the kinds of faunal assemblages
              associated with each. Since hippopotomi and crocodiles both modify such
              landscapes and predate on a wide range of species, they can leave a major mark.
              Mr. Njau will focus on both species and will conduct feeding experiments in
              which farm raised crocodile are provided with prey remains;their imprint on 
              discarded bones noted. Mr. Njau will also examine prior excavated faunal
              assemblages from Olduvai to search for matches between experimental and
              observed patterns.

This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide a framework for an improved understanding of hominid behavior at one of
              the most important prehistoric sites in Africa. It will also yield modern
              analog data which are directly relevant to a wide range of paleoecological and
              archaeological questions. The award also provides a promising young
              scientist.

