Title       : Computational Enzymology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0129568

Award Number: 0129568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Bruice tcbruice@bioorganic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1164,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Catalysis and design of catalysts is presently deemed to be of great practical
              importance.  Natural enzymes are the most proficient catalysts that we are
              aware of.  Some fifty years of research in the field of structural biochemistry
              has provided detailed structures of many enzymes by x-ray crystallography. 
              Even X-ray structures of high resolution suffer in that they are only averages
              of many dynamic structures and structures present in less than 25% of the time
              are not included in the averaged structure.  Molecular dynamic simulations
              (MDS) provide individual conformers and those present less than 25% of the time
              can be isolated.  The general question of why enzymatic reactions are so
              efficient has been, in the mind of many, answered by the Pauling tenet that the
              transition state (TS) is bound to the enzyme in preference to the ground state
              substrates (S) thus stabilizing the TS.  Using X-ray coordinates of enzyme
              species, secondary kinetic isotope effects and other means one can derive the
              structures of the enzyme bound S (E*S) and transition state (E*TS) and by MDS
              observe these structures and their dynamic motions.  By this means one can
              determine if E*TS is an appropriately tighter complex than is E*S.  Is the
              Pauling tenet a useful proposal?  Does the emerging concept of the importance
              of correlative motions in E*TS formation have value? This will be determined by
              examining the E*S and E*TS structures for a number of enzymes (diphtheria toxin
              NAD+ hydrolase, C. fasciculata nucleoside hydrolase, formate dehydogenase,
              liver alcohol dehydrogenase).   

