Title       : High Throughput Sequencing and the Phylogeny of Family Drosophilidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0129105

Award Number: 0129105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $367221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DeSalle desalle@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick M. O'Grady  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              DEB-0129105
R. DeSalle & P. O'Grady

A grant has been awarded to Drs. Rob
              DeSalle and Patrick O'Grady of the American Museum of Natural History to
              investigate evolutionary relationships of flies in the family Drosophilidae, a
              group of about 3,300 described species. In spite of recent research efforts,
              systematic relationships of genera and species groups within the Drosophilidae
              remain unresolved.  This is likely due to the rapid diversification of this
              large group.  The proposed work will generate about 60 gene sequences from over
              100 species.   This will comprise one of the largest collections of nucleotide
              data, in terms of number of loci and taxa, ever gathered for a phylogenetic
              study.  In addition to being applied to understanding the phylogenetic
              relationships within the Drosophilidae, these data will also be used to examine
              the molecular evolutionary patterns and processes acting on the genomes of
              these species.

The Drosophilidae has served as a model system in genetics,
              evolution, and development for over one hundred years.  The recent completion
              of the Drosophila melanogaster genome sequence, provides us with an
              unprecidented amount of data which can be used to initiate comparative studies
              in other drosophild species.  The proposed work will make the entire
              Drosophilidae a model system for molecular phylogenetic studies.  Furthermore,
              the data generated in this proposed work will facilitate the next stage of
              comparative evolutionary studies - comparative genomics.

