Title       : QEIB: A Theoretical Framework for Density-Dependent Life-History Evolution in
               Variable Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0129833

Award Number: 0129833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210551             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Chesson plchesson@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1649,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The parameters defining the life history of an organism, for example,
survival
              rates at different stages in life, birth rates, germination
rates and
              dispersal rates, vary with the physical environment, such as
weather, and also
              with the biological environment defined by the
densities of organisms of
              different sorts.  A general mathematical
theory of life-history evolution will
              be developed that takes into
account the interacting effects of a varying
              environment and organism
densities. Mathematical models will be developed and
              investigated using
probability theory, dynamical systems theory, and computer
              simulation.
Particular emphasis will be placed on annual plant germination,
              growth,
survival and reproductive relations in perennial organisms, and
              seasonal
variation in growth of perennial plants.

The life history of an
              organism is fundamental to the way it relates to
its environment, and
              therefore the life history is fundamental to
predicting what will happen to
              the organism as conditions change either
through human intervention or natural
              causes. The complexity of the
subject means that effective study requires a
              theoretical framework to
generate hypotheses, which can then be tested
              empirically. Although
separate theories for the effects of a varying physical
              environment and
organism densities have been developed previously, there has
              been very
limited attention to their interaction.  The results of the study
              should
have wide applicability to wild organisms (flora and fauna, pests,
              weeds
and fisheries), with some applications also to crops and
              domestic
animals.


