Title       : ABR: Response to Crowding and Vegetation Shade in Impatiens capensis: Genetic
               Basis and Fitness Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0129018

Award Number: 0129018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna M. Schmitt Johanna_Schmitt@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1148,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Many plant species exhibit characteristic morphological and physiological
              responses to crowding and vegetation shade. This "shade avoidance" response is
              cued by a reduction in the ratio of red to far-red wavelengths (R:FR) in light
              transmitted through or reflected from green vegetation. This R:FR signal is
              perceived by light-sensing molecules known as phytochromes.  Prior research
              from this project has demonstrated that phytochrome-mediated stem elongation
              increases lifetime reproduction of the native annual Impatiens capensis
              (jewelweed or touch-me-not) in dense stands, but plants induced to display the
              shade avoidance response at low density suffer reduced fitness relative to
              non-elongated plants. The present study will examine genetic variation among
              inbred lines in expression of shade avoidance traits across a range of
              densities, and assess the contribution of phytochrome-mediated developmental
              pathways to this variation. In addition, natural selection on shade avoidance
              traits will be measured in the field across a range of densities, in order to
              predict how shade avoidance responses will evolve in variable density
              environments.   
	
The results of this project will provide important
              information about the genetics and evolution of phytochrome-mediated shade
              avoidance responses in natural plant populations, and will provide an
              ecological and evolutionary context for current research on the molecular,
              genetic, developmental, and physiological mechanisms underlying plant responses
              to light.  It will also help to inform selection strategies for crop
              improvement and provide an ecological context for recent proposals to increase
              yield by genetically engineering crops in which shade avoidance responses are
              blocked. 

