Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Dependence of Optical and Nonradiative
               Relaxation Properties of Copper Nanoparticles on Shape and Self-Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0129263

Award Number: 0129263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mostafa A. El-Sayed mostafa.el-sayed@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5918,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0129263
El-Sayed

This two-year award for US-France collaboration in
              nanoparticle research involves researchers and students at Georgia Institute of
              Technology and the University Pierre and  Marie Curie (Paris VI).  The
              principal investigators, Mostafa El-Sayed in the US and Marie-Paule Pileni in
              France, lead the collaboration.  The combined teams will examine radiative and
              nonradiative properties of individual and assembled copper nanoparticles of
              different sizes and shapes.  Copper particles represent a new and interesting
              nanoparticle system.  Their properties such as surface plasmon absorption,
              acoustic breathing, oscillations, electron-phonon and phonon-phonon relaxation
              processes will be studied.  Changes in spherical and rod-shaped nanoparticles
              as a result of self-assembly and intraparticle interactions will be
              investigated. Experiments involve femtosecond transient laser spectroscopic
              methods and monodispersed size and shape distributions of nanoparticles.
              

The collaboration merges different experimental methods and expertise.  The
              US group is expert in ultrafast laser methods and spectroscopic experiments.
              This is complemented by French expertise in the synthesis of monodispersed
              nanoparticles, including copper nanodots and nanorods, and nanoparticle
              self-assembly.  This collaboration advances understanding of the optical and
              mechanical properties of nanomaterials.  Nanoparticle materials are important
              for new electronic devices, optical devices, and biological materials. 
              Graduate students also benefit. They will receive training in advanced
              synthetic and self-assembly techniques.
 
This award represents the US side
              of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS.  NSF will cover travel funds and
              living expenses for the US investigator, postdoctoral researcher and students. 
              The CNRS will support visits by French researchers and students to the United
              States. 

