Title       : Analysis of Speciation Mechanisms in an Adaptive Radiation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  2002       
File        : a0129130

Award Number: 0129130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Hodges hodges@lifesci.lscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Adaptive radiations have long been recognized as prime examples of natural
              selection and speciation. To understand the processes that bring about these
              radiations requires a phylogenetic reconstruction of the relationships among
              the species. However, adaptive radiations usually occur extremely rapidly and
              therefore traditional methods of phylogenetic reconstruction often  fail. The
              proposed research will investigate whether DNA sequencing of the
              3'-untranslated region of multiple genes will provide the data necessary for
              the phylogenetic reconstruction of a particularly rapid adaptive radiation,
              that in the columbine genus Aquilegia.  After sequencing the 3' ends of
              expressed genes, specific PCR primers will be designed to amplify both coding
              and non-coding gene regions. These gene regions will then be sequenced for
              multiple species of Aquilegia and a phylogenetic reconstruction will be made.
              

Understanding the processes that generate bio-diversity is essential to
              understanding how bio-diversity can be maintained. Adaptive radiations
              represent instances of remarkable diversification yet without information on
              the evolutionary relationships of their species, little progress can be made on
              understanding their origin. The proposed research will investigate a technique
              that would be applicable to reconstructing relationships for a wide range of
              taxa. 


