Title       : Acquisition of an automated DNA analysis system
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0129721

Award Number: 0129721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Connie J. Mulligan mulligan@anthro.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Molecular techniques are essential to some of today's most advanced and
              progressive research in physical anthropology.  The broad applicability of
              molecular methodologies, combined with improved accessibility, means that
              invaluable training and research opportunities now exist for students and
              researchers.  This award provides funds for an Automated DNA Analysis System in
              order to develop a molecular anthropology training and research program at the
              University of Florida (UF).  The Department of Anthropology at UF is expanding
              its Bioanthropology program with an emphasis on developing a core series of
              graduate-level laboratory courses.  Furthermore, the expansion of the
              Bioanthropology program has stimulated the development of several collaborative
              research and training projects within the Department of Anthropology and
              throughout the university.  Dr. Mulligan has an active research program in
              which molecular techniques, specifically DNA sequence and fragment analysis,
              play a central role.  A total of eight projects are currently funded (partially
              or fully).  The requested instrumentation will provide improved accessibility
              of the technology to researchers and students with minimal experience in
              molecular methodology.  The College of Liberal Arts and Sciences at UF
              recognizes the merit of this opportunity and has agreed to match external
              funding obtained for the acquisition of an Automated DNA Analysis System.
