Title       : Cryptographic Mechanisms for Internet Security
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0129617

Award Number: 0129617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mihir Bellare mihir@cs.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1766      Strategic Tech for Internet
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1766,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The Internet has opened the door to new possibilities, but also brought
              with it new risks.
Internet security is a widely recognized problem crossing
              the boundaries between mathematics,
systems and sociology, and panaceas are
              unlikely. The goal of this proposal is to isolate and
target a few components
              of the security problem that have real impact on Internet security in
practice
              and are well-defined enough that clear, documented, and identifiable progress
              can be made
within the time-frame and resources of the project. The chosen
              problems relate to cryptographic
components of current and future Internet
              security protocols and standards, in technical areas such
as authentication,
              access control, privacy, key distribution and key compromise, and to
              bridging
the gap between cryptography and systems security.
     Providing
              high-quality, cost-efective cryptographic mechanisms, and tying them together
              se-
curely,is a challenge. Cryptographic schemes are easy to specify but hard
              to validate, and notorious
for containing bugs that take a long time to be
              discovered. This proposal will employ the practice-
oriented provable-security
              approach toimprove security guarantees of cryptographic mechansisms.
Developed
              by Bellare and Rogaway, this approach already has a track record in delivering
              prac-
tical cryptography backed by theoretical guarantees. Past successes of
              this method include the
HMAC andOAEP algorithms which have been adopted by
              numerous standards bodies and widely
implemented.
     The first two problems
              that we propose to address are related to the security of protocols
such as
              SSL. The researchers propose to investigate the security ofa mechanism that is
              common practice but
not analyzed in theory, namely to use the same key for
              both asymmetric encryption and digital
signatures. The researchers  will seek
              to determine under what circumstances this is secure, with particular
focus on
              existing standards. The researchers will  then propose to investigate the
              security of the session key exchange protocols at the heart of security
              protocols like SSL, TLS or that of 3GPP, building on past
work in provable
              security for session key exchange.
     The greatest threat to the security
              the researcher may hope to obtain from some cryptographic mechanism
may simply
              be key exposure: an intruder breaks into the system and compromises the
              underlying
key. This problem crosses the boundary between security and
              cryptography, and the next two
problems  proposed by the researcheris  to
              consider two cryptographic approaches to it. The first is forward-security,
              whose goal is not to prevent key exposure, but to mitigate the damage it causes
              by making sure that past uses of a key are not compromised by its exposure. The
              researchers propose two specific pieces of research related to forward
              security, one in the domain of signatures and the other in the domain
of
              pseudorandom number generation. The second problem relates to human-memorizable
              keys, or
passwords. These have the advantage of not being subject to key
              exposure via breakin, but have
other disadvantages, most notably being subject
              to dictionary attack. Several corporations have
proposed some form of
              server-aided, password-based authentication. The researcher looks into the
              security of some of the potential mechanisms to this end.

