Title       : Phylogenetic Study of the Dogwood Genus Cornus L. (Cornaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0129069

Award Number: 0129069
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100001             (Estimated)
Investigator: (Jenny) Qiuyun Xiang jenny_xiang@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Xiang
0129069
The discontinuous distribution of many closely related plant
              species in eastern Asia and eastern North America is one of the most
              fascinating biogeographic patterns in the Northern Hemisphere.  This striking
              phenomenon has attracted the attention of botanists for centuries, providing a
              focal point for systematic and biogeographic investigation.  Although evidence
              available so far has suggested a complex history, the floristic exchange
              between the two continents and relative importance of proposed migration routes
              have largely remained unclear. Additional studies of plant groups with a good
              fossil record is necessary for a better understanding of the biogeographic
              pattern.  The dogwood genus Cornus L., which contains several ornamentally and
              medicinally important plants including the widely planted "flowering dogwood",
              is an ideal model for the study.  With an excellent fossil record and three
              subgroups showing intercontinentally discontinuous distributions, the genus
              permits a detailed quantitative, phylogeny-based biogeographic study of
              disjunct distribution patterns.  The primary goals of the proposed study by Dr.
              Jenny Xiang at North Carolina State University are: 1) to build a robust
              genealogical foundation for the dogwood genus using morphological characters
              and DNA sequence data from multiple genes; 2) to test evolutionary and
              biogeographic hypotheses that were based upon assessments of the morphological
              diversity in the genus; and 3) to evaluate the timing (in a geological sense)
              of major speciation events in the genus using the genealogical framework. 
              Extensive fieldwork will be conducted in the Americas and China to collect
              plant materials that are currently not available for some species. Historical
              information will be made available to the public via an on-line web page, which
              will serve as a starting point for the future development of a web-accessible,
              taxonomic monograph of this highly cultivated and biogeographically important
              plant genus.
The study focuses on the genus Cornus to advance our current
              understanding of the historical nature of eastern Asian-eastern North American
              floristic exchange through integration of phylogenetic and biogeographic data,
              and DNA-based dating approaches using calibration points provided by the fossil
              record.  Despite well known taxa in Europe and North America, tropical and
              Asiatic dogwoods are poorly known, and understudied. The multiple molecular
              data sets generated in the study will also facilitate comparisons of mode and
              tempo of evolution of different genes to enhance the understanding of molecular
              evolution in the two isolated continents.  The on-line web page will maximize
              the utility of the phylogenetic and biogeographic information obtained from the
              study, which will be valuable for evaluating conservation priorities (help in
              guiding research on the dogwood anthracnose disease, and developing strategies
              for sustainable uses of natural sources of dogwoods), and future ecological,
              pharmacological, and horticultural research.  One graduate student will be
              trained through this study.  The opportunity for student participation is
              important for it has profound impact on the future of systematics, the science
              of biodiversity.


