Title       : Materials and Thin Films for Spintronic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2001  
File        : a0129853

Award Number: 0129853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anant K. Ramdas akr@physics.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ireneusz Miotkowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project will be devoted to the growth of III-V diluted magnetic
              semi-
conductors (III-V DMSs) ternary compounds in which the anions are
              re-
placed with a member of the 3d-transition group. The motivation and goal
              of
the program are to explore and establish the conditions for successful
              growth
of single crystals which will be materials suitable for investigating
              the ex-
traordinary physical phenomena originating in the large magnetic
              moments
of 3d-transition-ion (3d-TMI) and their role as acceptors. The
              simultaneous
presence of free holes and the large magnetic moments provide the
              ingredi-
ents for novel phenomena associated with spin-polarized charge
              carriers. The
growth will initially focus on the incorporation of Mn, Co and
              Fe into GaAs,
InP, GaP and InSb by thermal diffusion and melt growth. 
              Spectroscopic
(Fourier Transform Infrared, Raman and photoluminescence,
              modulated re-
flectivity/transmission and magneto optic characterization at
              Purdue and
those based on magnetic, electron-paramagnetic-resonance, and
              non-linear
spectroscopy by international collaborators will provide invaluable
              feedback
to the crystal grower. Another collaboration will address the
              production of
ultrapure starting material and fabrication of substrates
              suitable for molec-
ular beam epitaxy (MBE). Basic science and device related
              work will be ini-
tiated during this phase.  Besides the crystal growth
              program implemented
by the Co-PI, students will participate in the
              characterization activities and
will acquire a healthy appreciation of growth
              techniques. This exposure and
involvement will prepare them for the
              scientific/technical workforce of the
21st century.

   The aim of the
              program is to provide a "steady state-" supply of well
characterized III-V
              diluted magnetic semiconductors to our ongoing research
on collective and
              localized excitations of vibrational, electronic, and magnetic
character.  The
              access to bulk single crystals as well as material as MBE-
grown epilayers and
              quantum well structures will give the participants the
intense excitement of
              basic research significant in device applications.


