Title       : Long-Term Evolutionary Response of Huon Pine to Climatic Fluctuation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0129113

Award Number: 0129113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29638              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald R. Sederoff volvo@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce S. Weir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Meagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine M. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosanne D. D'Arrigo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
DNA sequence information from subfossil wood specimens, hundreds to thousands
              of years old, would promote our understanding of temporal as well as spatial
              genetic variation in long-lived forest tree species. Huon pine and Siberian
              pine have been used extensively in dendrochronological analyses to infer
              climate variability in the late and post-Pleistocene periods in both the
              Northern and Southern Hemispheres. Subfossil wood samples range in age from
              present day to 15,000 years before present and encompass periods of increased
              amplitude of climate change and human mediated disturbance. Using state of the
              art DNA sequence based technology, we will evaluate the feasibility of
              obtaining genetic information from nuclear, chloroplast and mitochondrial
              genomes from exactly dated wood samples of these species. Rigorous criteria to
              authenticate DNA extraction and PCR - amplification from subfossil wood will be
              incorporated in all phases of this study. 
Genetic data from historical
              specimens could open broad new areas of investigation related to plant
              evolution, biodiversity, forensics and archaeology. Knowledge of the scale of
              genetic change in forest tree populations related to variability in climate and
              habitat alteration represent fundamental problems in plant biology, important
              for gene conservation strategies and global energy policies. 

