Title       : A Planning Grant for a Culturally Relevant Math and Science Summer Evaluation
               Training Institute for Mid-Level Experienced Evaluators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2003  
File        : a0129256

Award Number: 0129256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elmima C. Johnson                       
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Veronica G. Thomas vthomas@howard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vinetta C. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Howard University
	      2400 Sixth Street N W
	      Washington, DC  200590001    202/806-5567

NSF Program : 7261      PROGRAM EVALUATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is submitted with the acknowledgement that project and program
              evaluations are indispensable to those agencies and organizations that
              emphasize mathematics, science, technology and staff and funders with valuable
              information to make informed decisions about the implementation, progress and
              success of a project or program.  Therefore, it is imperative that the
              evaluators responsible for planning, collecting and analyzing evaluation data
              are trained to be both technically competent in their work efforts and
              sensitive to the cultural context in which the project or program takes place. 
              This planning grant would provide the structure for the development of a summer
              training institute for participants to broaden thier knowledge of evaluation
              models, methods, and standards, as well as raise both their awareness and
              understanding  of a very important aspect of evaluation - its cultural context.
               That is, a fundamental aspect integrated throughout all the institute's
              training activities will attend to the reality that evaluations do not occur in
              a vacuum but instead are contextual because of the variety of racial, cultural,
              socio-economic, and other settings in which the project or program is
              operating.  As such, there is a pressing need to develop a framework for
              identifying the many "hidden" variables (e.g., stereotypes, attitudes,
              ecpectations) that frame the cultural contex of evaluation.  A major focus of
              this planning grant would be to develop a culturally relevant evaluation
              training model and plan for its utilization at a summer training institute so
              that mid-level evaluators will appreciate and understand the need for a
              cultural context of educational evaluation of math and science and other
              projects.  Upon completion of the Institute, the participants will be able to
              effectively transfer theoretical knowledge learned to procedural knowledge, and
              then to actual evaluation practice within a responsive and relevant context.
