Title       : Why are Chiles Hot? An Integrative Exploration of Secondary Metabolite Function
               in Ripe Fruit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0129168

Award Number: 0129168
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alan J. Tessier                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas J. Levey dlevey@zoo.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joshua J. Tewksbury  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Non-technical summary of  "Why are chiles hot? An integrative exploration of
              secondary metabolite function in ripe fruit"

Doug Levey and Joshua
              Tewksbury
University of Florida

It is well known that the pungent compound
              in chile fruits, capsaicin, has many physiological effects in humans.  Although
              it is widely used in medicine and is one of the most important spices in the
              world, the evolutionary basis for capsaicin remains mysterious.  Why and how
              did the compound evolve?  Is its function secondary (non-adaptive) or can its
              presence in chiles be explained by selective pressures of frugivores?  Because
              similar secondary compounds are common in other fruits, our work will
              simultaneously address a long-standing paradox: Why do many plants place
              compounds in ripe fruit that are apparently toxic to fruit-eating animals? Six
              hypotheses for the role of secondary metabolites in ripe fruit, using chiles
              and capsaicin as a model system will be tested.  The work will entail
              laboratory trials with captive frugivores and field studies on two chile
              species that are widely separated geographically and phylogenetically.  One
              occurs in Arizona, the other in Boliva.  In Boliva, a variety is available that
              is non-pungent (i.e., it lacks capsaicin).  By comparing consumption of pungent
              and non-pungent chiles by a wide diversity of frugivores, from microbes to
              vertebrates, we will be able to determine the effect of capsaicin on frugivore
              behavior.  Parallel studies will use artificial fruits made with and without
              capsaicin.  These experiments will lead to a better understanding of
              capsaicin's evolutionary function and will pave the way for potential
              applications of capsaicin in human health, pest management, food storage, and
              chile cultivation.

