Title       : RCN: Resource Discovery Initiative for Field Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0129792

Award Number: 0129792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Muriel E. Poston                        
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William K. Michener wmichener@lternet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1664,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Michener at University of New Mexico to develop
              the informatics framework that can facilitate storage, discovery, and access to
              the strategic environmental information resources that are collectively held at
              North American biological field stations.  Project objectives will be
              accomplished through two integrated networking activities: (1) a research focus
              that encompasses five inter-related resource discovery components and (2) an
              intensive training component that provides field station personnel with a solid
              foundation in the computational and informatics skills that are critical for
              developing, archiving, managing, and communicating data and information
              resources.  In so doing, communication, discovery and exchange of data and
              information will be facilitated among scientists and students, integration and
              synthesis in field biology will be enabled, and the incipient value of the
              enormous data resources at biological field stations can begin to be
              realized.

Research activities include the development of five databases that
              will support discovery of biological data and information resources at field
              stations.  In particular, the research team will: (1) establish a North
              American Field Station Data Registry and Repository; (2) initiate a Thesaurus
              for Field Biology; (3) develop a Site Characteristics Database for North
              American Field Stations; (4) create a Bibliography of North American Field
              Station Publications; and (5) develop a WWW-accessible Database of Field
              Station QA/QC and Standard Methods.  The team of investigators will coordinate
              development of the databases in conjunction with representatives of the
              Organization of Biological Field Stations, who comprise the project steering
              committee.  In addition, the investigative team will coordinate the development
              of educational activities for field station personnel.  These field station
              personnel will also contribute to database development activities.  Education
              will principally focus on annual intensive (2-week) training workshops in
              ecological informatics that are developed around a series of course modules. 
              Where appropriate, training modules will be made available on a web site to
              broaden the potential audience throughout the community of potential
              users.

Biological field stations represent the premier facilities in North
              America where the most pressing environmental challenges facing science and
              society can be directly confronted and understood through research and
              education. These challenges include maintenance of biodiversity, ecological
              sustainability, environmental forecasting, restoration and rehabilitation of
              damaged ecosystems, the outbreak and spread of diseases and control of invasive
              species. Research Coordination Network activities supported in this project
              will enable discovery of the critical information resources that are held at
              biological field stations.  These resources will facilitate synthesis in
              ecology-leading to a better understanding of our natural environment, sound
              natural resources management, and a more sustainable quality of life.  The
              project management plan and the composition of the core research team and
              steering committee are designed to benefit the largest possible number of
              biological field stations in North America and their associated field
              biologists and students, to amplify research results to the international
              community, to promote an interdisciplinary perspective in field biology, and to
              enhance workforce diversity.

