Title       : Integrated Analysis of Fossil Lemur Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2003  
File        : a0129185

Award Number: 0129185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191498             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Burney burney@fordham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurie R. Godfrey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Jungers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4651

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,9278,EGCH,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A newly developed approach to excavation below the water table, tested
              successfully last year under a High Risk Anthropological Research award, will
              be applied to fossil lemur sites throughout Madagascar.  The anticipated rich
              yield of data will permit the examination of the nature and timing of the
              extinctions of the larger native animals and the landscape changes that
              occurred on the island in the last two thousand years.  In the past, sites
              containing a fossil record of the period during which the extinctions occurred
              have generally been excavated without suitable stratigraphic control.  By
              creating a temporary  depression in the water table in order to remove the
              sediments with full three-dimensional stratigraphic control, high-pressure
              ultralight water pumps now make it possible to re-excavate key sites, and open
              others previously uninvestigated because of their flooded nature.  Improvements
              in radiocarbon dating techniques and a multidisciplinary approach to analysis
              now make it feasible to correlate evidence from the bones of extinct giant
              lemurs and other extinct animals with many other types of data, including small
              vertebrate and invertebrate remains, pollen and plant macrofossils, charcoal
              particles, stable isotopes, ancient DNA, and human artifacts.  

Integrating
              these results at the landscape level, through the choice of key sites from the
              various regions of the island for detailed analysis and the compilation and
              evaluation of existing data sets for comparison, will provide the most rigorous
              test yet devised for the Blitzkrieg Hypothesis (rapid overkill by humans) and
              five competing hypotheses for the extinctions in Madagascar.  Determining the
              length of the period of overlap between humans and the extinct megafauna and
              the sequence of biotic changes will be particularly critical to the evaluation
              of competing explanations for the extinctions.  In addition, new insights will
              be gathered concerning the diet and habits of extinct giant lemurs, range
              shifts of extant lemur species, and the timing of human arrival and landscape
              transformation.  Applying these techniques will enrich our basic understanding
              of lemur evolution and ecology and of the role of humans in transforming
              Madagascar.   

The Office of International Science and Engineering and
              Environmental Social and Behavioral Sciences Activities are assisting in the
              funding in order to enhance international cooperation and educational
              opportunities for undergraduate students.


