Title       : Genome-Wide Hunt For Metal Hyperaccumulation Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0129747

Award Number: 0129747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Salt dsalt@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1179,9104,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              01297747
David E. Salt

The overall objective of this project is to identify
              genes involved in metal hyperaccumulation in metal-hyperaccumulating plants.
              These unique plant species are able to accumulate between 0.1 and 3% of their
              shoot dry biomass as Cd, Ni, Se or Zn depending on the species. Such
              characteristics could be invaluable in current efforts to use plants to clean
              metal-contaminated sites (phytoremediation).  The known metal hyperaccumulators
              are not well suited for phytoremediation because of their small size and slow
              growth.  However, they are a unique source of genes for metal
              hyperaccumulation. Over 25% of the known hyperaccumulator species are members
              of the Brassicaceae family, and as such they are related to Arabidopsis
              thaliana. By investigating the molecular genetics of metal hyperaccumulation in
              species related to A. thaliana, the investigators will utilize the technical
              and genetic resources developed during the Arabidopsis genome project,
              harnessing powerful functional genomics technologies to dissect metal
              hyperaccumulation at the genetic level. 

Metal hyperaccumulators in the
              Brassicaceae will be collected from around the world, and genes important in
              hyperaccumulation will be identified using three complementary approaches. Seed
              from approximately 40 accessions of over 20 different species of
              hyperaccumulators in the Brassicaceae family will be collected from North
              America, France, Germany, Austria, Italy, Greece and Turkey. Accessions of
              metal hyperaccumulators found to be amenable to T-DNA insertional mutagenesis
              will be identified and over 100,000 genetic lines will be generated.  In a
              forward genetic approach, these lines will be screened for mutants exhibiting
              metal-sensitivity and loss of metal-hyperaccumulation. T-DNA tagged genes from
              these mutants will be isolated, and their role in metal hyperaccumulation
              determined. In a reverse genetic approach, genomic DNA pools will be generated
              from these lines and screened by PCR to identify lines containing T-DNA
              insertions in genes already known or suspected to be involved in metal
              hyperaccumulation. The A. thaliana genome sequence will provide a rich source
              of candidate genes for this reverse genetic approach. In a third approach, cDNA
              expression libraries will be created in E. coli and yeast from
              hyperaccumulating species and screened for genes conferring heavy-metal
              resistance and sensitivity. Taken together these approaches will provide a
              comprehensive framework for the identification of genes involved in metal
              hyperaccumulation in plants.  The set of genes identified in this project will
              provide a valuable resource for the future development of plants ideally suited
              for the phytoremediation of metal polluted sites. 

This project was funded
              through the Joint Program on Phytoremediation, co-sponsored by the
              Environmental Protection Agency, the National Science Foundation, the Office of
              Naval Research, and the Strategic Environmental Research and Development
              Program.

