Title       : Collaborative Research: Study of Novel Phases in Two Dimensional Electron
               Systems in High Magnetic Fields and Low Temperature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0129652

Award Number: 0129652
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey Kravchenko S.Kravchenko@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Research Project will continue experiments that may be
              evidence for a metal-insulator (M-I) transition in two-dimensional systems of
              electrons in semiconductors.  The M-I transtion has been thought by many to be
              forbidden on general theoretical grounds.  The data, which are suggestive of a
              M-I transition, remains a mystery despite a growing number of theoretical and
              experimental papers on the subject.  Important recent progress, made by two
              experimental groups involved in the present project, has shown that the M-I
              transition in silicon inversion layers may be connected with a ferromagnetic
              instability in two dimensions.  To test this intriguing possibility,
              magnetoresistance measurements will be performed at ultra-low temperatures and
              high magnetic fields at the MicroKelvin facility of the NSF-supported National
              High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Gainesville, Florida.  The information sought
              will be crucial for the understanding of the nature of the enigmatic behavior
              observed in the two-dimensional electron gas systems.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students participating in this project will receive training in a
              complex and important area of forefront physics involving cutting edge
              technology and semiconductor device structures.  This will prepare them for a
              range of careers in industry, government or education.

This Collaborative
              Research Project will investigate the properties of very high purity
              semiconductor materials in a MOSFET structure somewhat related to those found
              in many current electronic devices.  Contrary to the widely-held expectation
              that no metallic phase is possible in such two dimensional semiconductors,
              experimental evidence has been obtained in the last few years that indicates
              there may be a transition from insulating to metallic behavior.  The issue
              remains unresolved despite a growing number of theoretical and experimental
              papers on the subject, and poses a serious challenge to our understanding of
              the behavior of electrons in semiconductors.  The principal investigators of
              the present project have been leading contributors to this field, and have
              independently obtained recent evidence that the metal-insulator transition may
              be associated with a tendency toward a ferromagnetic transition.  To test this
              intriguing possibility, measurements will be performed at ultra-low
              temperatures and high magnetic fields at the MicroKelvin facility at
              NSF-supported National High Magnetic Field Laboratory at Gainesville, Florida.
              Gainesville, Florida.  The information obtained is expected to be crucial for
              the understanding of the nature of the enigmatic behavior observed in two
              dimensional semiconductors.  Graduate and undergraduate students participating
              in this project, including some minority students, will receive training in a
              complex and important area of forefront physics involving cutting edge
              technology, including semiconductor device structures  This will prepare them
              for a range of careers in industry, government or education.

