Title       : Phylogenetic Relationships in Dioscorea, The True Yams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0129376

Award Number: 0129376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith E. Skog                          
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201056             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Geeta geeta@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

A grant has been awarded to Geeta Bharathan at SUNY at Stony Brook
              to study the evolutionary relationships of Dioscorea (the true yams). Dioscorea
              is a large, economically important monocot genus that contains about 600
              species of, mostly tropical, vines that grow in a range of habitats. Despite
              its traditional value as a tuber and medicinal crop (and, recently, in the
              pharmaceutical industry) the taxonomy of Dioscorea is in a mess. While a
              statement, over a 100 years ago, by the famous taxonomist, Hooker, that "...the
              species of Dioscorea are in a state of indescribable confusion" is slowly being
              remedied through heroic efforts by a great many alpha-taxonomists, the question
              of higher level relationships is a thorny one that traditional morphological
              approaches alone may not be able to resolve. 
In this project species of
              Dioscorea across the world will be sampled to study variation in molecules (DNA
              sequences of three genes) and morphology (observations on field and herbarium
              collections).  Molecular sequences will be analyzed to formulate hypotheses of
              evolutionary relationships and to construct a systematic framework for the
              group.  This will help to achieve several goals: 1) Evaluation of previous
              classifications to facilitate taxonomic revisions; 2) Evaluation of the
              evolutionary basis for particular subgroups (e.g., the one that includes the
              three North American species) to help understand the historical origins and
              biogeographical spread of this large genus; 3) Evaluation of morphological
              traits to improve their use in classification of the genus; 4) Compilation of a
              morphological data set for phylogenetic analysis, to be done in collaboration
              with Dioscorea scientists across the world.
The wider significance of the
              achievement of the above objective has both scientific and societal aspects. 
              The project would generate a rigorous systematic framework that then can be
              used to study various aspects of this important tropical crop: evolution of
              vegetative form and development (including leaf form and tuber-formation),
              biogeographical patterns of diversification, and history of domestication.  All
              these would contribute to future uses and improvement of the crop.  The project
              would enable training of students (graduate and undergraduate) in field and
              laboratory methods including morphology, while at the same time exposing them
              to important international issues involved in the collection and utilization of
              germplasm from other nations.  The project has the explicit involvement of a
              Mexican collaborator for plant collection and mapping using GIS, and a course
              on phylogenetics to be taught in Mexico by the PI.  All these activities will
              contribute to building 1) a scientific base of knowledge on an important, but
              understudied, tropical crop, 2) scientific skills and infrastructure at the
              national and international levels, and 3) international collaboration and
              scientific exchange.


