Title       : Sex Chromosome Evolution with Haploid Sex Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0129995

Award Number: 0129995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $258208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Hood meh2s@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1108,1112,1174,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              	An analogy is often drawn between sex (or mating-type) chromosomes in
              haploid-mating organisms, such as fungi, and the sex chromosomes in the
              majority of plants and animals.  However, the mechanisms of divergence, and
              thus the content of sex chromosomes, are likely to be very different when
              mating compatibility is determined during the haploid stage.  In particular,
              sheltered degeneration of the Y-chromosome in "higher" diploids is thought to
              be possible because only the Y is permanently heterozygous.  However, no such
              asymmetrical sheltering occurs in haploid-mating organisms, yet they also have
              sex chromosomes dimorphic for size.  In fungi, this was first observed in the
              basidiomycete Microbotryum violaceum.  Variation in the size of sex chromosomes
              of Microbotryum may be caused by translocations or by incremental insertions of
              repetitive elements (for example, transposon accumulation).  In this project,
              sex chromosome-specific libraries will be screened, using electrophoretically
              isolated autosomes, for hybridization patterns that identify translocations. 
              Whether accumulation of repetitive DNA is a cause of the dimorphism will be
              determined by sequencing a large sample of DNA fragments from each sex
              chromosome.  These sequences will be tested for homology to known genes and for
              similarity among them.  Several retrotransposon-related sequences on the sex
              chromosomes of Microbotryum have already been identified using this approach. 
              The directions and rates of sex chromosome change will be investigated by
              reconstructing intra-specific phylogenies using DNA sequence data from regions
              completely linked to the mating type locus.  Sex specificity of the chromosome
              dimorphism will be investigated by characterizing sex chromosomes from widely
              divergent samples from Europe and North America.
	Although there have been
              enormous theoretical and empirical advances in our understanding of sex
              chromosomes in plants and animals, their occurrence has been a long-standing
              enigma in organisms that mate as haploids, such as most fungi and mosses.  This
              research, using the fungus Microbotryum, will test specific genetic hypotheses
              regarding the composition, origin, and evolutionary directions of haploid sex
              chromosomes.  This research will also contribute to understanding variation
              among members of the same species for how genetic information is organized
              within the nucleus.  Great effort is currently being devoted to the
              construction of complete genome sequences, and an understanding of genetic
              variation within species is essential to interpreting such data, especially
              when it is associated with particular chromosomes.  In addition, because
              structural changes in chromosomes are often implicated as barriers to
              compatible mating, the study of forces that promote such variation will
              increase our understanding of the origins of new species by reproductive
              isolation. 

