Title       : Collaborative Research: Phylogeny and Montane Species Richness in Plethodontid
               Salamanders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0129142

Award Number: 0129142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: JOHN J. WIENS   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst
	      4400 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152134080    412/622-3241

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0312000   Population                              
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will reconstruct the phylogeny of plethodontid salamanders
              using morphological and molecular data and then use the phylogeny to explore
              how species diversity changes with elevation, and the evolutionary reasons for
              patterns of species richness.  Plethodontidae is the largest family of
              salamanders, containing about two-thirds of all 460+ species of salamanders. 
              Plethodontids are possibly the most abundant vertebrates in eastern North
              America and are the focus of research by dozens of scientists in many diverse
              fields of biology (e.g., ecology, behavior, morphology, evolution,
              development).  Many (if not most) of these studies depend critically on having
              a robust phylogenetic framework.  However, higher-level relationships among
              plethodontids have never been the subject of a comprehensive study using modern
              methods. In a three-year collaborative study, the PIs will reconstruct the
              phylogeny of 112 species of plethodontid salamanders (plus outgroups
              representing five other families) using morphological characters and DNA
              sequences from two mitochondrial genes and one nuclear gene.  The phylogeny
              will be used to explore how and why species diversity changes with elevation,
              using the unusually rich salamander fauna of the Appalachian Mountains as a
              model system.  Many groups of organisms exhibit increased species diversity in
              montane areas relative to lowland areas, a widespread pattern that remains
              poorly explained.  It is suggested herein that this pattern results from
              increased speciation in montane regions caused by the disjunctive nature of
              montane habitats and the elevational habitat specificity of highland species. 
              Three key predictions of this model will be tested using phylogenetic methods.
              
	The study will provide the first phylogeny of plethodontid salamanders based
              on a rigorous analysis of morphological and molecular data. The phylogeny will
              be critical to dozens of researchers who use plethodontids as a model system in
              studies of ecology, behavior, evolution, development, and other areas of
              biology. The study will also be the first to address elevational patterns of
              species richness from a phylogenetic perspective.  These analyses of montane
              species richness should have important implications for the fields of ecology,
              evolution, biogeography, and conservation biology. For example, the analyses of
              elevational specificity (how narrowly adapted a species is to a given
              elevational range and its associated climate) may be important for predicting
              the persistence or extinction of montane species in relation to global warming
              or other changes in climate.  The study will provide training for undergraduate
              and graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow in molecular techniques and in
              integrated analyses of phylogeny, ecology, and evolution.  

