Title       : Development of an Undergraduate Minor Concentration in Nuclear Fission Power
               Engineering (EEC-Small Grants for Exploratory Research)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0129712

Award Number: 0129712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Duderstadt jjd@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Corradini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,9237,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A planning grant (SGER) is sought to develop a national curriculum in nuclear
              fission power engineering that would serve as a certificate-based, minor
              concentration for undergraduate students majoring in traditional engineering
              degree programs. With the renewed interest in nuclear power as a key component
              of the nations energy portfolio, there is growing concern about the
              availability of engineers trained in nuclear technology in view of the very
              significant erosion in university nuclear engineering programs and facilities
              over the past two decades. Even with a rapid infusion of new resources, the
              time required to rebuild the
necessary faculties and facilities and stimulate
              student interest makes it highly unlikely that conventional nuclear engineering
              programs can provide a flow of graduates adequate to meet the near-term needs
              of industry and the federal government.

We propose to form a team of faculty
              members drawn from the leading nuclear engineering programs in the nation to
              develop a minor concentration in nuclear fission power engineering that
              colleges and universities could offer to students enrolled in conventional
              undergraduate engineering degree programs (e.g., mechanical engineering,
              electrical engineering, chemical engineering, industrial engineering, materials
              science and engineering, and computer engineering). This effort would augment
              nuclear engineering graduates in the near-term and supplement the growth of
              nuclear engineering majors in the long-term. This
multiple-course nuclear
              power curriculum would include a summer practicum involving extensive
              laboratory experience (perhaps at a regional university reactor facility or
              national laboratory) taken between the junior and senior years of the
              undergraduate major. This proposed nuclear-power minor curriculum would be
              supported by extensive computer and network resources,
including nuclear code
              simulation packages, web portals, and technology enhanced learning for
              on-campus and off-campus distance education.

We believe that such a program
              has the potential for rapidly expanding the production of engineers and
              scientists capable of contributing to our nations nuclear energy programs since
              it would draw from the large cadre of engineering and science majors rather
              than the small enrollments of nuclear engineering degree programs. In fact,
              industry has long expressed interest in hiring nuclear engineers more broadly
              trained in general engineering majors such as mechanical engineering,
              electrical engineering, and computer engineering. Furthermore, this approach is
              particularly attractive to universities since it would allow them to respond to
              growing national needs in nuclear energy without the necessity of major
              expansion of existing
nuclear engineering faculty or facilities (unlikely in
              the current budget climate in any event). The program would be designed to be
              highly transportable, and since both the content and support of the proposed
              program would be provided by a team of faculty members drawn from leading
              nuclear engineering programs across the nation, individual institutions would
              not have to commit additional resources to build new capabilities. In
              particular, this effort would intends to produce teaching tools such as course
              resources, web-based lectures, and software simulations that could be used at
              institutions that do not have access to nuclear engineering
              faculty.

Moreover, this effort could serve as a useful model in engineering
              education for addressing the need for engineers trained in other highly
              specialized areas such as integrated manufacturing, nanotechnology, quantum
              engineering, and biotechnology. An undergraduate minor concentration would
              allow students to prepare for careers in these fields without sacrificing the
              broader educational experience (and market opportunities) provided by a more
              conventional degree program. Furthermore, by developing a curriculum and
              supporting materials for a minor concentration using a team of national leaders
              in the given specialty, colleges and universities could offer such specialized
              curricula without significant additional investments in
new faculty and
              facilities. In fact, the model we propose may well represent the future of
              engineering education as technical knowledge continues to fragment into
              subdisciplinary specialties and universities face growing constraints on
              resources for
faculty and facilities.





