Title       : Elementary, Secondary and Informal Education: Dragon Skies: Astronomical
               Instruments of Imperial China -- A Planning Grant for a Traveling Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0129834

Award Number: 0129834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49967              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Reynolds reynolds@chabotspace.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chabot Space & Sci Center
	      10000 Skyline Blvd
	      Oakland, CA  94619    510/336-7300

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chabot Space and Science Center is developing and organizing a major traveling
              exhibit called "Dragon Skies:  Astronomical Instruments of Imperial China." 
              The exhibit will consist of nine Chinese astronomical instruments, dating
              between 1439 and 1744, as well as 25 smaller artifacts.  In addition, a variety
              of interpretive materials and activities will be developed to enhance the
              exhibit.

The PI, Michael Reynolds, has visited the Ancient Beijing
              Observatory and begun initial conversations with the staff there, resulting in
              tentative collaboration agreements.  Subsequent to that visit, the Ancient
              Beijing Observatory has already determined which original instruments will be
              able to travel, has replicated several exhibits, and has compiled a collection
              of additional artifacts that will enhance the exhibit.  The planning phase will
              be carried out by staff from Chabot, the Beijing Ancient Observatory, the
              Chinese Astronomical Society, and a team of advisors.  Planning activities will
              include:

Decide which aspects of exhibit development will be taken on by
              each partner.
Determine what ancillary materials will need to be
              developed.
Establish what interactive activities, such as hands-on activities
              or computer kiosks, will enhance the project.
Determine what multimedia
              programs, such as an audio tour or planetarium shows, will increase the impact
              of the exhibit.
Determine the translation needs for the exhibit and for the
              supplemental materials and programs.
Arrange the logistics for the traveling
              exhibit.
Establish criteria for venues that might display the exhibit and
              identify potential sites.

