Title       : Improved Estimates Of Turbulence From Mesosphere-Stratosphere-Troposphere (MST)
               Radars
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0129464

Award Number: 0129464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory D. Nastrom nastrom@stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Doppler spectra measured by MST (mesosphere-stratosphere-troposphere) radars are
              broadened by turbulent velocity fluctuations of the scattering elements in the
              beam.  Measuring the spectral spread is therefore one of the ways of using MST
              radar to estimate the intensity of turbulence.  Because the beams of such
              radars are fairly broad (typically several degrees) there are additional
              contributions to the Doppler spread caused by the cross-beam wind (so-called
              beam broadening) and by shear of the radial wind component in the direction of
              the beam axis.  Recent studies indicate that the methods currently used to
              correct for these effects are inaccurate.  Such methods are usually based on
              the assumption that the contributing volume is uniformly filled with
              turbulence.  In fact, the turbulence is often confined to one or more
              horizontal layers that are thinner than the vertical extent of the contributing
              volume.  Corrections based on the assumption of a filled beam are then
              generally too large.

The present award supports development of a new
              experimental technique that will enable improved radar estimates of turbulence.
               Called the dual-beamwidth technique, it has the advantage of obtaining the
              turbulence intensity directly, without the need for the usual corrections to
              the Doppler spectral width.  The assumption underlying the method is that the
              (generally unknown) contribution of beam broadening to the Doppler spread is
              proportional to the beamwidth.  Simultaneous measurements at the same range
              with two beamwidths, which is possible with advanced MST radars such as those
              in Japan and India, then make it possible to measure the contribution of
              beam-broadening to the total Doppler spread and to compensate for it in
              estimating the remaining spread due to turbulence.  The turbulence intensities
              determined this way will be compared with those estimated from a single beam
              employing the concept of an "effective beamwidth," which is less than the
              geometric beamwidth to allow for the limited vertical extent of the turbulent
              layers.  If the method employing a single effective beamwidth is proven
              accurate, it will then be applied to recompute turbulence intensities for radar
              data from Japan and White Sands, New Mexico, that have already been reported in
              the literature.
