Title       : FASEB Summer Conference: "Control of Transcription in Prokaryotes", to be held
               July 24-29 at the Vermont Academy, Saxton's River, Vermont.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9225109

Award Number: 9225109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Gourse   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gisela T. Storz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Garges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9125,
Abstract    :
                   This application is for partial funding for the 1993 FASEB                
              Summer Conference on "Control of Transcription Initiation in                   
              Prokaryotes", to be held July 24-29 at the Vermont Academy,                    
              Saxton's River, Vermont.  The conference is under the auspices of              
              the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology                   
              (FASEB).  There will be nine major sessions and poster sessions.               
              The topics to be included for discussion are biochemistry of                   
              transcription, control through different sigmas, activation and                
              repression mechanisms, activator-RNA polymerase interactions, and              
              control by multiple protein-DNA complexes.  The purpose of the                 
              meeting is to bring together geneticists and biochemists to                    
              exchange information.  The field of transcription initiation in                
              prokaryotes is progressing rapidly, providing information on                   
              mechanisms at the molecular level.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              This conference deals with the means by which bacteria produce the             
              messenger RNA blueprint from which proteins from proteins are                  
              produced.  This involves where the replication machinery begins on             
              the gene as well the role of the cellular factors which work to                
              regulate the production of the RNA blueprints.  The conference                 
              brings together scientists that study this area with biochemical               
              and genetic techniques to exchange information.  This meeting                  
              brings basic science and biotechnology people together.
