Title       : CRB: Molecular Genetics of Historical Tiger Beetle Populations for Conservation
               Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1997      
File        : a9225074

Award Number: 9225074
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31030              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfried P. Vogler vogler@nhm.ac.uk  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9285,
Abstract    :
                   Historical information that dates back to a time before                   
              endangered populations were affected by human disturbance could be             
              used to design specific conservation strategies.  However direct               
              observation of changes in the population structure are difficult               
              because they necessitate long-term surveillance and sampling.  The             
              advent of the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) makes it possible to             
              extract genetic information from museum specimens.  Thus, the time             
              range that is accessible for the study of genetic parameters in                
              endangered species is substantially extended.  The potential of                
              this approach for its application in conservation genetics by                  
              addressing concrete management problems involving the endangered               
              tiger beetle, Cicindela dorsalis will be examined.                             
              %%%                                                                            
              The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) will be used to examine                    
              variation in mtDNA of specimens from museum collections.  Changes              
              in genetic structured over time will be assessed by comparing data             
              from the historical specimens to an extensive data base on mtDNA               
              variation in extant populations.  Three main conservation questions            
              will be addressed concerning (a) the choice of a source population             
              for reintroduction into historical habitat, (b) the importance of              
              the metapopulation for the management of the species, and (c) the              
              loss of genetic variation after bottlenecks.
