Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Semiliner Partial Different EquationsCurve Shortening in
               Minkowski Geometry and Branching Processes in Probability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1993      
File        : a9225145

Award Number: 9225145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Li   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              Li  9225145       This project concentrates on three areas of research in 
              mathematical analysis.  The general theme is that of determining  existence,
              regularity, local and global behavior and symmetry  properties of solutions of
              nonlinear equations and systems. In  particular, work on semilinear elliptic
              partial differential  equations will continue, examining the Lane-Emden
              equation and  Matukuma equation of astrophysics.  This includes a complete 
              classification of positive solutions, and to determine whether  all solutions
              are radial with limiting values of zero or  infinity. A second line of
              investigation considers anisotropic  curve shortening.  This has a more
              geometric flavor in which  embedded plane curves evolve according to a rate
              proportional to  the normal vector. The present work focuses on a generalized 
              setting of curves on manifolds in a Minkowski geometry.  Efforts  will be made
              to determine when such flows can shrink to a point  when standing symmetry
              hypotheses are not present.  The ideas  represented by this work can be viewed
              as models for the  evolution of phase boundaries such as the boundaries of
              growing  crystals.   The third direction this works takes involves 
              measure-valued branching processes, including the model on the  evolution
              caused by point catalysts.  ***        The work has its roots in stochastic
              partial differential  equations arising in the study of spatially distributed
              birth and  death processes.  A particular goal is to analyze nonequilibrium 
              reactions in the presence of multiple catalysts.
