Title       : Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1995     
File        : a9225110

Award Number: 9225110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Fred Stollnitz                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Sneider tsneider@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norman P. Curthoys  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1139      RSCH EXPER FOR UNDERGRAD SITES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biochemistry at                 
              Colorado State University to continue a successful Research                    
              Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site.  The program in                      
              Molecular Biosciences will enable qualified undergraduates to do               
              independent research projects in a range of areas and using a                  
              variety of experimental approaches.  Biochemistry/molecular                    
              biology employs the methods of chemistry, physics, cellular                    
              biology, microbiology, and genetic manipulation to study the                   
              structure and function of complex biomolecules, how these                      
              molecules generate the phenomenon we call life, and how                        
              alterations in these molecules perturb the living organism.                    
              Because of its breadth, biochemistry/molecular biology serves to               
              integrate didactic and experiential material learned in a                      
              multitude of basic science courses.  The REU program is designed               
              to ?a! offer the participants a wide variety of research areas                 
              from which to choose an independent studies project; ?b! offer                 
              project areas that are meaningful and exciting to the student;                 
              ?c! teach the student how to formulate and test hypotheses; ?d!                
              help develop the ability to trouble-shoot and problem-solve when               
              confronted with the unexpected; ?e! instruct the participant in                
              state-of-the-art techniques and instrumentation of                             
              biochemistry/molecular biology; ?f! develop the ability to                     
              communicate with one's peers concerning ongoing research efforts               
              as well as more formal presentations of completed research                     
              projects; and, ?g! provide, in CSU faculty and in outside                      
              scientists invited to speak to the REU students, role models that              
              will reinforce the intellectual excitement of a scientific                     
              career; and ?h! render assistance to the participants in applying              
              for graduate studies and fellowships.
