Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Differential Equations and continuum Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  1993  
File        : a9225000

Award Number: 9225000
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24200              (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Serrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9225000  Serrin       Work supported by this award will be done in three
              principal  directions: the study of radial solutions of nonlinear elliptic 
              equations; the asymptotic behavior and stability of nonlinear  holonomic
              oscillators and the relation of Newtonian mechanics to  invariance principles. 
              In the first direction, emphasis will be  placed on establishing existence or
              nonexistence of ground  states, especially when the governing nonlinearities
              have   algebraic growth both in the solution variable and its gradient.  A
              ground state is a non-negative solution (not trivial) which  tends to zero off
              compact sets.  Work on holonomic oscillators,  which arise particularly in
              Lagrangian mechanics, concerns the  stabilizing effect of various damping modes
              and nonautonomous  restoring forces.  Particular attention will be paid to the 
              effect of intermittently applying damping mechanisms,  specifically, to
              determine necessary and sufficient conditions  under which such damping causes
              transient effects to decay.  Finally, the derivation of equations of motion
              from invariance  principles continues earlier work of the same nature. It is 
              expected that extensions to chemical mixtures and micropolar  materials will be
              carried out.  These are cases not well  understood.       Partial differential
              equations form a basis for mathematical  modeling of the physical world.  The
              role of mathematical  analysis is not so much to create the equations as it is
              to  provide qualitative and quantitative information about the  solutions. 
              This may include answers to questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.
               In addition, analysis often  develops methods for approximation of solutions
              and estimates on  the accuracy of these approximations.  ***
