Title       : Collaborative Research: The Role of Curvature in Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2001      
File        : a0124201

Award Number: 0124201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198173             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin Forman forman@math.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0124201
Robin Forman

In recent years ideas from geometry have driven
              some of the 
most exciting developments in combinatorics such as Gromov
              
hyperbolic groups and CAT(0) spaces, combinatorial Morse theory,
              combinatorial Ricci curvature, combinatorial differential 
manifolds and
              matroid bundles. The central unifying notion 
in geometry is that of
              curvature. Now, through these diverse
geometric and combinatorial theories,
              curvature is emerging 
as a powerful tool and fundamental unifying concept in
              
combinatorics as well.  This Focused Research Group will 
explore some of
              the specific notions of combinatorial
curvature driving current combinatorial
              work, and also the 
role of curvature as the basis for a coherent geometric
              
vision of combinatorics itself.

The notion of curvature has been one of
              the grand unifying 
concepts in geometry and physics for well over a century. 
              
For example, Gauss, the originator of our modern understanding 
of
              curvature, showed that Euclidean geometry was distinguished 
from other
              geometries as being the geometry of a space with 
zero curvature. As an
              application he showed that it is
precisely the curvature of the surface of the
              Earth which makes 
it impossible to draw a map of the Earth's surface (on a
              flat 
piece of paper) that accurately portrays all lengths and
              angles.
Riemann generalized Gauss's work to smooth spaces of higher
              
dimensions, and Einstein observed that Riemannian geometry
was precisely the
              right setting in which to describe his 
theory of general relativity (in which
              the curvature of the 
universe is the result of gravitational forces). Partly
              as a 
result of Einstein's work, the last century saw an intensive
              investigation into the curvature of smooth spaces.
Combinatorics, roughly
              defined, is the study of objects which 
can be described by a finite amount of
              information.  This is 
precisely the mathematics that computers can do.  This
              type of mathematics seems far removed from the geometric investigations 
of
              Gauss, Riemann and countless others.  However, there is a 
growing collection
              of  combinatorial phenomena which can best 
be viewed as being finite
              analogues of facts about the curvature 
of smooth spaces.  The goal of this
              proposal is to come to a
coherent understanding of curvature as a
              combinatorial notion. 
In addition, bringing together researchers from a
              variety of mathematical disciplines, we wish to bridge the chasms between
              geometry, combinatorics, algebra and topology, using curvature 
as the
              unifying theme.


 
  


