Title       : SGER: Phylogency, Reproductive Mode, and Parasitism in Antarctic Cidaroid Sea
               Urchins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2001      
File        : a0124131

Award Number: 0124131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Pearse pearse@darwin.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Mooi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The origin of Antarctic biota remains uncertain. Shallow-water, circum-antarctic
              habitats have been isolated from the rest of the world since Antarctica
              separated from Australia forty million years. With the separation of Antarctica
              from South American 25 million years ago, and the inception of the Antarctic
              Circumpolar Current and the Polar Frontal zone, the isolation of the Antarctic
              biota from the rest of the world's oceans was nearly complete. The exception is
              the deep sea, which is replenished by cold, sinking Antarctic bottomwater. Many
              Antarctic species are endemic with apparent affinities to species in the deep
              sea. A major question about the Antarctic biota is whether deep-sea organisms
              invaded and radiated into the Antarctic benthos after it was isolated and
              cooled or the Antarctic biota is a refugium and/or source of deep-sea organisms
              and Antarctic species invaded the deep sea. This research will focus on
              cidaroid sea urchins, as part of an international Antarctic deep-sea
              biodiversity program to be conducted on the German Antarctic program's research
              vessel Polarstern. The cruise will be conducted in the Scotia and Weddell Seas.
              Material collected from the Antarctic shelf to the floor of the adjacent deep
              sea will form the basis for a phylogenetic analysis to help resolve origin of
              this group of organisms. Studies will also include a focus on larval
              development, which is unknown in some species. Finally, an examination of a
              fungus-like parasite which occurs on the spines of some species of Antarctic
              cidaroids, will be conducted in order to place this parasite into a recognized
              higher taxonomic category, and to open the possibility for understanding how it
              influences echinoid development. This project will provide new information on a
              understudied part of the world's ocean and will contribute to the study of the
              world's biodiversity.
