Title       : US-European Workshop on Bridge Evaluation, Repair and Rehabilitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0124189

Award Number: 0124189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter Chang                             
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej S. Nowak nowak@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The objective of the US-European Workshop on Bridges is to  the
              recent
advancements in bridge engineering, focusing on new materials and
              technology, monitoring
and diagnostics involving integrated sensor systems,
              new methods of analysis, design,
evaluation, repair and rehabilitation of
              bridges used in Europe, and identify the most
suitable topics for joint
              research projects. The major areas to be covered include: (1)
advanced
              materials (high-strength/high-performance concrete and steel,
              composites,
fiber-reinforced concrete, smart materials), (2) development of
              load and resistance models
for steel and reinforced concrete and prestressed
              concrete structures, (3) diagnostic
procedures (tests, performance monitors,
              nondestructive techniques, signal processing,
integrated sensor systems,
              acoustic and optical techniques), (4) materials and techniques
for repair and
              rehabilitation of concrete structures (reinforced and prestressed
              concrete,
steel, new composite materials). Accordingly the Workshop attempts
              to  state of
the art summary of main topics as viewed on one hand in the U.S.
              and, on the other hand,
in Europe, identify the research needs, in particular
              topics for cooperative projects; and
derive some recommendations that reflect
              the needs in manpower, technology transfer and
education for the near future.
              The Workshop involves researchers and consultants. The
local organizers also
              organize special meetings, a conference, and field trips to the
construction
              sites. The results will be presented in the final report.

