Title       : Experimental Investigations of the Dynamics of Thermochemical Boundary Layers in
               the Mantles of Terrestrial Planets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0124972

Award Number: 0124972
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Manga manga@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Richards  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Manga
0124972

Heat and mass transfer across thermal and chemical boundary
              layers at the top and bottom of the mantles of the terrestrial planets govern
              the chemical and geodynamic evolution these planets. The dynamics of the top,
              lithospheric boundary layers of terrestrial planets are dominated by multi-mode
              (brittle/ductile) rheological behavior, e.g., plate tectonics on Earth and
              immobile lithosphere on Mars, which are at least readily observed if not
              completely "understood". Although deep mantle dynamics are less accessible to
              observation, there are still seismological, mineral physics and geochemical
              data that provide constraints on mantle dynamics. Near the core-mantle
              boundary, flow probably involves both a thermal and chemical boundary
              layer.

Laboratory experiments can play an important role in treating
              problems involving vigorous multi-component convection in which dynamical
              interactions across continuous viscosity and density interfaces determine the
              flow. The investigators will carry out a series of laboratory experiments aimed
              at achieving a better understanding of the dynamics of mantle flow at the
              Earth's core-mantle boundary. Over the course of the proposed work they will
              forge a better fundamental understanding of thermochemical boundary layers in
              all aspects of mantle convection.

The investigation will focus on two
              classes of experiments: (1) Basic studies of thermochemical convection to
              elucidate the coupling of heat transfer and flow across chemical boundary
              layers, quantify entrainment rates across viscosity interfaces, and better
              understand the dynamics controlling the formation of thermo-chemical plumes.
              (2) Focussed studies of plume/plate interactions using controlled large-scale
              flow as a proxy for the effects of plate motions. The investigators also plan
              to complement their laboratory experiments with theoretical and 3-D numerical
              modeling studies. For the latter, the laboratory experiments will form valuable
              benchmarks.

