Title       : Structure of Liquid Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0124936

Award Number: 0124936
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $356350             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter S. Pershan pershan@deas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on synchrotron generated x-ray scattering using the
              National Synchrotron Light Source (NSLS) at Brookhaven National Laboratory and
              the Advanced Photon Light Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory to study
              the structural properties of thin liquid layers and related novel liquid
              surfaces. The structure and fluctuations of a thin liquid wetting layer that
              forms on various substrates will be characterized by x-ray specular
              reflectivity, off specular diffuse scattering and grazing incidence
              diffraction. A unique feature is that some of the wetting will involve the
              wetting of one liquid by a separate immiscible liquid. Solvation of selected
              nano-particles in these thin layers, accompanied by control of the thickness of
              the liquid, will make it possible to the study how 2-dimensional (2D)
              mesoscopic arrays form on deposition from solution. In addition, the
              interactions between thin wetting liquids and nano-scale structures on Si
              surfaces, and the manner in which alkane chains tethered to nano-particles
              order as the density of the nano-particles change will be investigated. A
              second benefit expected from this project, in addition to the expected
              scientific knowledge, is that new young researchers will be trained to carry
              out cutting edge research using these precious national synchrotron facilities.
              In addition, researchers participating in this grant will participate in the
              ongoing educational outreach activities at Harvard (see
              http://www.mrsec.harvard.edu/education.html) for example, the Research
              Experiences for Teachers program (RET) that makes it possible for teachers from
              local-area K-12 schools to participate in research.

Understanding the
              structure and related physical properties of liquid surfaces and thin liquid
              films are important for a variety of processes that include lubrication,
              adhesion, catalysis, painting, and coatings. In addition, the experimental and
              theoretical study of wetting phenomena is contributing significantly to the
              current understanding of fundamental problems in statistical physics. For
              example, studying the wetting of substrates with nano-scale inhomogeneities is
              important for developing a technologically promising microprinting method for
              the production of nano-scale structures. 
 

