Title       : 2001 TSE: Formulating Waterborne Coatings for the Environment: Interactions in
               Water-Cosolvent Media between Associating Polymers, Surfactants, and Colloidal
               Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0124848

Award Number: 0124848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paschalis Alexandridis palexand@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0124848
Alexandridis, P
SUNY Buffalo

Formulating Waterborne
              Coatings for the Environment: Interactions in Water-Cosolvent Media between
              Associating Polymers, Surfactants, and Colloidal Particles

Background:  The
              coatings and paints industry commands a 50 billion-dollar market worldwide.
              Over 1 billion gallons of coatings and paints are sold in the U. S. every year.
              Because of increased environmental awareness and under regulatory pressure for
              the reduction of volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions (e.g., Pollution
              Prevention Act of 1990), over half of the coatings and paints are now
              waterborne, and the trend for increasing the fraction of waterborne
              formulations continues. But even waterborne coatings and paints are not
              VOC-free, as they contain cosolvents, which may comprise up to 30% of the total
              liquid present. Furthermore, a number of these cosolvents are classified as
              hazardous air pollutants (HAP).

Motivation:  There is a need for both an
              overall reduction of VOC cosolvents and a replacement of HAP cosolvent by
              non-HAP ones. This need challenges the waterborne coating and paint
              formulations, but the drive for reformulation is confounded by the dearth of
              reports in the open literature regarding the effects of cosolvents on the
              aqueous solution behavior of associating polymers and surfactants. These
              amphiphiles are essential in stabilizing the resin and pigment colloidal
              constituents of coatings and paints and in conferring unique rheological
              properties (e.g., very high viscosity at rest and very low viscosity during the
              spraying or brushing application). 

Research objectives: It is the goal of
              the principal investigator to develop fundamental knowledge to support and
              guide the optimal formulation of waterborne coatings and paints. The specific
              objectives are the following:  Objective 1 is to establish benchmarks by
              examining the phase behavior, structure, and dynamics of aqueous solutions
              consisting of associating polymers and surfactants representative of those used
              in coatings and paints. Objective 2 is to explore and quantify the effects of
              various cosolvents (e.g., different types of glycol ethers and other polar
              solvents) on the phase behavior, structure and dynamics of aqueous solutions
              consisting of associating polymers and surfactants. No such information is
              currently available in the open literature. Cosolvents can have a profound
              effect on the solution behavior and interactions of amphiphiles, and also
              modify the overall and local viscosity of the system. Objective 3 is to study
              the colloidal stability, structure, and rheology of colloidal suspensions of
              resins or pigments in aqueous-cosolvent media that contain associating polymers
              and surfactants. Such suspensions are very similar to the ones used in coatings
              and paints. Of explicit consideration here is the fact that the cosolvents can
              interact specifically (e.g., partition or swell) with the resins. Another very
              important issue to consider is the change in the overall and the local
              composition (and corresponding interactions) of the
              particle-polymer-surfactant-cosolvent mixture as the water and cosolvents
              evaporate following the application of the coating/paint.

Potential Impact:
              The proposed research directly enables (i) the reduction of VOC cosolvents that
              are used in waterborne coatings and paints and the switch to cosolvents that
              are not HAPs, (ii) the optimal formulation of waterborne coatings and paints
              which would result in overall reduction of coating material (and associated
              energy costs) needed; (iii) at the same time the proposed work assists (by
              providing fundamental information) the ongoing efforts of replacing organic
              solvent-borne coatings and paints with environmentally friendlier waterborne
              formulations.

