Title       : Topological Aspects of Chow Quotients and Moduli Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a0124600

Award Number: 0124600
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yi Hu yhu@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0104600
Yi Hu

The investigator proposes to give topological
              constructions of
the Chow quotient by introducing moduli spaces of stable
              orbits
with prescribed momentum charges and moduli spaces of
              stable
action-manifolds, respectively. The introductions of stable 
orbits
              and stable action-manifolds follow closely the idea of investigator's earlier
              work on stable degeneration of polygons. 
Note that just like a stable polygon
              is a collection of ordinary polygons, a stable orbit is a collection of
              ordinary orbits. The connections from stable orbits and stable action-manifolds
              to the corresponding Chow cycles are to be established by moment map. 
Next,
              he also attempts to interpret the Uhlenbeck compactification 
as a topological
              analogy of a Chow quotient.  In the same vein, 
the investigator proposes a
              moduli problem for stable tuples of homogeneous polynomials of a fixed total
              degree in two variables.
The investigator anticipates that the resulting
              moduli space is 
the smooth compactification of the variety of holomorphic
              maps 
from one-dimensional projective space to n-dimensional projective
              
space as constructed in his earlier work on blowups along 
arrangements of
              subvarieties.

This proposal deals with the fruitful interaction between
              
topology and algebraic geometry. Algebraic Geometry as a field 
is both old
              and new.  It is old because of its long history, 
it is new because it is
              still vigorously developing as one of 
the main stream mathematics. It has
              numerous beautiful connections 
and applications to other subjects. Roughly
              speaking, Algebraic Geometry studies spaces which are locally the set of
              solutions
of some polynomial equations. Topology is another amazing
              
mathematical achievement of this century and is the study of 
flexible
              geometrical properties of spaces.  One of central 
problems in algebraic
              geometry is the classification of spaces 
in algebraic geometry. A key idea
              here is to treat every type of 
spaces as a point in a "master set" which is
              technically called 
a moduli space. This paper focus on the topological and
              
geometrical aspects of moduli spaces. The proposal consists
of some new
              ideas and methods which are substantially based 
upon investigator's earlier
              papers, among others.


