Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Studies of Model C-H Bond and Si-H Bond
               Activation Processes on the Surfaces of Large[RG]n and [CH4]n Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0124920

Award Number: 0124920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Breckenridge breckenridge@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5918,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0124920
Breckenridge

This three-year award for US-France collaboration in
              experimental physical chemistry involves researchers and students at the
              University of Utah and the Center for Atomic Energy (CEN) in Saclay, France. 
              The principal investigators, William H. Breckenridge in the US, and Benoit Soep
              and Jean-Michel Mestdagh in France, lead this collaboration. They will study
              reactions of excited atoms and metal oxides produced at the surface in order to
              activate C-H  (carbon-hydrogen) bonds. Activation of C-H bonds is important in
              a wide variety of technological processes such as hydrocarbon cracking,
              synthesis of chemicals from natural gas, hydrogenation, and organic synthesis.
              Many of these processes are either extremely complex chemically or occur under
              conditions which make it difficult to characterize and identify the processes
              responsible for bond breaking.  The collaboration and comparison of
              experimental results will elucidate the bond-breaking process and understanding
              of how C-H activation occurs in these technological systems. 

Experiments
              will be performed at the University of Utah and in Saclay, France.  The French
              group will conduct photosensitized C-H bond activation "surface" model
              experiments.  These are complemented by metal oxide/methane experiments at the
              University of Utah. The collaboration and comparison of experimental results
              will elucidate the bond-breaking process and advance understanding of how C-H
              activation occurs in these technological systems.  Graduate students will
              benefit through advanced training and participation in the collaborative
              experiments performed by an international team.
 
This award represents the
              US side of parallel proposals to the NSF and the CNRS.  NSF will cover travel
              funds and living expenses for the US investigator and his students. The CNRS
              will support visits by French researchers and students to the United States. 

