Title       : U.S. - Bulgarian Cooperative Research: Synthesis of Large Quantities of
               Conductive Nanoparticles. Possible Applications in Batteries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2002  
File        : a0124080

Award Number: 0124080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42870              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth J. Klabunde kenjk@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 0000,5958,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a U.S.-Bulgarian cooperative research project that will focus on
              synthesizing large quantities of conductive nanoparticles for possible
              applications to battery technology.  The principal investigators are Dr.
              Kenneth Klabunde from Kansas State University and Dr. Iovka Dragieva from the
              Central Laboratory of Electrochemical Power Sources in Sofia. 

The
              researchers will devise strategies for the synthesis of large quantities of
              conductive and semiconductive nanoparticies.  The strategies will be based on
              two approaches:  1)  modified sol-gel/aerogel procedures employing metal
              alkoxide molecular precursors leading to metal oxide nanoparticles, and
              conversation of metal oxide nanoparticles to metal sulfide (or selenide or
              telluride) nanoparticles by catalyzed solid-gas reactions and 2) borohydride
              reduction of mixed metal salts to yield bimetallic metal particles and metal
              hydrides, and metal vapor-solvent cocondensation to form nanocrystalline metals
              and bimetallics. Through this research the researchers expect to discover and
              develop better porous conducting materials for applications as electrodes in Li
              ion batteries, metal-hydride batteries, and zinc-air batteries.

This project
              in materials research fulfills the program objectives of bringing together
              leading experts in the U.S. and Central/Eastern Europe to combine complementary
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on
              the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
