Title       : Dynamics of Convective Entrainment in a Heterogeneously Stratified Atmosphere
               with Wind Shear
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 7,  2002    
File        : a0124068

Award Number: 0124068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evgeni Fedorovich fedorovich@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the nonsteady evolution of the convective boundary
              layer (CBL) in an atmosphere with complex vertical structure.  As the CBL
              grows, air from the free atmosphere is entrained into the top of the CBL by
              turbulent mixing.  The structure of the entrainment layer and the entrainment
              dynamics depend on the static stability of the atmosphere, as measured by the
              temperature profile, and the vertical wind shear.  Convective entrainment in
              conditions when the wind and temperature vary smoothly with height has been
              studied extensively in laboratory tanks, numerical large-eddy simulations
              (LES), and simple bulk models of the CBL.  Less studied is the development of
              the CBL in fluids with more complex stratification, though there is evidence
              that the CBL in such cases grows in an unsteady way, passing through a sequence
              of transition regimes accompanied by strong variations in the intensity and
              vertical structure of the entrainment.  In this study, the CBL entrainment
              dynamics will be investigated numerically, by means of high-resolution LES, and
              compared with observations from atmospheric, laboratory, and other numerical
              studies.  Emphasis will be placed on the influence of discrete and nonlinear
              temperature stratification on the entrainment characteristics with and without
              wind shear.  Elements of the work include: (1) improvement of the
              characterization of subgrid-scale turbulence in LES models; (2) numerical
              studies of convective entrainment in conjunction with analysis of observational
              and experimental data; (3) developing a parameterization of convective
              entrainment in a heterogeneously stratified atmosphere with wind shear.
