Title       : Electrochemical Light: Putting Modern Technology Into the Hands of Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0124367

Award Number: 0124367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark M. Richter mar667f@smsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Annette W. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bryan Breyfogle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southwest Missouri State U
	      901 South National
	      Springfield, MO  658040027    417/836-5000

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
Electrochemiluminescence (ECL), combining elements of
              electrochemistry and photochemistry, involves the production of light near an
              electrode surface by species that can undergo highly energetic electron
              transfer reactions. ECL is a powerful technique that can be used to study a
              variety of analytes (e.g., organic, inorganic, biochemical). It is unfortunate
              that it is usually thought of as a tool only of the research and clinical
              laboratory since using analytical techniques that have "real-world"
              applications (e.g., in the clinical analysis of biomolecules) can greatly
              enhance teaching at the undergraduate level. We are adapting experiments from
              the research and educational literature and are developing new experiments, all
              of which use ECL techniques that can be carried out using an ECL analyzer.
              These experiments are being implemented in laboratory courses across our
              general chemistry and analytical curriculum, including courses for non-science
              majors and courses enrolling pre-service teachers. For example, in Fundamentals
              of Chemistry and in Chemistry for the Citizen students study claims about the
              purity of bottled water by determining the amount of copper in commercial water
              samples. Therefore, this state of the art instrument makes it possible for
              students to actually carry out environmental and water testing analyses. In
              Quantitative Analysis ECL allows the incorporation of quality assurance/quality
              control and regulatory issues into the undergraduate curriculum. Our goal is to
              have students gain experience with ECL techniques, and develop an appreciation
              for the applicability of these techniques to a wide range of problems. These
              improvements also reflect modern analytical science and emphasize the
              development of sound analytical technique while exposing students to the types
              of problems dealt with by professionals in the real world. A secondary goal is
              to modernize the undergraduate curriculum and to produce graduates who are
              competent in the use of modern instrumentation. The ECL analyzer also is being
              used in undergraduate research projects. Evaluation of the project will occur
              in a number of ways, including pre-and post-exposure assessment in the affected
              courses, and compilation of data from exit interviews with our senior majors.
              Procedures for the new experiments will be made available on the internet, and
              tested experiments will also be published in appropriate journals.

