Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Intraregional Interaction in the Mesa
               Verde Region, A.D. 1150-1300: Placing Emigration in its Social Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0124876

Award Number: 0124876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith W. Kintigh kintigh@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A century of research has focused on understanding the complete abandonment of
              the Mesa Verde region of the American Southwest by A.D. 1300. Enormous efforts
              have been devoted to reconstructing the prevailing environmental conditions and
              to understanding where the Mesa Verde people went. However, a full
              understanding of this dramatic abandonment requires knowledge of the
              relationships among villages prior to and during the depopulation of this
              region. Existing data are inadequate to assess these interactions. For this
              critical period (A.D. 1150-1300), this project investigates social interaction
              among villages using evidence for economic cooperation, indicated by the
              exchange of pottery among villages and the locations of communal and defensive
              buildings signifying cooperation and conflict. The combination of ceramic
              exchange data and the distribution of communal and defensive architecture
              provides a powerful means for understanding the social processes at work during
              this otherwise well-documented abandonment.

NSF funding will permit the
              chemical composition analysis of an additional 490 ceramic and clay samples
              from nine sites using Instrumental Neutron Activation Analysis. With these
              samples, it will be possible to reconstruct patterns of ceramic production and
              exchange using a regional database comprising 1,041 ceramic and 60 clay samples
              from 18 sites. The grant would also fund the compilation of a regional database
              documenting the geographic distribution of communal and defensive architecture
              necessary for the assessment of the degree of cooperation and conflict among
              villages. Both of these databases will provide critical data that will be made
              accessible for and can be expanded by future research to further test
              anthropological arguments about social dynamics. This study, conducted by Ms.
              Donna Glowacki under the supervision of Dr. Keith Kintigh, will contribute to
              understanding the effects of stress, such as drought and violence, on social
              relationships prior to and during periods of large-scale
              emigration.






