Title       : Hf-isotopes in Ocean Island Basalts and Meteorites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2001   
File        : a0124965

Award Number: 0124965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent J. M. Salters salters@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Salters
EAR-0124965

This project will focus on Hf-isotope studies of ocean
              island basalts (OIB) and meteorites with the goal of characterizing the mantle
              and understanding how heterogeneities (metasomatic component, subducted
              components etc.) are mixed back into the ambient mantle.  The terrestrial
              variation in Hf and Nd isotopes indicates that the Lu-Hf and Sm-Nd system are
              well correlated and regression of the array leads to eHf = 1.35 ?eNd + 3 eHf. I
              propose to test this excellent correlation between Nd and Hf isotopic
              compositions by analyzing materials from "extreme" isotopic or trace element
              environments.  The Hf and Nd isotope systematics will provide interesting and
              powerful information in places where the Nd and Hf systems are differently
              correlated.  Lu-Hf-Sm-Nd characteristics of pelagic sediments, oceanic crust as
              well as carbonatites imply evolution lines that have a different slope than the
              terrestrial or ocean basalt array.  These distinctive trace element and Hf-Nd
              isotopic characteristics allows for relatively easy recognition of these
              components in oceanic basalts as well as good estimates on the duration of
              isolation of these components (mantle heterogeneity).  The fact that the
              oceanic island basalt array is so well defined indicates that processes or
              components that would move mantle compositions off the array are either
              insignificant in volume or are mixed back in on relatively short timescales.  A
              first step towards understanding these mixing processes is recognition of the
              different type of materials (pelagic sediment, oceanic crust etc) and processes
              (melting, metasomatism etc) in the sources of the basalts.  I propose to obtain
              Hf-isotope data for basalts from the Samoan Island chain, from Koolau volcano,
              Hawaii, and from Walvis Ridge. 

A second component of the project is the
              determination whether Lu/Hf-Sm/Nd fractionation in chondrites is significantly
              different then the time integrated fractionations in earth as observed by the
              terrestrial array. Presently there are three different estimates for the
              isotopic composition of bulk Earth in Hf-Nd-isotope space.  The available data
              indicate that Hf and Nd isotopic compositions of meteorites are correlated and
              that the meteorite array is at sharp angle with the OIB array.  I propose to
              analyze a suite of meteorites for Hf and Nd isotopic composition and thereby
              better define the meteorite array.

