Title       : Bioinformatics Symposium: Computer-based Medical Instrumentation and Information
               Technologies, Hartford, Connecticut, October 12, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2001     
File        : a0124653

Award Number: 0124653
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Bronzino joseph.bronzino@beaconalliance.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity College
	      300 Summit Street
	      Hartford, CT  061063100    860/297-2000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0124653
Bronzino
Bioinformatics is a scientifically broad discipline involving
              the use of computer technology to develop new medical (virtual) instruments,
              create and protect computerized patient records, enhance the operation of
              medical imaging systems, utilize artificial intelligence techniques (i.e.
              expert systems, neural networks, etc.) to develop decision support systems,
              create efficient and effective data mining and modeling approaches, and use
              robotics in a host of medical applications. This field is vast and it is
              difficult to cover all of the topics. Therefore, the Symposium is to focus on
              computer-based instrumentation in medical systems. 

The primary objectives
              of the Bioinformatics Symposium are:
Present insights into the new research
              and development efforts underway in virtual instrumentation, medical imaging
              and storage, and decision support systems.

Present examples of successful
              academic/industrial collaborations in these areas.

Provide an opportunity
              for students in biomedical engineering, computer science and health sciences to
              learn more about the field of Bioinformatics.

The convening of academic and
              industrial professionals from the various disciplines involved in
              Bioinformatics at the Symposium and associated Technology Fair will facilitate
              interdisciplinary and inter-institutional collaborations in research and
              development efforts within the realm of Bioinformatics. The Bioinformatics
              Symposium and associated Technology Fair offers a timely opportunity to
              facilitate the development of innovations in this emerging area of biomedical
              engineering. 

This award  provides support for the publication of printed
              proceedings of the meeting.

