Title       : Investigation of the Rate of Shelf-Basin Interaction in the Western Arctic Using
               Radium Isotopes: SBI Phase II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0124872

Award Number: 0124872
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : November 30,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448268             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Kadko dkadko@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The largely landlocked Arctic Ocean receives input from the Pacific and Atlantic
              Ocean and from rivers draining the surrounding continents.  These inflows are
              important sources of salt, heat, nutrients, sediment and organisms for the
              central basin.  With the exception of a portion of the Atlantic Ocean
              contribution, these inputs must cross continental shelves where they are
              modified significantly by benthic, water column, and air-ice-ocean
              interactions.  As a consequence of the cross-shelf transports, there are
              significant biogeochemical exchanges between the shelves and the central basin.
               However, we currently lack the information to quantify these exchanges.  In
              order to address this lack, this project proposes as part of the western Arctic
              Shelf-Basin Interaction (SBI) Phase II program to apply an isotopic water mass
              tracer technique to assess the pathways and rates of exchange between the
              western Arctic shelves and the interior Arctic Ocean basin.  The proposed
              technique uses the measured concentrations in the water column of the  two
              naturally occurring radioisotopes 228Ra and 226Ra.  Because 228Ra, which has a
              half life of 5.77 years, is derived solely from shelf sediments, it provides
              unambiguous evidence of the presence of shelf water.  Its relative
              concentration in shelf and basin waters can therefore provide quantitative
              information on shelf-basin water transports.  This technique is mature and has
              been used in shelf-basin exchange investigations in other regions.  Results of
              a pilot research project carried out during the SBI Phase I program have
              demonstrated utility of this tracer technique in the western Arctic Ocean.  For
              the proposed research, tracer data collected from vessels along transects
              through the study region will be analyzed within the context of nearshore and
              offshore field and modeling studies that focus on understanding cross-shelf
              transport.  An emphasis will be placed on the role of mesoscale eddies in this
              transport.  Where appropriate, the shorter-lived 224Ra with its 3.64-day half
              life will be measured at sea to supplement the dataset.  Radium tracer data
              will also be collected whenever possible from other platforms such as moored
              arrays provided by other SBI investigators.
