Title       : Mapping Aquifer Heterogeneity: Integrated Analysis of Electrical Resistance
               Tomography, Tracer Tests, and Hydraulic Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2003  
File        : a0124262

Award Number: 0124262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $402004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. Gorelick gorelick@geo.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0124262
Gorelick

Accurately characterizing flow and solute transport in
              groundwater systems is a critical problem in hydrology.  In order to predict
              the fate and long-term transport of contaminants, an accurate depiction of the
              spatial variability of the hydraulic conductivity field is essential. 
              Hydraulic conductivity measurements are generally too sparse to obtain a
              high-resolution image of the subsurface.  Given the large volume of data
              required to develop an accurate model of subsurface flow, and the cost of
              direct sampling, the use of geophysical methods can contribute significantly to
              information about the subsurface.
The focus of this research is two-fold. 
              First is the use of electrical resistance topography (ERT) as a tool to map
              subsurface relative flow paths and flow barriers in detail.  Second is the
              establishment of a systematic procedure capable of delineating hydraulic
              conductivity through integrated analysis of multiple data types.  By analyzing
              these data together in a simulation-inversion framework, we intend to provide
              images of aquifer properties consistent with all data inversion framework, we
              intend to provide images of aquifer properties consistent with all data types.
              We plan to develop a multiple data type simulation-framework, and test it using
              results from laboratory-scale experiments collected in 6 x 8 x 6 foot sand tank
              at the Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory at Columbia University (funded
              independently by NSF) and field-scale demonstration at the Massachusetts
              Military Reservation on Cape Cod, Massachusetts.  This work will quantify the
              worth of different types of data, and their combination, to develop
              high-resolution maps of aquifer properties.  It will also improve the
              understanding of the relationship between electrical resistance and hydraulic
              conductivity.  Both of these results will be valuable to physical
              hydrogeologist, contaminant hydrogeologists, and geophysicists.

