Title       : Collaborative Research: Millennial Scale Fluctuations of Dry Valleys Lakes:
               Implications for Regional Climate Variability and the Interhemispheric
               (a)Synchrony of Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0124049

Award Number: 0124049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62886              (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn W. Berger gwberger@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0124049
Berger

This award supports a project to add to the understanding of
              what drives glacial cycles.   Most researchers agree that Milankovitch seasonal
              forcing paces the ice ages but how these insolation changes are leveraged into
              abrupt global climate change remains unknown. A current popular view is that
              the climate of Antarctica and the Southern Ocean leads that of the rest of the
              world by a couple thousand years at Termination I and by even greater margins
              during previous terminations.  This project will integrate the geomorphological
              record of glacial history with a series of cores taken from the lake bottoms in
              the Dry Valleys of the McMurdo Sound region of Antarctica. Using a modified
              Livingstone corer, transects of long cores will be obtained from Lakes Fryxell,
              Bonney, Joyce, and Vanda.  A multiparameter approach will be employed which is
              designed to extract the greatest possible amount of former water-level,
              glaciological, and paleoenvironmental data from Dry Valleys lakes. Estimates of
              hydrologic changes will come from different proxies, including grain size,
              stratigraphy, evaporite mineralogy, stable isotope and trace element chemistry,
              and diatom assemblage analysis.  The chronology, necessary to integrate the
              cores with the geomorphological record, as well as for comparisons with
              Antarctic ice-core and glacial records, will come from Uranium-Thorium,
              Uranium-Helium, and Carbon-14 dating of carbonates, as well as luminescence
              sediment dating.   Evaluation of the link between lake-level and climate will
              come from hydrological and energy-balance modelling.  Combination of the more
              continuous lake-core sequences with the spatially extensive geomorphological
              record will result in an integrated Antarctic lake-level and paleoclimate
              dataset that extends back at least 30,000 years. This record will be compared
              to Dry Valleys glacier records and to the Antarctic ice cores to address
              questions of regional climate variability, and then to other Southern
              Hemisphere and Northern Hemisphere records to assess interhemispheric synchrony
              or asynchrony of climate change.


