Title       : Dissertation Research: Ch'orti' Verbal Art and the Poetic Discourse Structures
               of Maya Hieroglyphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2002   
File        : a0124167

Award Number: 0124167
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10322              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian M. Stross bstross@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Brian Stross, Mr. Kerry Hull will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct linguistic research on the Ch'orti'
              Maya language spoken in Guatemala. This language is the closest direct
              descendent of the language comprising most Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions.
              Hull's year of fieldwork in Ch'orti'-speaking communities will involve
              participant observation of oral recitation, direct elicitation, and recording
              through audio media of healing, agricultural, and other ceremonies. The
              transcriptions of ceremonies and oral traditions will then form the basis for
              analytic discussions with native speakers to flesh out critical details and
              opaque allusions in these ancient forms of expression. The results will then be
              compared to features found in the Maya hieroglyphic script with intent of
              correlating the poetic discourse forms and archaic metaphorical references in
              Ch'orti' with those of its ancestral language in the Maya hieroglyphic
              inscriptions. At the present stage of decipherment of Maya hieroglyphic
              writing, a large number of expressions can be read syllabically without a full
              understanding of their metaphorical or ritual meaning. Ch'orti's linguistic
              affinity to the language of the Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions suggests both
              languages may also share similar poetic structures and archaic formalized
              expressions. 

The significance of this research is twofold. First, the
              project will directly benefit the ongoing decipherment of the Maya hieroglyphic
              script. The data gathered from living Ch'orti' speakers will also form the most
              thorough study so far of the poetic styles of Ch'orti' ritual speech. Hidden
              within such speech are vestiges of ancient cultural conceptions and
              metaphorical imagery that will inform research on the language, cultural
              conceptions, and ritual practices of the ancient Maya. The Ch'orti' data will
              provide a basis for analyses of stylistically similar ritual forms found in
              Maya hieroglyphic inscriptions. This aspect of the study will carry the
              discussion of Maya hieroglyphic writing beyond grammar and vocabulary, showing
              that this writing system is complex in other domains as well. Second, this
              project will preserve the currently disappearing forms of poetic speech and
              ritual knowledge among the Ch'orti'. This documentation will be useful both for
              future generations of Ch'orti'-speakers and also for scholars of Latin American
              studies, history, epigraphy, archaeology, anthropology, linguistics,
              ethnopoetics, and ethnography.


