Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Mesozooplankton-Microbial Food Web Interactions in
               Western Arctic Shelf and Basin Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  2002  
File        : a0124892

Award Number: 0124892
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $557988             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evelyn B. Sherr sherre@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry F. Sherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A central goal of the Shelf-Basin Interactions (SBI) program is to understand
              the processes affecting carbon transformations and fluxes within and between
              Arctic shelf and basin ecosystems, and how climate change might impact these
              processes. The cycling of carbon in Arctic shelf and basin habitats depends on
              the structure and functioning of both micro- and meso- zooplankton acting as
              significant consumers of primary production. The partitioning of primary
              production between the fractions remaining in the water column or accumulating
              to the seafloor (where organic matter is less available for export from the
              shelf) can be greatly affected by the relative grazing rates of
              microzooplankton versus mesozooplankton herbivores. Microplankton grazing
              dampens export flux, while mesozooplankton grazing enhances it. The primary
              focus of this project is an analysis of the impact of microzooplankton and
              mesozooplankton grazers on the fluxes and exchanges of carbon within the
              oceanic waters of the Canada Basin and the shelf waters of the Chukchi/Beaufort
              Seas.  This study will explicitly address trophic linkages previously
              unexplored in this region of the Arctic. The hypothesize is that changing
              ecosystem structure resulting from climate change will alter the role of these
              trophic interactions in the utilization and cycling of carbon in arctic shelves
              and basin systems. This project will provide rate measurements for
              microzooplankton and mesozooplankton grazing and reproduction, parameters that
              are a high priority for the seasonal process cruises in the SBI project.
