Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Collision Dynamics of Nuclei with High Isospin
               Asymmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0124186

Award Number: 0124186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: ManYee B. Tsang Tsang@nscl.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Lynch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pawel Danielewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0124186
Tsang

This award supports a two-year collaborative research project
              between Professor ManYee B Tsang at Michigan State University and Professor
              Akira Ono of Tohoku University in Japan.  The researchers will undertake a
              study of collision dynamics of nuclei with high isospin asymmetry.  The focus
              of this project is the theoretical interpretation of nuclear
              multifragmentation, a process that may provide insight into the liquid-gas
              phase transition of nuclear matter and the equation of the state of asymmetric
              nuclear matter.  The first goal will be to study the role of symmetry energy in
              the production of isotopes in heavy ion collisions.  The second goal will be to
              develop transport equations that accurately describe the isotopic yields and to
              compare the predictions of these equations to a wide variety of experimental
              data produced in central collisions.  The third goal is to isolate experimental
              signals that are especially sensitive to the non-equilibrium aspects of the
              multifragment break up.  Included in this latter effort will be the study of
              processes such as the neck fragmentation, for example, that are expected to be
              rather sensitive to the interplay between reaction dynamics and fragment
              formation.  

The project brings together the efforts of two laboratories
              that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The Japanese
              scientists pioneered the development of the Antisymmetrized Molecular Dynamics
              (AMD) Model and the U.S. scientists have expertise in the development of
              Boltzmann-Uehling-Uhlenbeck (BUU) transport equations.  It is anticipated that
              the research will benefit the development of quantal reaction models. Through
              the exchange of ideas and technology, this project will broaden our base of
              basic knowledge and promote international understanding and cooperation.  The
              project advances international human resources through the participation of a
              postdoc and a graduate student.  The researchers plan to publish results of the
              research in scientific journals and report on the findings at scientific
              meetings.


