Title       : Conference: Variational Methods: Open Problems, Recent Progress, and Numerical
               Algorithms, June 11-14, 2002, Northern Arizona University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a0124121

Award Number: 0124121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Neuberger John.Neuberger@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0124121
Neuberger

This grant will support a conference on Variational
              Methods: Open 
Problems, Recent Progress, and Numerical Investigations to be
              held 
June 11-14, 2001 at Northern Arizona University in Flagstaff, Arizona.
              
The term Variational Methods in the title refers to a rich area of partial
              
differential equations and a family of methods historically used to
              
investigate them. Many famous mathematicians have made significant
              
contributions in the last century to this area, but it is widely held that
              the 
time is ripe for a new round of discoveries to be made. Solutions of
              these 
problems typically rely on tools from a wide range of mathematical
              
areas and potentially have a significant impact on the study of important
              
physical applications. The purpose of this conference is to assemble as
              
many experts as is possible in this research area, in order to discuss and
              
catalog the area's most important open (unsolved) problems and the 
methods
              that might be used to attack them. Numerical investigations 
(using a computer
              to visualize and approximate solutions and their 
properties) are gaining
              respect in the mathematical community, but their 
power is not yet fully
              appreciated by many in the established research 
world, nor are they yet
              accessible to many of those who do appreciate 
that power. This modern
              approach will be integrated with traditional 
(non computer-related)
              discussions via numerical lectures and hands-on 
technological demonstrations.
              Special attention will be given to physical 
applications, in order to
              facilitate our contributing to real-world science 
and to provide a source of
              renewed inspiration for our endeavors.

The driving force for this conference
              is a desire to produce a highly 
usable, in fact essential, reference for
              those actively researching in the 
area and for young mathematicians just
              starting their careers. Both 
groups will benefit greatly from having a single
              succinct catalog of good 
research problems together with an introduction to
              the most fruitful 
relevant mathematical tools and an exhaustive bibliography.
              A publisher 
(American Mathematical Society Journal of Contemporary
              
Mathematics) has already provisionally accepted a proposal for 
publishing
              this document. The conference will encourage informal 
discussion about the
              future of our field, the potential for it to make 
significant contributions
              to the sciences, and how best to put all this 
information in a single
              proceedings volume.

The focus of the discussed research will be on nonlinear
              elliptic partial 
differential equations, a key application of variational
              methods. 
Nonlinear equations in general are vital to the description of
              physical 
phenomena, and elliptic equations describe (roughly speaking) one
              third 
of these. The efficient harvesting of biological mass, modeling of star
              
birth and death, and the fundamental equations governing quantum 
physics
              all rely on elliptic equations. Significant progress in this research 
area
              has the potential to make a real difference, scientifically and 
economically,
              to the world at large. The aim is to trigger a vibrant 
renewed surge of
              interest and effort towards solving these types of 
problems. The conference
              and corresponding proceedings volume will 
be of equal parts research and
              educationally oriented. Beginning 
researchers will be exposed to research in
              mathematics to the physical 
importance of the field, unsolved problems will
              be suggested for their 
pursuit, and analytical and numerical tools essential
              to that research will 
be introduced. These new researchers who attend or,
              more generally, 
have access to the resulting proceedings volume, will in the
              long run be 
the key contributors. The aim is to encourage informal
              discussion, where 
real mathematics is done, but guide the process with a
              focus on the 
ultimate goal of producing a cohesive document.

