Title       : 2001 Technology for a Sustainable Environment: An Environmentally Sustainable
               Approach to Crude Oil Production and Processing: Compressed Gas Demulsification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0124760

Award Number: 0124760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Kilpatrick peter-k@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ruben G. Carbonell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
CTS-0124760
Kilpatrick, P
North Carolina State U

The management
              of emulsions during the production, transportation, and processing of crude
              petroleum fluids is one of the most persistent challenges which faces the
              petroleum industry.  Annually, tens of millions of tons of emulsions are
              produced during production of petroleum and this figure is likely to rise
              annually with the increased production of heavy oils.  A substantial percentage
              of these emulsions are stabilized by elastic films of adsorbed asphaltenes.  It
              is common to treat these emulsions with chemical demulsifiers, typically
              nonionic polymers containing substantial proportions of ethylene oxide (EO) and
              propylene oxide (PO).  Other methods employed to a lesser extent include
              thermal pressurization and rapid depressurization, electrostatic droplet
              shattering and coalescence, and ultrasonication of emulsions. Among the most
              effective chemical demulsifiers are oxyalkylated phenol resins,
              phenol-formaldehyde glycidyl ethers, and other polymers based on EO, PO,
              phenol, and formaldehyde.  There is considerable concern in that many of these
              demulsifier chemicals persist in the environment, are nonbiodegradable, and may
              have adverse human health effects, including being suspected endocrine
              disruptors.  Moreover, the costs associated with demulsifiers in particularly
              heavy and troublesome fields can be substantial.  

This project describes a
              novel method for demulsifying water-petroleum emulsions using compressed gases;
              the specific example which has been reduced to practice is the use of
              compressed carbon dioxide (CO2).  The project describes the further development
              of this method and the possible use of mixed compressed gases, including
              methane (CH4), ethane (C2H6), propane (C3H8), and CO2.  The method is based on
              the alteration of the solvent properties of petroleum for asphaltenes upon
              dissolution of dissolved gas.  It is well known that dissolution of appreciable
              amounts of propane in petroleum fluids can precipitate asphaltenes, a process
              known as propane de-asphalting.  CO2 is also highly effective and the
              precipitation is of sufficient magnitude to demulsify extremely stable
              petroleum emulsions.  Should the method be plausible with compressed gases
              commonly found in contact and coproduced with petroleum - e.g. CH4, C2H6, C3H8,
              and CO2 - the possibility exists for demulsifying produced emulsions at the
              source and, perhaps, perform preliminary unit operations on the crude, such as
              downhole deasphalting.  The impact of such a technology, if successfully
              reduced to economical practice, would be difficult to overestimate.  Based on
              the somewhat reduced scope due to the revised budget reductions, the mixed gas
              demulsifications will be performed with methane (CH4) and CO2 only.


