Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cranial Vault Modification in the Pre-Columbian
               Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0124594

Award Number: 0124594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7172               (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip L. Walker pwalker@anth.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1391,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The ability to effectively convey information about a person's social status is
              fundamental to the creation of ethnic identities and social hierarchies. The
              custom of cranial vault modification,  permanently altering the head shape of
              children to create social distinctions, was widespread among Native Americans
              during the pre-conquest period. Analysis of this practice has the potential to
              provide important insights into aspects of prehistoric social relations that
              are available from no other source. In this Ph.D. dissertation research, the
              health and social organizational correlates of cranial vault modification are
              analyzed from a broad temporal and spatial perspective in the pre-Columbian
              Andes. This work focuses on the social functions of cranial modification, both
              within and between groups, and its relationship to the rise of social
              complexity in the Andes. The goal of the research is to integrate physical
              anthropological and archaeological data into an analysis that clarifies the
              social factors that motivate body modification. 

Collections were carefully
              selected to encompass a broad spectrum of social systems. The research will
              include a large-scale survey of the cranial vault modification exhibited by
              more than 2,500 pre-Columbian skulls from the Andes housed in museums in the
              United States and Chile. The methods used in the analysis follow the
              recommendations in the Standards for Data Collection from Human Skeletal
              Remains. Analysis of cranial modification in a large number of individuals from
              a variety of cultural contexts is a powerful tool for testing hypotheses
              concerning the factors responsible for the development of socially stratified
              societies. The bioarchaeological approach, with its emphasis on the
              reconstruction of human behavior patterns and health status provides a direct
              means through which theories of cultural complexity and the biological
              consequences of inequality can be explored. The issues of social
              differentiation and cultural complexity addressed in this research have many
              implications for understanding the social relations of modern ethnic groups.

