Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science: Mean-Field Approach to Collective Excitations in
               Unstable Medium-Mass and Heavy Nuclei
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0124053

Award Number: 0124053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra McAuliffe                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Witold Nazarewicz witek@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0124053
Nazarewicz

This award supports a three-year collaborative research
              project between Professor Witold Nazarewicz at the University of Tennessee and
              Professor Kenichi Matsuyanagi of Kyoto University in Japan.  The researchers
              will undertake a study of the mean-field approach to collective excitations in
              unstable medium-mass and heavy nuclei.  The focus of the research is in those
              aspects of nuclear structure physics which are of highest priority in the
              community: 1) radioactive nuclear beam physics which will access nuclei at the
              limits of stability around the proton and neutron drip lines, and  2) gamma ray
              spectroscopy which accesses discrete nuclear states in rapidly rotating nuclei
              up to the fission limit.  The intent is the further development of techniques
              that can treat the special properties of weakly bound nuclei, where the Fermi
              energy is close to zero.  Hartree-Bogolyubov (HFB) programs that include
              unbound states are needed.  Current programs that include the continuum states
              are usually restricted to spherical shapes.  The proposal will continue the
              development of HFB programs that include non-spherical shapes as well as the
              continuum states.  This is necessary for a more realistic description of nuclei
              around the neutron drip line.  An interesting possibility of different shapes
              for neutrons and protons, including neutron halos, can then be investigated. 
              The development of the program will permit investigation of double beta decay,
              which has fundamental interest not only to nuclear physics, but also particle
              physics and astrophysics.

The project brings together the efforts of two
              laboratories that have complementary expertise and research capabilities. The
              research addresses a number of questions that are of great importance for
              Japanese and U.S. low-energy nuclear structure communities.  The number of
              nuclear structure theorists in the U.S. and Japan is small and the groups are
              isolated.  The project will offer a good opportunity to join efforts between
              the two countries.  Through the exchange of ideas and technology, this project
              will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
              understanding and cooperation.  The project advances international human
              resources through the participation of postdocs and a graduate student.  The
              researchers plan to publish results of the research in scientific journals and
              report on the findings at scientific meetings.


