Title       : Program for Persons with Disabilities - PPD: RASEM Squared: Advanced Regional
               Alliance of Science, Engineering, and Mathematics for Students with
               Disabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0124198

Award Number: 0124198
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Roosevelt Y. Johnson                    
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4746941            (Estimated)
Investigator: William C. McCarthy wmccarth@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ed Misquez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0124198
Institution: New Mexico State University
Principal
              Investigators: William McCarthy and Ed Misquez
Title: RASEM
              Squared



ABSTRACT

New Mexico State University will be the lead
              institution for a Regional Alliance for Students with Disabilities in Science,
              Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology (SMET). The project, entitled RASEM
              Squared (or RASEM 2), is based on the successes of an earlier project named
              RASEM (Regional Alliance For Science, Engineering, and Mathematics for Students
              with Disabilities) funded by NSF. The project's primary goal over the five
              years of the program is to increase the number of students with disabilities
              who graduate with baccalaureate degrees leading directly to graduate training
              or to employment in their desired fields. To achieve these goals, RASEM 2 is
              instituting a comprehensive educational approach composed of six innovative
              actions, five previously field-tested by RASEM and an additional one that
              prepares faculty for full participation of students with disabilities in SMET
              curricula. The actions will affect students throughout the education continuum
              from K-12, through community colleges, and to universities in New Mexico and
              far west Texas. The six actions are: 1. Hands-on science experiences in
              pre-college science education environments. 2. Formal research experiences as
              undergraduates and graduates. 3. Preparation of faculty for full participation
              of students with disabilities in a SMET curricula. 4. Bridge programs between
              academic levels. 5. Mentoring by successful SMET professionals and SMET
              students with disabilities. 6. Securing co-op, summer internships, and
              professional employment. Each of the six actions will be evaluated using
              outcome measures that provide evidence of the program's efficacy. 
The RASEM 2
              Alliance is made up of numerous entities in New Mexico (seventeen 2-year
              community colleges, six 4-year colleges and universities, and nine school
              district regional center cooperatives) and West Texas (two universities and two
              educational service centers representing school districts). The Alliance also
              includes two national laboratories, the statewide agencies serving people with
              disabilities, and a national organization for the advancement of science. These
              entities are located in a region that has a broad spectrum of culturally
              diverse, economically impoverished constituencies of students with disabilities
              and student families. RASEM 2 project coordinators in three sub-regions will
              work to strengthen existing ties (or develop new ones) with public schools in
              their areas. They will facilitate efforts to provide a bridge between public
              schools and higher education institutions and promote summer programs in their
              geographical areas. 

