Title       : Real-time Monitoring of Polymerization Reactions: Part II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a0124006

Award Number: 0124006
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $257694             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne F. Reed wreed@mailhost.tcs.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will continue work on developing equipment and methodology to
              monitor complex polymerization reactions in real time.  Such a capability could
              benefit both academic and industrial scientists nd engineers.  At the
              fundamental level, polymer chemists can immediately observe the effects of
              different synthetic strategies, monomers, initiators, and other factors and how
              they influence kinetics and ploymer properties.  This could advance the
              discovery of new materials.  Industrial researchers could use it as a tool for
              pilot plant optimization of industrial processes.  One goal of the work is to
              apply the methodology to full scale industrial reactors, integrated into a
              feedback loop than can control reactions.  This in turn could lead to better
              uses of non-renewable resources, reactor and personnel time, conserve energy,
              lead to less pollution, and enhance product quality.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                      The fundamental work to
              be done is threefold: 1) Extension of the PI's "Automatic, Continuous
              Monitoring of Polymer Reaction" or "ACOMP" to copolymerization, controlled
              radicl polymerization, and emulsion polymerization.  This includes development
              of instrumentation, software, theory, and kinetic modeling to deal with these
              complex reactions.  2) Further develop and use associated, automated
              equilibrium characterization and modeling techniques for to the behavior of the
              polymers whose growth was monitored.  This includes auto-assocition, and
              interactions in multi-component solutions; e.g. those involving polymer,
              solvent, micelles and slts.  3) Introduction o simultaneous multiple sample
              light scattering to high throughput screening in polymerization and other
              polymer-based kinetic processes.  It is expected that this portion will provide
              new tools for polymer discovery and synthesis.                                 
                                                           The project has potential
              infrastructure benefits in that students trained in developing this methodoloty
              would be of great use to industry.
