Title       : 2001 TSE: NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research: Source-Based Pollution
               Prevention through Depolymerization of Poly(ethylene terephthalate) with Carbon
               Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2001   
File        : a0124618

Award Number: 0124618
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361680             (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Roberts groberts@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Saad A. Khan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1238,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Source-Based Pollution Prevention through Depolymerization of Poly (ethylene
              terephthalate) with Supercritical Carbon Dioxide

Technical
              Description:
	This research represents a new approach to pollution prevention
              through elimination of waste polymer that is generated during the manufacture
              of poly (ethylene terephthalate) (PET).  A one-step process will be
              investigated to depolymerize PET and recover purified monomeric and oligimeric
              units for repolymerization.  The key features of the process are:
1) use of a
              twin-screw extruder to continuously create the fresh surface that is required
              for a depolymerizing agent (methanol or ethylene glycol) to penetrate into
              polymer;
2)  use of supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2) as a processing
              aid.
Molten polymer is contacted with a mixture of scCO2 and either methanol
              or ethylene glycol in a twin-screw extruder.  The methanol or ethylene glycol
              causes the PET to depolymerize as it passes through the extruder.  The scCO2
              plasticizes the PET, facilitating penetration of the methanol/ethylene glycol
              into the polymer.  The scCO2 also reduces the viscosity of the melt and
              enhances chain mobility, improving the overall reaction rate.  Finally, the
              scCO2 extracts organic contaminants from the polymer.  The scCO2 containing
              dissolved contaminants,unreacted ethylene glycol or methanol, and some of the
              monomers produced is removed in a vent on the extruder.
The potential
              advantages of this process are:
(1) elimination of the solvents and processing
              steps that otherwise are required for separation of monomers and oligomers from
              contaminants;
(2)  much higher depolymerization rates;
(3)  integration of
              multiple processes, i.e., depolymerization and extraction, into a single
              step.
The process parameters will be studied include the depolymerizing gent,
              the depolymerizing agent/polymer ratio, pressure, temperature, CO2/polymer
              ratio, and average residence time in the extruder.

Broader
              Significance:
	Approximately 100 million pounds of waste PET is generated
              annually in U.S. manufacturing facilities.  While some of this waste is used in
              low-value products such as fillers, a large portion remains unusable. 
              Successful development of this new technology could help to solve a serious
              waste disposal problem and increase the competitiveness of U.S. PET
              manufacturers.
	A fundamental understanding of the depolymerization of PET
              could provide a basis for several technology extensions.  First is the
              application to post-consumer waste PET, the annual volume of which is about 30
              times the volume of in-plant waste.  Second, this new process should be
              applicable to other step-growth polymers such as poly (bisphenol A carbonate)
              and various nylons.



