Title       : Learning & Intelligent Systems: Center For Innovative Learning Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2003   
File        : a0124012

Award Number: 0124012
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1679930            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nora H. Sabelli nora.sabelli@sri.com  (Principal Investigator former)
              Roy D. Pea  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Marcia C. Linn  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              John D. Bransford  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Barbara M. Means  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Robert F. Tinker  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1707      INTERACTIVE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1707,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
The Center for Innovative Learning Technologies (CILT) was founded in October
              1997 with a four-year grant from the National Science Foundation. The invited
              Accomplishment Based Renewal (ABR) proposal describes CILT' s planned
              activities during this ABR period.

CILT was formed to stimulate the
              development and implementation of important, technology-enabled solutions to
              critical problems in K-14 science, mathematics, engineering, and technology
              (SMET) learning. CILT has engaged the collaborative efforts of an exceptionally
              wide range of people, institutions, and organizations including hundreds of
              cognitive scientists, computer scientists, natural scientists, engineers,
              classroom teachers, educational researchers, learning technology industry
              leaders, and policy analysts. CILT is designed as an inclusive national effort
              led by five institutions -SRI International, Stanford University , University
              of California at Berkeley, Vanderbilt University, and the Concord Consortium -
              each with a broad range of expertise and an international reputation for making
              effective, innovative contributions to technology-enhanced SMET
              learning.

During the ABR period, CILT will continue its current work of
              hosting workshops that encourage collaboration throughout the field; funding
              and facilitating a new round of seed grants; and fostering the development of
              new researchers through its post doctoral researcher program. In addition, CILT
              team will find ways to sustain the promising aspects of CILT by refocusing the
              theme teams, nurturing the community that CILT has created, institutionalizing
              effective components of CILT, and exploring next steps. More can be learned
              about CILT and its current activities at http://www.cilt.org.


