Title       : WORKSHOP: PRISM Symposium on Integration, Networking, and the Next Decade;
               August 9-11, 2001; West Lafayette, Indiana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 1,  2001    
File        : a0124768

Award Number: 0124768
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Shimon Y. Nof nof@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ray E. Eberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Lawley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This symposium's primary objective is to identify research issues that transform
              the traditional industrial engineering environment to a new kind of industrial
              engineering work and services considered as e-Work.  The scope of e-Work
              includes the collaborative computer-supported activities and
              communication-supported operations in highly distributed organizations of
              humans and/or robots or autonomous software agents such as agent-based
              manufacturing, workflow and enterprise modeling, and middleware development. 
              The premise is that without effective e-Work, the potential of emerging
              electronic work activities such as virtual manufacturing, e-supply chain, and
              e-commerce cannot be competitively materialized.  This award provides partial
              support of the symposium and participants' expenses during a two and one half
              day workshop at Purdue University on the past, present, and next frontier in
              the research direction of Production, Robotics, and Integration Software for
              Manufacturing/Management (PRISM).  This meeting will bring together previous
              and current PRISM researchers, industry practitioners who have experience in
              computer-oriented collaborative work, and sponsors who have implemented
              enhanced technologies to compare ideas, experiences, and challenges.

The
              workshop will develop research guidance by survey review of previous and
              current research and through panel discussions on advanced production research
              for the next decade.  The aim is towards solutions in seven areas: (1)
              engineering and design collaboration, (2) distributed models of networked
              enterprises, (3) assembly and inspection technology, (4) agent-based
              manufacturing and service systems, (5) electronic commerce and enabling
              technologies, (6) web-based human and computer interaction, and (7) information
              assurance for the above areas.  The results and proceedings will benefit
              researchers at the Purdue PRISM Lab and at other universities by developing and
              sharing new advanced production research models and by providing a forum for
              researchers to discuss, exchange, and plan their discoveries.

