Title       : Experiments in Education: Studies of the Not So Simple Alkali Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2002  
File        : a0124422

Award Number: 0124422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerd Bergmann bergmann@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental project will address a major theme in condensed matter
              physics, the effect of the Coulomb interaction in an otherwise band-free
              electron system, that is the alkali metals, largely in thin film form or with
              transition metal impurities.  The latter systems are excellent probes because
              they introduce a strong local exchange repulsion between the d-states of the
              impurities coupling to the conduction electrons. However, there are several
              difficulties to overcome for the experimental investigations: (a) transition
              metal impurities do not dissolve in alkali hosts and (b) the magnetization of
              the transition metal impurities is very small and difficult to measure. In this
              project the method of quenched condensation is used to prepare alkali films
              with small concentrations of 3d and 4d impurities. The magnetization as a
              function of temperature and magnetic field is measured with the method of the
              anomalous Hall effect. Presently there are no other laboratories in the world
              that can perform this task. The experimental goal is two-fold: (a) to determine
              the effect of the magnetic impurities on the polarization of the host and (b)
              to determine the magnetic moment of the impurities  These experiments should
              stimulate renewed theoretical effort to rationalize the currently poorly
              understood measurements.  The experiments introduce graduate students to the
              technique of high vacuum and low temperature physics with sophisticated
              evaporation methods. During the period of the last several undergraduate
              students also performed these difficult experiments, co-authored several
              publications in major physics journals, presented their results at American
              Physical Society meetings, and won first and second prizes for undergraduate
              research at the University of Southern California

Alkali metals are a
              special group of metals. The wave length of the conduction electrons is larger
              than the atomic distance so that the atomic ions hardly disturb the motion of
              the electrons. Furthermore the volume of the atomic ions occupies only a
              fraction of the total volume. This makes the alkali metals the best
              representation of the "jelly" model in which the electrons move undisturbed by
              the ions through the metal and interact only with each other through their
              electrical charge, the repulsive Coulomb interaction. Therefore the alkali
              metals are the ideal system to study fundamental aspects of Coulomb
              interaction, which underlies many of the properties exhibited by solids: 
              ferro-magnetism, high temperature superconductivity, etc.  The effect of the
              Coulomb interaction can be probed in the alkali metals by introducing
              transition metal impurities (for example atoms of iron, cobalt, nickel,
              vanadium, titanium,..). These impurities introduce locally an additional strong
              Coulomb repulsion which pulls on the electrons like the bow of a violinist
              pulls on the string of a violin. The resulting magnetic moments reveal
              information about the energetic state of the electrons and the effect of the
              Coulomb interaction on them.  However, for experimental investigations there
              are several difficulties to overcome: (a) transition metal impurities do not
              dissolve in alkali hosts and (b) the magnetization of the impurities is very
              small and difficult to measure. Two techniques, "quenched condensation" and the
              "anomalous Hall effect" overcome these experimental hurdles.  Presently there
              are no other laboratories in the world that can perform this task.  The
              experiments introduce graduate students to the techniques of high vacuum and
              low temperature physics with sophisticated evaporation methods.  During the
              period of the last grant several undergraduate students also performed these
              difficult experiments, co-authored several publications in leading physics
              journals, presented their results at American Physical Society meetings, and
              won first and second prizes for undergraduate research at the University of
              Southern California.

