Title       : Laboratory for Parallel Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1996   
File        : a9115021

Award Number: 9115021
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen R. Mahaney                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1481962            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sartaj K. Sahni sahni@cise.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley Y. Su  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen S. Yau  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerhard X. Ritter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Randy Y.C. Chow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,2887,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The infrastructure award is for the acquisition of equipment              
              to develop a laboratory for parallel processing.  The major                    
              acquisition is a 64 processor MIMD (Multiple Instruction,                      
              Multiple Data) parallel computer and workstations.  Research will              
              be performed in software engineering, parallel algorithms and                  
              data structures, networks and simulation, computer vision, and                 
              database management systems.                                                   
                                                                                             
              The advent of new architecture parallel computers has opened new               
              areas of research related to the effective use of these                        
              computers. The MIMD computers work by allowing individual                      
              processors to operate on independent data streams.  The discovery              
              of algorithms to effectively use this type of architecture is a                
              major research question crossing several disciplines.  The                     
              parallel processing laboratory at the University of Florida is                 
              investigating several research topics ranging from experimental                
              algorithm studies to computer vision applications.  In                         
              particular:                                                                    
                   1. The software engineering group is developing a parallel                
                      programming language environment to be used in the                     
                      development of parallel programs in conjunction with a                 
                      knowledge based development and maintenance environment.               
                                                                                             
                   2. The parallel algorithms group is concentrating on                      
                      experimentally determining bottlenecks with both                       
                      processor communication and input/output devices.                      
                      The experimental results will be compared with                         
                      theoretical models of performance.                                     
                                                                                             
                   3. The network and simulation group is using the parrallel                
                      computer as both an experimental testbed for load                      
                      balancing and other performance enhancing algorithms                   
                      and as a computational resource to perform complex                     
                      simulations.                                                           
                                                                                             
                   4. The computer vision group is developing algorithms to                  
                      utilize parallelism.  There is a natural match between                 
                      many vision applications and the MIMD architecture.                    
                                                                                             
                   5. The database management group is designing algorithms                  
                      to implement an object oriented semantic database model                
                      on a MIMD architecture computer.                                       
                   //
