Title       : The Genetic Significance of Viruses in the Marine Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1993    
File        : a9115942

Award Number: 9115942
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318292             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Paul jpaul@seas.marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan B. Rose  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Viruses are now known to be the most numerically dominant form of              
              life in the world's oceans.  This revelation has raised a myriad of            
              questions concerning the ecological role of viruses in the oceans.             
              This study will investigate the genetic significance of                        
              viruses in the marine environment. Viruses could be a significant              
              component of the oceanic dissolved (<0.2 um) nucleic acid pools and            
              they also have the potential to alter bacterial gene                           
              pools by effecting gene transfer by transduction and viral mediated            
              transformation.  To investigate the gentic significance of viruses             
              in the marine environment this study wil pursue the following three            
              research objectives:  1)  To determine viral abundance in                      
              estuarine, coastal, and offshore environments in surface and                   
              subsurface waters, and to develop methods for direct viral                     
              enumeration in sediments.  The relationship between viral                      
              abundance and total (autotrophic and heterotrophic) host pool size             
              will be assessed, as well as the relationship with particulate and             
              dissolved DNA content.  2)  To determine the proportion of                     
              particulate and dissolved nucleic acids that are contained in virus            
              particles in estuarine, coastal, and offshore waters.  Methods will            
              be developed to quantitate viral DNA directly and relate it to                 
              bacterial and "free" (i.e. soluble as opposed to that encapsulated             
              in virons) in oceanic samples.  3)  To determine the potential for             
              gene transfer by transduction in the marine environment by                     
              investigating the presence of temperate phage and lysogenic host               
              bacteria.  Using both isolated phage-host systems and natural viral            
              and bacterial assemblages, the study will determine the presence of            
              temperate phage/lysogenic hosts by chemical and physical induction             
              of lysis.  Once  lysogens have been identified, these will be used             
              in studies on the transfer of chromosomal DNA and broad host range             
              plasmids by transduction.  This research will begin to                         
              answer the questions of the role of viruses in the oceanic gene                
              pool.
