Title       : Development and Application of Balanced Dynamical Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1994     
File        : a9115485

Award Number: 9115485
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $381571             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne H. Schubert waynes@hadley.atmos.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Although the most accurate predictions and simulations come               
              from primitive equation models, most of our physical insights into             
              atmospheric behavior come from "balanced" models, which represent              
              versions of the basic equations simplified through a number of                 
              approximations.  Recently, Dr. Schubert has made progress in                   
              formulating generalizations of the semi-geostrophic theory (a type             
              of balanced model theory) to include the full effects of the                   
              earth's sphericity.  The results open the possibility of extending             
              semi-geostrophic applications from synoptic scale to planetary                 
              scale phenomena.  An elegant aspect of the theory (when formulated             
              in combined isentropic and spherical geostrophic coordinates) is               
              its simple mathematical structure -  one prognostic equation for               
              potential vorticity and one diagnostic equation or invertibility               
              principle.  Under this award, Dr. Schubert will further develop and            
              apply this theory.                                                             
                   One weakness of the generalized semi-geostrophic theory is                
              that highly curved flows are not properly simulated.  The principal            
              investigator hopes to be able to overcome this problem through the             
              use of a formulation (mathematically simple) which combines two                
              special coordinate systems and a non-linear balance approximation.             
              He also will carry out simulations of midlatitude storm and                    
              tropical systems with several different types of models and                    
              systematically compare the results.
