Title       : Development of a Three-Dimensional Regional and Global Model for
               Chemical/Dynamical Evolution of Ozone and Nitrogen Oxides in the Troposphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1991 
File        : a9115153

Award Number: 9115153
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jarvis L. Moyers                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121600             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Sanford Sillman sillman@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   To date most models for global-scale photochemistry have                  
              included detailed chemistry but have represented dynamics with a               
              one- or two-dimensional treatment with transport based on eddy                 
              diffusion coefficients.  Models of this type calculate                         
              photochemical production and loss terms based on concentrations                
              of nitrogen oxides and other species averaged over an entire                   
              latitude band.  They omit the geographical variation in nitrogen               
              oxides concentrations which ranges over three orders of                        
              magnitude.  Models of this type cannot be used to evaluate                     
              species concentrations in specific locations (e.g. the north                   
              Atlantic) that have complex source-receptor relations.  Even the               
              calculation of global average species concentrations may be                    
              flawed due to nonlinearities in the chemistry.  Photochemical                  
              production and loss rates are very different in polluted                       
              environments or in regions of biomass burning than in remote                   
              continental or marine locations, and rates also depend on local                
              meteorology.  Models for global photochemical production and                   
              loss must account for these differences.                                       
                   This project is designed to develop a realistic chemical                  
              module which, while capable of simulating the complex nitrogen,                
              hydrocarbon and ozone chemistry associated with atmospheric                    
              pollution, will run efficiently and effectively in a global                    
              chemical transport model.  The chemical module will be developed               
              and tested in the GFGL global chemical transport model.                        
              Successful development of a chemical module that realistically                 
              simulates photochemical production and loss of nitrogen oxides                 
              and ozone and that economically operates in a global transport                 
              model offers a number of scientific benefits.  Accurate three                  
              imensional models are an essential tool for evaluating                         
              photochemical evolution in the global troposphere in a way that                
              includes geographical variation and the episodic nature of                     
              meteorological events.  A three dimensional model also allows                  
              direct comparison of results with observed species                             
              concentrations.
