Title       : Low-Temperature Atomic Force Microscopy with Freeze FractureEtching
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1995    
File        : a9115655

Award Number: 9115655
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152183             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhifeng Shao   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jie Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kunio Takeyasu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9126,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this three year proposal is to construct a                    
              low temperature atomic force microscope (AFM) combined with                    
              the freeze-fracture/freeze-etch technique of structural                        
              biology research.  A prototype is expected to be completed                     
              within three years, and it will be dedicated to                                
              instrumentation calibration and structural study of                            
              macromolecules of biological importance.  Structural                           
              information on functional proteins in liposome obtained by                     
              electron microscopy is limited to a resolution about 2-5 nm                    
              in conventional freeze-fracture/etch practice, due to the                      
              limitation by the gain size of shadowing metal particles.                      
              However, the newly developed AFM, which uses interacting                       
              force between a sharp tip at the end of a cantilever and the                   
              specimen surface topology, can achieve atomic resolution                       
              with high signal to noise ratio.  Unfortunately, the                           
              conventional AFM applies a much stronger probing force to                      
              the specimen surface than that can be withstood by a                           
              biological specimen at room temperature.  At low                               
              temperatures this become a minor problem, because a frozen                     
              specimen is less disturbed by the probing force.  We propose                   
              to build a liquid nitrogen temperature AFM system, and use                     
              this modified AFM for elucidation of molecular and submit                      
              structures of membrane associated and purified                                 
              macromolecules.  The system incorporates an ambient pressure                   
              freeze-fracture/etch apparatus working in liquid nitrogen                      
              and an AFM in pure nitrogen vapor, thus a freshly prepared                     
              specimen is immediately scanned to study its surface                           
              structure.  Furthermore, the system is self enclosed and                       
              sufficient measure has been taken to keep specimens free                       
              from any contamination, especially water condensation on the                   
              specimen .  Thus, the proposed low temperature AFM can be                      
              used to elucidate the molecular structures of a variety of                     
              functional membrane proteins and specific inhibitors, and                      
              will provide valuable information about their interaction,                     
              conformational changes, and higher order structures.
