Title       : Variation in Sex Expression in a Marine Bryozoan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 26,  1991  
File        : a9115910

Award Number: 9115910
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey S. Levinton levinton@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. McCartney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Hermaphroditism is poorly understood in sessile marine Bryozoa                 
              that release of sperm externally for fertilization and                         
              reproduction.  This project is designed to explore in a marine                 
              bryozoan how male reproductive success is related to male                      
              reproductive effort, and ultimately to the evolution of                        
              hermaphroditism.  The hermaphroditic marine bryozoan                           
              Celleporella hyalina displays extensive variation in the                       
              expression of male and female gender in populations studied                    
              along the mid-coast of Maine.  Individual colonies vary                        
              quantitatively in the allocation of anatomical structures to                   
              male relative to female reproductive functions.  This                          
              investigation will use this polymorphism to test theoretical                   
              mechanisms for evolutionary maintenance of hermaphroditism.                    
              The study will address three specific objectives: (1) to                       
              develop genetic markers in the bryozoan that can be used in                    
              paternity analysis, (2) to determine whether gender variation                  
              has any measurable reproductive success, and (3) to use                        
              naturally-occurring "female" variants of the bryozoan in                       
              independent assays for fertilization success.  This study will                 
              represent the first attempt to test sex allocation models for                  
              the presence of simultaneous hermaphroditism in benthic marine                 
              animals.  Although this study will not isolate the mechanism of                
              combined gender in bryozoans, it will provide an evaluation of                 
              the validity of this mechanism, a poorly understood aspect of                  
              benthic invertebrate reproductive ecology.
