Title       : A proposal to improve plankton culturing facilities at Bigelow Laboratory for
               Ocean Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1991 
File        : a9115186

Award Number: 9115186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen D. Keller mkeller@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Guillard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences is unique in its                
              focus on marine phytoplankton, the microscopic floating plants that            
              form the base of the food chain in the world's oceans.  The Lab is             
              actively used by resident and visiting scientists.  Dr. Maureen                
              Keller is a resident scientists at the Lab, and she has embarked               
              on an ambitious plan to expand the Lab's ability to grow                       
              phytoplankton in the laboratory under carefully controlled                     
              conditions.  These new lab facilities proposed by Dr. Keller would             
              facilitate novel research into the growth and physiology of marine             
              plankton, and would allow culturing of polar species at Bigelow Lab            
              for the first time.                                                            
                   The proposed expansion of the Bigelow Lab's culturing facility            
              would accommodate more research projects and would facilitate new              
              avenues of research.  This expansion would establish a unique                  
              capability for controlled temperature culturing down to polar                  
              conditions, and would increase the impact of the Lab's other                   
              facilities, such as a recently acquired transmission electron                  
              microscope and an important reference collection of marine                     
              phytoplankton.
