Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: The Multiple-Minima Problem in Molecular
               Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9115638

Award Number: 9115638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold A. Scheraga has5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              13        Physics                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1144,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports cooperative research in biophysics              
              between Harold Scheraga of Cornell University and Bernard                      
              Maigret at the Louis Pasteur University in Strasbourg, France.                 
              The cooperation deals with the theoretical and computational                   
              aspects of protein structure with particular emphasis on protein               
              conformation and folding, the so-called multiple-minima problem.               
              The objective of their research is to develop methods for computing            
              the stable comformations of proteins and protein complexes from                
              their amino acid sequences utilizing enhanced x-ray diffraction and            
              Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR).  Methodology based on                        
              exposed surface areas of proteins will be used to screen out                   
              undesirable conformations.  Dr. Scheraga and his research group                
              bring to the collaboration expertise in NMR, energy minimization               
              and Monte Carlo computations.  This is complemented by French                  
              expertise in neural networks, surface area and Monte Carlo                     
              computations.  Their ultimate goal is to resolve the multiple-                 
              minima problem and develop techniques for prediction of protein                
              structure.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Knowledge of the protein structure is central to the fundamental               
              understanding of biological processes.  The ability to predict                 
              structure will advance our understanding of protein behavior and               
              the principles that determine these structures.  In the long term, a           
              computational model of protein structure will make it possible to              
              utilize protein engineering in designing new enzymes, and possibly             
              new drugs.
