Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Architectural Variability and Community
               Organization at Xculoc, Campeche, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9115249

Award Number: 9115249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James L. Boone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. James Boone, Mr. Christopher Dore will              
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will work in the               
              Mayan village of Xculoc, located in the Puuc region of Campeche                
              Mexico and will collect information which will allow him to link               
              behavior to the built environment.  The inhabitants of Xculoc                  
              follow a traditional subsistence way of life and the results of                
              this work will be applicable to similar Mesoamerican villages,                 
              both past and present.  Mr. Dore will obtain aerial photographs                
              and use them to construct a village map.  All structures will be               
              noted.  He will then list artifacts associated with each.  To                  
              complete this first part of his research, he will note the                     
              individuals who use each structure and collect demographic                     
              information about them.  This will include such variables as                   
              socioeconomic status.  The second stage of the research consists               
              of a behavioral analysis where a sampling technique will be                    
              employed to relate behavior to the built environment.  In this                 
              way it will be possible to determine how these two variables                   
              interact.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              In Middle America, as well as many other parts of the world,                   
              archaeologists often excavate prehistoric villages of roughly the              
              same scale as Xculoc.  Remains of houses and other architectural               
              features, as well as artifacts are often recovered and with these              
              data, an attempt is made to reconstruct inhabitants' behavior.                 
              Assumptions are often made: for example, it is usually stated                  
              that higher status people have larger dwellings.  However, no one              
              has ever examined such issues in a controlled circumstance where               
              both behavior and structures can be directly observed.  Mr.                    
              Dore's research will begin to fill this gap.                                   
                                                                                             
              The work is important for several reasons.  Xculoc is located in               
              a region with many large prehistoric sites and the data Mr. Dore               
              collects is directly relevant to their interpretation.  On a                   
              broader scale, the general methodological tools which he forges                
              will be useful in many archaeological situations where no direct               
              historic link exists.  Finally, this project will assist in the                
              training of an extremely promising young scientist.
