Title       : New Visiting Scientist Facilities at Hancock Biological Station
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9115235

Award Number: 9115235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58436              (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. White david.white@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      Main Street
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1104,
Abstract    :
                   Dr. David White is Director of the Hancock Biological                     
              Station, which is operated by Murray State University.  This                   
              station is located along Kentucky Lake, the largest reservoir in               
              the southeast U.S., created near the confluences of the                        
              Mississippi, Ohio, Cumberland, and Tennessee Rivers.  The Station              
              has been recognized by the State of Kentucky as a Research Center              
              of Excellence, and Murray State has joined with eight other                    
              colleges and universities to create a focal point for reservoir                
              research.  Dr. White proposes construction of two dormitories and              
              two cabins for visiting scientists at the Hancock Biological                   
              Station.  Construction of these four winterized residences would               
              increase the capacity of the Station by more than 20, adding                   
              significantly to the presence of visiting researchers and                      
              students.                                                                      
                   Research on the ecology of reservoirs has obvious and                     
              important implications for society.  Hancock Biological Station                
              is currently a successful regional facility for student training               
              and for some recently initiated research projects on reservoirs.               
              Institutional commitments to the Station has increased its                     
              potential significantly, and it could develop into a nationally                
              significant research facility.  The proposed visitor housing will              
              provide a critical mass of visiting investigators with access to               
              the Station, and the site's full potential should be expressed as              
              a result.
