Title       : Semiactive Control of Vibrating Systems Using Electrorheological Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1991       
File        : a9115056

Award Number: 9115056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Leitmann gleit@coe.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This project is supported under NSF's "Small Grants for Exploratory            
              Research (SGER)" Program and jointly by the Structural Systems and             
              Construction Processes and Earthquake Hazard Mitigation Program.               
              The objective of this project is to explore the feasibility and                
              applicability of electrorheological fluids (ER) as a semiactive                
              scheme for vibration control of structures.  The approach is to use            
              a simple system whose control parameters, damping and stiffness                
              coefficients, dependent on the ER fluid, are varied in real time               
              through control of the electric field.  a multidisciplinary                    
              approach is undertaken in which both experimental and analytical               
              tasks will conducted.  The analytical model takes into account the             
              nonlinear dynamics of this problem.  A nonlinear control scheme                
              will be developed, based on the constructive use of Lyapunov                   
              stability theory.  Such a controller is efficient in computation               
              time (essential for real time applications) and, in addition,                  
              handles nonlinear dynamics.  ER materials characterization and                 
              response will be measured using the experimental arrangement.  One             
              important result of the research, in addition to demonstration the             
              advantages of semiactive control for structural vibration, is that             
              it will provide guidelines for the requirements of suitable ER                 
              fluids for such applications.  This investigation explores, for the            
              first time, the feasibility of ER scheme for use in controlling the            
              dynamic structural response and assesses its potentials in solving             
              seismic, wind, or machine-induced vibration problems.
