Title       : The Nature of Detritral Absorption: Relationships Between Particle Types,
               Chromophore Composition, and Particulate Spectral Absorption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1992  
File        : a9115716

Award Number: 9115716
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1991  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154070             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Nelson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. Verity  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This study will examine the sources of variability of light                    
              absorption by "detrital" particles on bio-optical properties in                
              both eutrophic and oligotrophic waters.  In a number of bio-optical            
              studies "detrital" particulate material has been observed to cause             
              a pronounced increase in absorption from the blue into the near-               
              ultraviolet.  This study seeks to better define the nature of the              
              dominant blue- to uv-absorbing particulate chromophores in waters              
              with different optical characteristics, and to identify the types              
              of particle (detrital and living organisms) with which such                    
              chromophores are associated.  These objectives will be addressed in            
              combined laboratory and field investigations.                                  
                                                                                             
              The study will utilize analytical approaches which consider the                
              question of detrital absorption at several levels: characterization            
              of individual particle types (by epifluorescence microscopy coupled            
              to an image analyzer); analyses of chromophore composition;                    
              measurements of particulate spectral absorption (total and                     
              "partitioned"); and, in the field, optical profiling.  Laboratory              
              studies will focus on the potential contribution of living                     
              organisms (particularly heterotrophic bacteria and protozoans) to              
              "detrital" absorption, the chromophore composition of biogenic                 
              detritus produced by microzooplankton, the relative importance of              
              different biological chromophore types, and the stability of                   
              chromophores in detrital particles.  Field work (within the South              
              Atlantic Bight) will extend the results of the laboratory study to             
              compare turbid inshore coastal waters with oligotrophic waters                 
              beyond the shelf break.  The role of geopolymers versus biogenic               
              chromophores in detrital absorption will be assessed. The results              
              of this study will be relevant to several disciplines, including               
              bio-optical oceanography and marine photochemistry.
