Title       : U.S.-Japan Cooperative Research: Regulation of the Infection Process by Erysiphe
               Graminis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1994     
File        : a9115516

Award Number: 9115516
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11950              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph L. Nicholson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5921      JAPAN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1142,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a two-year U.S.-Japan cooperative science              
              research project between Professor Ralph Nicholson, Department                 
              of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University, and Professor                
              Hitoshi Kunoh, Laboratory of Plant Pathology, Mie University,                  
              Tsu, Japan.  The project will also involve Professor Robert Hanau              
              of Purdue and two co-investigators from Okayama University in                  
              Japan, Professors Tomonori Shiraishi and Tetsuji Yamada.  These                
              researchers have considerable expertise in diverse areas of plant              
              pathology.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The subject of this project is Erysiphe graminis, a fungal pathogen            
              of barley.  Understanding the molecular basis of disease                       
              interactions and its relationship to changes in plant physiology is            
              important to both the United States and Japan.  Plant diseases                 
              represent a significant problem in the production of all food and              
              fiber crops.  This collaborative research project will expand on               
              previous work by the investigators to discern the molecular basis of           
              the peptides released and their influence on the physiology of the             
              host as well as their importance to the successful                             
              thigmodifferentiation of the fungus.  Future research will be based            
              on using the information obtained to elucidate logical control                 
              strategies based on the better understanding of the infection process          
              and what specific sites in the process might be considered as targets          
              in a control scheme.  It is expected that researchers in both                  
              countries will benefit from this project because it will result in a           
              new understanding of plant disease caused by obligate pathogens.               
              It will also bring together researchers with considerable expertise in         
              diverse areas of plant pathological research.
