Title       : Some Problems in Coding, Coded Modulation, Suboptimum Decoding and Trellis
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  1994       
File        : a9115400

Award Number: 9115400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252317             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shu Lin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   As the demand for data integrity increases, coding for error              
              control becomes increasingly important in data communications.  It has         
              become an integral part in almost every communication system design.           
              Today very sophisticated coding is used in a broad range of data               
              communication systems.  this research project is an investigation of           
              some problems in coding and coded modulation which are both                    
              theoretically and practically important.  The research includes four           
              inter- related areas:  (1) multi-level modulation codes and multi-stage        
              decoding; (2) multi-level concatenated coded modulation schemes and            
              construction of multi- dimensional modulation codes; (3) trellis               
              structure of linear block codes; and (4) suboptimum decoding of block          
              codes.In the first area, the research seeks specific multi-level               
              methods to construct bandwidth efficient multi-level modulation codes          
              with good minimum squared Euclidean distance, small path multiplicity,         
              and desirable structure such as linearity, phase symmetry, and simple          
              trellis diagrams. To reduce the path multiplicity, proper                      
              interdependence between consecutive levels of labeling for signal              
              points and component codes is sought.  Also studied are various multi-         
              stage decoding schemes for the multi-level modulation codes.  The focus        
              is to devise multi-stage decoding schemes which achieve good error             
              performance and large coding gain with reduced decoding complexity.  In        
              the second area of research, multi-level concatenation in conjunction          
              with coded modulation is studied for error control in data                     
              communications to achieve high error-correction performance, large             
              coding gain, and high spectral efficiency with reduced decoding                
              complexity.  This multi-level concatenated coded modulation scheme is          
              used to construct long powerful multi-dimensional  (block or trellis)          
              modulation codes with good phase symmetry.  In the third research area,        
              the focus is on the complexity of the trellis structure of linear block        
              codes.  Boolean polynomial representation of block codes will be used          
              for the construction of their minimal trellis diagrams.  It is intended        
              to find specific permutations on the bit positions of codes which              
              reduce the state complexity of code trellises.  Emphasis is placed on          
              finding good codes with simple trellis structure so that maximum               
              likelihood decoding can be achieved with the Viterbi algorithm.  The           
              fourth area is an investigation of suboptimum soft-decision decoding           
              for block codes which can be decomposed into constituent codes with            
              smaller dimensions and simpler (trellis) structure.  It is intended to         
              find good codes (such as BCH codes) which are decomposable or are              
              unions of decomposable codes.
