Title       : U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research: Expert/Novice Conceptual Approaches to
               Calculus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1994 
File        : a9115930

Award Number: 9115930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19912              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo B. Nemirovsky ricardo_Nemirovsky@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janice R. Mokros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 5922      MEXICO
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5922,7258,
Abstract    :
              This U.S.-Mexico award will support a research in                              
              science education collaboration between Dr. Ricardo                            
              Nemirovsky of the Technical Education Research                                 
              Center (TERC) in Cambridge, Massachussetts, and Dr.                            
              Ricardo Cantoral of the Centro de Investigacion y de                           
              Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politecnico                                   
              Nacional (CINVESTAV) in Mexico City.  The purpose of                           
              the proposed research is to explore how students'                              
              intuitive calculus concepts as well as knowledge of                            
              their conceptual difficulties could help in                                    
              developing an enhanced approach to the teaching of                             
              calculus.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Calculus concepts are essential for understanding                              
              both the physical sciences and many events in daily                            
              life.  Preliminary results indicate that calculus                              
              experts may retain intuitive conceptions of calculus                           
              operations not identical with those of the formal                              
              calculus in which they are trained.  Researchers at                            
              CINVESTAV have found historically early conceptions                            
              of calculus shared many commonalities with                                     
              approaches of novice students to calculus-based                                
              problems.  By teaming up to explore both novice and                            
              expert conceptions of calculus, the collaborators                              
              hope to better understand how calculus is                                      
              conceptualized and learned in order to develop a new                           
              model of calculus instruction that recognizes and                              
              seeks to develop students' alternative intuitive                               
              conceptions.  The proposed cross-national                                      
              collaboration will provide an efficient coordination                           
              of research resources aimed at supporting a new                                
              approach to calculus education.
