Title       : Collaborative Project: On The Origin of Stellar Activity: Generation and
               Propagation of Wave Energy in the Surface Layers of Late-Type Dwarfs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1991   
File        : a9115194

Award Number: 9115194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fausto Cattaneo cattaneo@mhd2.chicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Zdzislaw E. Musielak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              11        Astronomy                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Atmospheric turbulent energy degrades itself into smaller scales               
              of motion until its energy is converted entirely to heat, sound,               
              and light.   The convective granular motions of the outer envelope             
              of the Sun and other cool stars are thought to convert their energy            
              into acoustical energy, which is thought to play a key role in the             
              heating of the outer atmosphere (chromosphere) of the Sun.  Just               
              how important this role may be is still controversial as an error              
              has been found in important assumptions that have been made in the             
              past to evaluate acoustical heating in the solar chromosphere.                 
              The Principal Investigator and his collaborator, F. Cattaneo, plan             
              an extensive set of computer numerical simulations in which the                
              excitation of acoustical energy will be computed from a set of                 
              equations describing turbulence in a three-dimensional                         
              compressional fluid.  In addition, their experiments will include              
              the effects of turbulence in plasma containing tubes of magnetic               
              flux, such as are thought to be important on the Sun's surface.                
              The computations of acoustic energy will be used to compute heating            
              from sound waves which can be directly compared to the cooling of              
              the chromopheres of the Sun and other stars from X-ray                         
              observations.  It is anticipated that this work will put the                   
              estimates of acoustical energy in star's atmospheres on a firm,                
              experimental basis and should permit estimates of the minimum                  
              amounts of mass that stars can lose through a heating of their                 
              outer atmospheres.  In addition, it may lead to applications of                
              the dissipation of energy from loud acoustical sources on the                  
              Earth (e.g. jet engines).
