Title       : Dissertation Research: Ceramic Chronology in the James and Potomac River Valleys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1991    
File        : a9115469

Award Number: 9115469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1991   
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8624               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Klein  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Jeffrey Hantman, Mr. Michael Klein                  
              will conduct research for his doctoral dissertation.  He will                  
              analyze ceramic materials collected from 43 Native American sites              
              located in the James and Potomac Rivers region of Virginia and                 
              Maryland and will focus on the period between 500 - 1600 AD.  The              
              goal of the project is to develop a ceramic chronology - to                    
              understand how ceramics changed in form over time - and the                    
              selected sample which derives entirely from radiocarbon dated                  
              sites will make this possible.  On this basis, an archaeologist                
              will then be able to take pottery from undated sites in the                    
              region and determine its age through comparison to the controlled              
              sequence.  Since most pottery in the Chesapeake region is neither              
              decorated nor painted, Mr. Klein will focus on attributes such as              
              sherd thickness and the tempering material used.  Ceramics which               
              form the basis of this research are housed in East Coast museums               
              and Mr. Klein will make a series of trips to visit them.                       
                                                                                             
              The Chesapeake region is unusual because of the richness of the                
              resources available to prehistoric peoples and relatively little               
              is known about how technologically simple societies developed in               
              such environments.  Archaeological evidence indicates that during              
              the 1100 year span which Mr. Klein's study includes, societies                 
              were transformed from small scale hunting and gathering groups to              
              large centralized chiefdoms which relied on agriculture.  Before               
              one can understand the process which underlies this                            
              transformation, it is first necessary to place archaeological                  
              sites in time and Mr. Klein's research will help to achieve this               
              goal.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will increase              
              our understanding of prehistoric Native Americans and the                      
              processes which led to the emergence of cultural complexity.  It               
              will provide a tool useful to many archaeologists and will assist              
              in the training of an extremely promising young scientist.
