Title       : Renovation and Equipmnt for Visiting and Resident Scientist Facility at BBSR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1991 
File        : a9115405

Award Number: 9115405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Schindel                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1991 
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony H. Knap knap@bbsr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clayton B. Cook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fredric Lipschultz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bermuda Biol Sta Research
	      17 Biological Station
	      Ferry Reach, GE 01, BD      /   -

NSF Program : 1104      FIELD STATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Bermuda Biological Station for Research has been an                   
              influential and productive marine lab since its creation in 1903.              
              The Station has supported research and education for resident and              
              visiting scientists, and continues to offer outstanding facilities.            
              The Station has experienced rapid growth recently in both its                  
              research capabilities and its use by the scientific community.  Dr.            
              Anthony Knap, Director of the Station, now plans to expand the                 
              Station's capabilities in the area of marine biotechnology and                 
              molecular biology.  Renovation of several labs and the acquisition             
              of new research equipment will improve the Station's capacity for              
              preserving, preparing, and analyzing marine life at the molecular              
              level.                                                                         
                   The Bermuda Biological Station is unique in offering research             
              facilities that are close to both shallow tropical marine habitats             
              and open ocean deep water environments.  The proposed lab                      
              improvements will provide direct and immediate benefits to a wide              
              array of marine scientists, and will offer students access to the              
              most recently developed instrumentation and research techniques.
