Title       : Multi-User Triple Quadrupole Electrospray Mass Spectrometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9115824

Award Number: 9115824
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230400             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Crabb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : W. Alton Jones Cell Sci.
	      
	      Lake Placid, NY  12946    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,
Abstract    :
              This proposal requests funds for the purchase of an                            
              electrospray triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer with on                       
              line HPLC and tandem mass spectrometry capability.  It is                      
              planned that the instrument will serve primarily by nine                       
              user groups at the W. Alton Jones Cell Science Center.  A                      
              broad range of independently supported studies are ongoing                     
              and all require the requested instrumentation.  Most of the                    
              projects are directed at analysis of peptides and proteins                     
              and the proposed instrument will be located and operated                       
              within the institutional share Protein Chemistry Facility.                     
              The instrument will provide the user groups with ready                         
              access for the first time to low to sub-picomole level                         
              accurate mass spectrometric analyses of peptides and                           
              proteins covering a relatively broad mass range.  There                        
              currently are no mass spectrometry instruments at the Cell                     
              Science Center.  Mass spectrometry has become an                               
              indispensable tool for peptide and protein structure-                          
              function studies and is essential for satisfactory progress                    
              in the ongoing and future biological research at the W.                        
              Alton Jones Cell Science Center.
