Title       : Oxygen, Sulfur and Carbon Isotopic Study of Pore Fluid Evolution in the Creede
               Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1994   
File        : a9115965

Award Number: 9115965
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146455             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. M. Palin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Rumble  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This project involves an integrated petrographic and stable               
              isotopic study of samples selected from core obtained during                   
              drilling in the Creede Formation of southwestern Colorado for the              
              purpose of documenting progressive changes in the oxygen, sulfur               
              and carbon isotopic compositions of secondary minerals which                   
              precipitated from pore fluids during the course of diagenesis and              
              hydrothermal activity in the Creede hydrothermal system.  The                  
              textural relationships and mineral compositions of pore-filling,               
              fracture-filling, and wall rock alteration minerals will be                    
              examined in order to establish the relative timing of secondary                
              mineral precipitation.  Laser-based in situ extraction techniques              
              will be employed whenever possible to measure oxygen and sulfur                
              isotopes in fine-grained minerals and test for isotopic variation              
              within minerals.  Oxygen (and to a lesser extent sulfur and carbon)            
              isotopic partitioning between appropriate minerals will be measured            
              and combined with experimentally and theoretically derived                     
              fractionation factors in order to constrain temperatures of                    
              precipitation.  The measured isotopic compositions of oxygen,                  
              sulfur, and carbon in secondary mineral minerals will be combined              
              with temperature constraints and mineral-fluid fractionation                   
              factors to calculate the stable isotopic compositions of the                   
              solutions from which the minerals precipitated.  The sequence of               
              stable isotopoic variation reconstructed from data for the                     
              secondary minerals will be used to assess the relative importance              
              of closed-system processes (e.g. local fluid-rock reaction) and                
              open-system processes (e.g. groundwater or hydrothermal fluid                  
              influx) in controlling the isotopic compositions of oxygen, sulfur,            
              and carbon in the pore fluids.
