Title       : Development of Process Control for Microwave Joining of Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1994   
File        : a9115417

Award Number: 9115417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179912             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Murray Black mblack@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Guy O. Beale  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   The researcher will develop a process control system for the              
              microwave joining of advanced ceramics.  Ceramics have the chemical            
              and physical properties necessary for advanced engines and                     
              industrial and chemical process systems, but brittleness and the               
              lack of reliable in-process methods to detect critical flaws make              
              manufacturing of ceramic components very difficult.  Joining is                
              thus a critical technology impeding the widespread commercial use              
              of ceramics.  It has been demonstrated that direct heating of the              
              joint interface with microwave energy produces strong bonds in a               
              fraction of the time necessary with conventional methods.  Precise             
              control of the heating process is necessary to exploit this result,            
              because the dielectric loss factor of ceramics increases with                  
              temperature, leading to positive feedback and thermal runaway.                 
              Control over the joining process will be achieved through                      
              development of the following automated feedback loops:  (1) control            
              of the power to the (magnetron) microwave source based upon                    
              measurements of the surface temperature of the samples being                   
              joined, and subsequent calculation of the interior temperature via             
              solution of the thermal diffusion equation; and (2) control of the             
              resonant frequency of the microwave cavity applicator and the                  
              coupling of the microwave power to the loaded cavity based upon                
              measurement of the amplitude and the rate of change of the                     
              reflected power.  The controllers will be based upon linearized                
              models derived from numerical solutions to the coupled                         
              electromagnetic and thermal diffusion equations.                               
                   If inexpensive, reliable methods for joining ceramic can be               
              developed, it may be possible to manufacture ceramic components                
              will tailored properties and then join them together, as is                    
              currently done with metals.  Such a method may greatly expand the              
              application of ceramics to machine components.
