Title       : Small Grants for Exploratory Research: A Stirling Micro-Refrigerator for Cold
               Electronics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1991      
File        : a9115773

Award Number: 9115773
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyn Bowman   (Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Berchowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sunpower Inc
	      6 Byard Street
	      Athens, OH  457012702    614/594-2221

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER)                  
              project is on the development of a novel Stirling micro-                       
              refrigerator for cold electronics.  This silicon and glass                     
              machine is to be batch fabricated by micromachining techniques                 
              developed in the silicon sensor industry.  Despite its small                   
              size (approximately one cubic centimeter), the micro-                          
              refrigerator will pump practical amounts of heat by operating                  
              at much higher frequencies than previously thought possible                    
              for Stirling cycle machines.  Heat transfer and losses in                      
              Stirling cycle machines, like those in other fluid dynamic                     
              systems, depend not on individual operating quantities such as                 
              frequency or speed, but rather on dimensionless groups of                      
              quantities, such as Reynold's number and Valensi number.                       
              These dimensionless groups permit losses to be controlled by                   
              compensating for high frequencies by means of small                            
              dimensions.  Our analysis of a preliminary design describes a                  
              machine that is 30 times smaller with 100 times more heat                      
              lifting capacity than the most advanced miniature Stirling                     
              cryocooler yet described in the scientific literature.                         
                                                                                             
              In this research, two theoretical and practical feasibility                    
              issues will be addressed.  We will identify fundamental                        
              limitations and opportunities by analyzing the complex heat                    
              transfer and friction factor coefficients at high frequencies                  
              and small dimensions, and we will examine the extent to which                  
              the proposed micro-refrigerator can be manufactured by                         
              existing processes employed in the commercial silicon sensor                   
              industry.  We will also design a thermally and fluid-                          
              dynamically "similar" Stirling refrigerator in larger                          
              dimensions and in conventional materials for later                             
              experimental verification of analyses with conventional                        
              instrumentation.
