Title       : Geochemical and Isotopic Evolution of the Pore Waters of theCreede Formation,
               Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9115780

Award Number: 9115780
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143581             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen P. Altaner altaner@aquifer.geology.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Hay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                  The proposed study will test the hypothesis that Creede                   
              Formation sediments (Colorado) were a major source of mineralizing             
              fluids for the Creede ore district and will quantitatively evaluate            
              the geochemical and isotopic evolution of pore waters in the Creede            
              Formation.  The Creede Formation sediments have undergone a                    
              complicated history that appears to include low temperature                    
              alteration by fluids of controversial salinity and later                       
              hydrothermal alteration.  The project will involve a combined                  
              observational and computational study to characterize the sediments            
              and porewaters of the Creede Formation.  Previously collected                  
              outcrop samples and core samples from two planned drill holes                  
              undertaken as part of the Continental Scientific Drilling Program              
              will be studied.  The mineralogy, texture, chemical and stable                 
              isotopic composition, and age of chemical sediments and authigenic             
              minerals, including zeolites, K-feldspar, clays, carbonates, and               
              saline minerals will be characterized.  Analytical techniques will             
              include XRD, petrography, SEM, electron microprobe, stable isotope             
              geochemistry, and laser 39Ar/40Ar and K/Ar age dating.  The principal          
              investigators will work closely with Robert Rye (USGS, Denver) and             
              Marvin Lansphere (USGS, Menlo Park) in the collection and                      
              interpretation of stable and radiogenic isotope data.  They will               
              also develop quantitative models of the diagenetic alteration of               
              Creede sediments using a geochemical and isotopic mass transfer                
              computer program.  They also hope to gain new insights into this               
              and other similar systems by incorporating a broad spectrum of                 
              mineralogical and geochemical methods with state-of-the-art                    
              geochemical and isotopic modeling to develop and integrated model              
              of the depositional, diagenetic, and hydrothermal history of the               
              Creede Formation.
