Title       : Limitation of Microbial Loop Activity in the Sea: Seasonal Rates of Organic
               Carbon Utilization and Implications for Global Temperature Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1993   
File        : a9115673

Award Number: 9115673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence R. Pomeroy   (Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Microbial growth and respiratory rates vary seasonally at all                  
              non-tropical latitudes.  In addition, based on results from the                
              PI's ongoing research, the minimal requirement for substrates by               
              bacteria also varies seasonally.  The interaction of these two                 
              factors results in a dramatic decrease in microbial food web                   
              activity at the time of the local minimum temperature.  This is                
              a transient condition and can be attenuated by a rise in                       
              temperature and/or increase in organic substrates, either                      
              directly or via zooplankton grazing.  Results of ongoing                       
              research, over three spring bloom periods in Conception Bay,                   
              Newfoundland demonstrated that microbial loop activity is greatly              
              diminished at the beginning to mid-bloom, increasing either after              
              the bloom ceases (1986, 1990) or toward the end of a bloom that                
              is extended by physical mixing so that zooplankton grazing                     
              intensifies (1988).  Data from the U.S. southeastern continental               
              shelf suggest that this concept applies to the subtropical ocean               
              as well. In many continental shelf regions this transient period               
              may represent the only autotrophic (primary production exceeds                 
              community respiration) period of the year.  The length of this                 
              event becomes critical to the functioning of the system over the               
              entire year.  Even moderate global warming of surface waters                   
              could have a substantial impact on the organic nutrient status of              
              the region.  A combination of observations and experiments at                  
              sea, from high to subtropical latitudes, together with                         
              experimental studies, using bacterial and protozoan isolates in                
              the laboratory, will help us define the combined effects of water              
              temperature and substrate availabilities.  These results should                
              be of particular value in predicting the effect of global warming              
              on marine food webs.
