Title       : Near-Wall Lift and its Role in the Survival of Limpets and Keyhole Limpets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  1994    
File        : a9115688

Award Number: 9115688
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174190             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Denny mwdenny@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9260,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   All organisms live in a fluid medium (either air or                       
              water), and are therefore subject to the physics of fluids.  In                
              particular, all plants and animals encounter fluid-dynamic                     
              forces that can potentially injure or dislodge the organism,                   
              thereby adversely affecting its survival, and in many cases                    
              fluid-dynamic forces are thought to have acted as selective                    
              factors in the evolution of body form.  Aspects of these forces                
              (e.g., drag on benthic organisms, lift on the wings of birds                   
              and insects) have been extensively studied, and our                            
              understanding of their mechanism has been an important tool in                 
              interpreting the ecology and evolution of these groups.                        
                   Despite the importance of fluid-dynamic forces, one common                
              force, near-wall lift, has escaped notice.  Near-wall lift is                  
              likely to be an important source of mortality in many benthic                  
              marine animals.  For instance, limpets and keyhole limpets are                 
              often killed when dislodge by hydrodynamic forces, and near-                   
              wall lift is by far the largest force acting on them.  However,                
              the mechanism of near-wall lift and its interaction with body                  
              form have never ben examined and are not well understood.                      
                   These investigations by Dr. Denny have three major goals:                 
              (1) To understand the mechanism of near-wall-lift and thereby                  
              to provide a firm basis for exploring its role as a source of                  
              mortality in limpets and keyhole limpets.  (2) To measure the                  
              strength distribution of limpets and keyhole limpets, thereby                  
              allowing for the quantitative prediction of rates of mortality                 
              as a function of the local wave regime. (3) To quantitatively                  
              predict the selective advantage or disadvantage in wall lift to                
              act as an agent of selective mortality.  As such, this                         
              research provides a quantitative, experimental tool for                        
              exploring the role fluid-dynamic forces play at the crucial                    
              nexus of community ecology, population biology, and the                        
              evolution of body form.
