Title       : Diamond Film Deposition in a Radio-Frequency Thermal Plasma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1991  
File        : a9115464

Award Number: 9115464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George P. Peterson                      
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247071             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Girshick slg@tc.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Among the processes which have been demonstrated for chemical                  
              vapor deposition (CVD) of diamond films, the radio-frequency                   
              thermal plasmas approach is one of the most promising in terms                 
              of high deposition rates, lack of contamination, and good film                 
              uniformity over large substrate areas.  The present work is                    
              directed at development of a fundamental understanding of the                  
              mechanisms of diamond-film CVD in an rf thermal plasma reactor                 
              and use of that understanding for definition of process                        
              conditions which will enable high-rate deposition of high-                     
              quality diamond films on various substrates of industrial                      
              interest.  Experiments will be conducted to characterize the                   
              effects of controllable process parameters on film properties                  
              and deposition rates.  On-line measurements of temperatures                    
              and chemical species concentrations in the boundary layer                      
              adjacent to the substrate and at the substrate surface itself                  
              will be obtained using optical pyrometry, laser-induced                        
              fluorescence, and gas chromatography of samples gathered with                  
              probes.  Analyses of the deposited films will be obtained from                 
              optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy, Raman                        
              spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction.  A numerical model which                  
              specifically corresponds to the experimental reactor and                       
              conditions and which predicts film growth rates as a function                  
              of process variables will be developed in parallel with the                    
              experimental studies.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Diamond is a superlative material with respect to mechanical,                  
              thermal, optical, electrical, and acoustic properties.                         
              Deposition of diamond films on various substrates (various                     
              materials and shapes) is a rapidly growing field with a                        
              potentially huge market in such areas as machine cutting                       
              tools, abrasives, bearings, lasers, lenses/mirrors, and                        
              microelectronic devices.  The ability to produce uniform pure                  
              diamond coatings at high deposition rates is critical to                       
              future developments in this area.  This program represents an                  
              important step in exploration of the rf thermal plasma                         
              approach to such production, and will additionally advance the                 
              knowledge and technology base for other potential applications                 
              of rf thermal plasma CVD processes.
