Title       : Symposium: Molecular and Mathematical Approaches to Genealogical Analysis and
               Strain Indentification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1991   
File        : a9115764

Award Number: 9115764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1991   
Expires     : October 30,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Meagher   (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter E. Smouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   With the advent of modern molecular methods for genetic                   
              analysis, it has become feasible to study ever more refined                    
              aspects of the genetic structure of populations.  The                          
              developments have stimulated considerable growth in studies of                 
              the genealogical structure of populations, as well as                          
              investigation into the composition of populations of mixed                     
              genetic background.  These two fields of study are based on                    
              common molecular and statistical tools, but have largely been                  
              developed in isolation from one another.  The proposed symposium               
              will provide a forum for presentation, comparison, and discussion              
              of the various approaches currently available for genealogical                 
              analysis and strain identification.  Participants have been drawn              
              from a national pool, and the proceeding will be publicized on a               
              national level as well.  This symposium will bring together                    
              scientific leaders in various related areas in a way that is                   
              certain to generate useful interaction, and that could give rise               
              to fruitful future collaborations.  Finally, this symposium is                 
              being structured in a way that will encourage attendance by                    
              graduate students, so that people in their formative stages will               
              have the opportunity to benefit directly from the intellectual                 
              synergism that will arise from this meeting.
