Title       : Board on Chemical Sciences and Technology Core Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1993     
File        : a9115617

Award Number: 9115617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406460             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary E. Dwoskin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2101 Constitution Ave NW
	      Washington, DC  204180007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1978      PROJECTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1978,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide partial core support for the continuing                
              activities of the Board of Chemical Sciences and Technology                    
              (BCST) of the Commission on Physical Sciences, Mathematics, and                
              Resources.  It is supported jointly by the Office of Special                   
              Projects in the Division of Chemistry and by the Division of                   
              Chemical and Thermal Systems in the Directorate for                            
              Engineering.  The BCST serves as the focal point within the                    
              National Research Council (NRC) for concerns and issues                        
              affecting chemistry in its broadest sense, including                           
              biochemistry and chemical engineering.  Board activities                       
              require extensive planning for ongoing studies, potential                      
              studies, private sector fund raising, and broadly directed                     
              efforts to communicate Board activities to the chemistry                       
              community.  All of these are core activities.  The capacity to                 
              develop a new project while paying costs partially or fully                    
              from core funds enhances the freedom and ability of the Board                  
              to react responsively to important issues in the field of                      
              chemistry and chemical technology.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              Effective communication with the public, with other scientists                 
              and with scientific organizations representing chemical                        
              sciences and technology is important for maximizing the                        
              effectiveness of research in the chemical sciences and chemical                
              engineering.  Partial support for the Board on Chemical                        
              Sciences and Technology ensures that the National Research                     
              Council will be able to take maximum advantage of the                          
              scientific talent available to it and be appropriately                         
              aggressive in undertaking new tasks of importance to the                       
              community.  This support is highly leveraged with support from                 
              other Federal agencies and the private sector.
