Title       : Surface Chemistry with Ion Beams and Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9115011

Award Number: 9115011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1422780            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Winograd nxw@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project involves performing an extensive range of                          
              experiments designed to enhance the use of ion beams for the                   
              study of surface chemistry.   These experiments are designed to                
              (i) elucidate the fundamental aspects of ion/solid collisions,                 
              (ii) to characterize the chemistry and structure of solid                      
              surfaces using the basic information obtained in (i), and                      
              (iii) to optimize the application of ion beams in trace                        
              molecular analysis of surfaces and in submicron imaging.                       
              The use of multiphoton resonance ionization spectroscopy will                  
              enable neutral species to be ionized with both temporal and                    
              spatial resolution by using a movable mass spectrometer to                     
              measure the trajectories of the secondary ions produced.  This                 
              will enable the measurement of neutrals, excited neutrals, and                 
              ions desorbed from well-defined surfaces subjected to ion                      
              bombardment.    The experimental results will be compared with                 
              a theoretical model which uses molecular dynamics simulations.                 
              New experimental geometries will be determined by the use of                   
              shadow-cone enhanced desorption.   New experiments in the trace                
              molecular analysis of surfaces and in submicron atomic and                     
              molecular imaging will also be performed.                                      
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              The research, in the general area of Analytical and Surface                    
              Chemistry, focuses on the use of energetic ion beams (of                       
              several thousand electron volts in energy) in surface chemistry                
              research.   These experiments promise to provide the most                      
              complete picture so far developed of ion/solid interactions,                   
              new approaches to the determination of surface chemical                        
              geometries, new methods for trace molecular analysis of                        
              surfaces, and new approaches to the atomic and molecular                       
              imaging of surfaces.  The results from these studies should                    
              find widespread applications in such diverse fields as high                    
              molecular weight mass spectrometry, astrophysics, fusion                       
              reactor design, and ion implantation and etching of electronic                 
              materials.
