Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotope Geochemistry of
               Laterites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1995     
File        : a9115892

Award Number: 9115892
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Savin sms7@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean-Pierre Girard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1552,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                  
              involving Samuel Savin and Jean-Pierre Girard of Case Western                  
              Reserve and Daniel Nahon of the University of Aix-Marseille III.               
              The investigators propose to apply isotopic techniques to the study            
              of laterites, which are tropical soils that cover a substantial portion        
              of the earth.  The objectives of their cooperation involve analyzing           
              oxygen and hydrogen ratios of minerals in well-characterized,                  
              active laterites found in Brazil.  Drs. Savin and Girard bring to the          
              collaboration their extensive experience in stable isotope studies of          
              clays and related minerals in geologic materials of low temperature            
              origin.  This is complemented by the French investigator's                     
              expertise in problems of soil genesis and geochemistry of laterite             
              weathering.  They will jointly collect laterite samples found in the           
              Amazon Basin in Brazil and conduct laboratory analysis.                        
                                                                                             
              Laterites offer one of the best prospects to obtain information about          
              ancient climates.   Using stable isotopes studies, the investigators           
              propose to determine both paleotemperatures and isotopic values of             
              ancient rainfall as recorded in the mineral content of the laterites.          
              The results will be important to research into the use of stable               
              isotopes for paleoclimatic reconstructions.  Knowledge about these             
              ancient climatic factors particularly rainfall in tropical regions will        
              advance our understanding of the link between change in equatorial             
              rainfall patterns and global climate change.
