Title       : Funds for an Ultramicrotome
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1992      
File        : a9115808

Award Number: 9115808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17807              (Estimated)
Investigator: Clara Franzini-Armstrong   (Principal Investigator current)
              H L. Sweeney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Kelly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yale R. Goldman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Holtzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This group of investigators is now requesting funds for the                    
              purchase of an ultramicrotome for thin sectioning, and a                       
              dissecting microscope for block trimming.                                      
                                                                                             
              The ultramicrotome is an indispensable instrument in standard                  
              electron microscopy.  It provides sections of suitable thickness               
              from material embedded in plastic.  The users of the microtome                 
              will use a variety of approaches, from the classical chemical                  
              fixation to ultrarapid freezing, to selective staining.  Tissue                
              samples, cultured cells, single isolate muscle fibers and                      
              isolated cell organelles will be used.  The research projects                  
              will study muscle differentiation; the architecture of molecules               
              involved in activating the muscle fiber and in the process of                  
              contraction; the mechanism of assembly of a functional muscle                  
              fiber and the contribution of various molecules to myofibril                   
              structure.  These projects require different sectioning                        
              techniques and thus a versatile microtome.  When sectioning                    
              muscle fibers, the sections must be very precisely oriented and                
              it is of paramount importance that the microtome includes a                    
              specimen mount that allows precise small angle changes.  The                   
              instrument that we request is particularly useful because it is                
              readily capable of producing excellent quality sections in a                   
              range of thicknesses, from ultrathin to semithin, with precise                 
              orientation.
