Title       : Management and Scientific Services in Support of the U.S. JGOFS Arabian Sea
               Process Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9310577

Award Number: 9310577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2997212            (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon L. Smith ssmith@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1315,1670,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                      Smith  9310577    Management  and Scientific Services in Support of the
              U.S.  JGOFS  Arabian Sea Process Study    Some  of  the strongest atmospheric
              forcing of oceanic properties  anywhere  on  our  planet is observed in the 
              Arabian  Sea  where  seasonally reversing monsoon winds drive fast-flowing,
              vertically  extensive currents, complex eddy fields, broad-scale, open  ocean 
              upwelling,   coastal   upwelling   and   pronounced   mixed-layer  deepening.
              Cycles of production in this region are driven by  the  ocean's response to
              monsoon winds and therefore exhibit large and  regular  seasonal  oscillations,
               During  the  southwest  monsoon  season   (June-September  inclusive), 
              primary  productivity   is  maximal owing to strong winds which not only cause
              the uplift  of  deep  water rich in nutrients, but also deliver aeolian  dust 
              to  the  surface layer of this tropical ocean.  During the  northeast  monsoon 
              (October-November inclusive) and  intermonsoon  periods,  primary productivity
              is markedly reduced.  A major rationale  for  the  choice  of the Arabian Sea
              as a process study  site  is  the  strong  and seasonally reversing physical
              forcing of the  region.  It is safe to say no investigator working in this
              program will be  able to properly interpret her/his data without understanding
              the  physical   regime.  For an expedition of the scale  of  the  U.S.  JGOFS 
              Arabian Sea Process Study, 9 cruises spread over an annual  monsoon  cycle,  it
              is necessary to provide a consistent  set  of  measurements  of  the 
              background density,  tracer  and  nutrient  fields.   These  data  are  crucial
              for  the  interpretation  and  resolution  of  the  seasonally changing,
              background  mean  flows  which  are  the  setting  for the more  specialized 
              pelagic  and  benthic  studies of the expedition.  These measurements are  also
               needed  to estimate the transport of nutrients into the  euphotic  zone  and
              to provide insight into the chemical constraints placed  upon  physiological 
              processes.   This project  will  provide  the  basic, background observational
              program which will include  ship-  based   measurement  of  depth-resolved 
              temperature,   salinity,  nutrients, oxygen, and currents.  The methods to be
              employed will  be  standardized and consistent throughout the expedition, 
              using  protocols  already established either by U.S. JGOFS or U.S.  WOCE  or 
              protocols  agreed  upon  by all investigators  prior  to  the  beginning of the
              expedition.  ***
