Title       : Role of bFGF in Compensatory Adrenocortical Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9310866

Award Number: 9310866
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matilde A. Holzwarth HOLZWART@UIUC.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
              9310866  Holzwarth         The mechanisms by which the central nervous system
              controls  growth and development of cells in endocrine organs is not well 
              understood.  Since there is an extensive growth in the number of  cells in the
              remaining adrenal gland following unilateral  adrenalectomy, this physiological
              system may provide an excellent  model to examine these underlying mechanisms. 
              While it is known  that the compensatory growth of the remaining adrenal is
              mediated  by afferent and efferent autonomic adrenocortical nerves, the 
              cellular mechanisms by which these autonomic nerves initiate and  regulate cell
              proliferation have not been elucidated.  During  previous NSF support, Dr.
              Holzwarth identified a potent growth  factor in adrenal glands, basic
              fibroblast growth factor (bFGF).   She will now determine whether the
              adrenocortical nerves activate  this local factor which then initiates the cell
              growth.  Using  state-of-the-art anatomical and molecular techniques, she will 
              assess the mechanisms responsible for the proliferation of  adrenocortical
              cells in vivo.  Dr. Holzwarth will determine whether  the cell proliferation is
              inhibited by immunological blockage of  the growth factor.  She will also
              measure how much bFGF is formed  and where it is localized during the initial
              stages of compensatory  growth.  Finally, Dr. Holzwarth will determine whether
              cellular  receptors present are altered during this proliferation.  These 
              experiments will provide new insights into how the nervous system  controls
              cellular processes of non-neuronal cells as well as the  mechanisms by which
              cells process and utilized their endogenous  growth-promoting factors. 
              Information gained from this work may  eventually prove important in developing
              methods to prevent  abnormal cell proliferation.   ***
