Title       : Origins of Food Production in Anatolia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1995     
File        : a9310513

Award Number: 9310513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91681              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Rosenberg   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Michael Rosenberg and             
              his colleagues will conduct archaeological excavation at the site              
              of Hallan Cemi which is located in the Zagros mountain region of               
              Southeastern Turkey. The site itself consists of a low mound which             
              covers approximately .7 hectares and previous work by Dr. Rosenberg            
              has shown that it covers the time period from approximately 10,600             
              to 10.000 years before the present. Dr. Rosenberg will conduct two             
              seasons of work in which he will open broad areas and through                  
              controlled stratigraphic excavation recover large amounts of faunal            
              and floral remains as well as a broad range of material objects                
              such as stone tools. These will be analyzed by a team of                       
              specialists in order to reconstruct subsistence and social patterns            
              and to set the site into a broader regional context.                           
                                                                                             
              Given the date of Hallan Cemi and the materials collected to date,             
              it is apparent that this site documents a very early phase of the              
              Neolithic Revolution. The term "Revolution" is an appropriate one              
              because it marks perhaps the most significant shift in lifestyle               
              over the ca. 2,000,000 years of human existence. In the Neolithic              
              plants and animals were domesticated, settled village life emerged             
              and a technological explosion which included the development of                
              ceramic technology and metallurgy occurred. It is ironic, given                
              great archaeological interest in this question that so little is               
              known about the Zagros region since it is both known to contain                
              very early Neolithic sites and has been postulated as a possible               
              point of origin. The work to date by Dr. Rosenberg has demonstrated            
              that Hallan Cemi represents an early stage in this process. While              
              it contains domestic plants and animals, ceramics, another hallmark            
              of the Neolithic are lacking. The large faunal and floral samples              
              which will be collected will shed new light on the subsistence                 
              change.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. Within two years               
              this entire region will be flooded by a newly constructed dam and              
              if work is now done now a unique opportunity will be irrevocably               
              lost. The information which Dr. Rosenberg collects will increase               
              our understanding of perhaps the most important transformation in              
              human history.
