Title       : Quantum Tunneling in One- and Three-Dimension Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9310260

Award Number: 9310260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Goodkind jgoodkind@physics.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip M. Platzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9310260  Goodkind    This combined experimental and theoretical project will
              study  quantum tunneling in a one-d model system and a three-d model  system. 
              The one-d system consists of electrons tunneling out of  the shallow potential
              well associated with their image potential at  the surface of helium.  The
              three-d system is solid He-4.   Electrons on helium represent a model system
              where tunneling rates  can be measured as a function of applied electric field
              and  electron density.  This system is appropriate to study using the  one-d
              time-dependent Schrodinger equation.  Solid He-4 is the  simplest possible
              solid in nature so that its properties provide  fundamental understanding
              applicable to all solids.  In He-4,  lattice defects such as vacancies are
              expected to be delocalized as  a result of their ability to tunnel between
              potential minima of the  periodic lattice.  However, experimental evidence
              about their  concentration and their properties is limited and inconclusive.  
              The proposed research is intended to resolve certain outstanding  issues in
              both systems.  Further, the tunneling phenomena are  potentially of
              technological interest as microelectronic devices  become smaller and tunneling
              between closely spaced structures more  likely.  %%%  This is a combined
              experimental and theoretical which will study  quantum tunneling in two model
              systems.  Quantum tunneling is  analogous to finding your car outside your
              garage in the front yard  in the morning, even though it was left locked inside
              the night  before.  This macroscopic event is very unlikely, but if the car 
              and surroundings are shrunk to atomic dimensions, tunneling becomes  a
              measurable phenomenon, particularly at very low temperatures.  In  this work,
              one model system consists of electrons tunneling through  a potential barrier
              to leave a surface.  In the other model system,  helium atoms in the solid
              tunnel from lattice sites (garages) to  defects (front yards).  In both cases,
              there are fundamental issues  of both a theore tical and experimental nature
              that need to be  resolved.  Further, the tunneling phenomena are potentially of
               technological interest as microelectronics devices become smaller  and
              tunneling between closely spaced structures more likely.  ***
