Title       : Ethics and Archaeology: A Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1994 
File        : a9310554

Award Number: 9310554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Wilk wilk@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310554  Wilk  Around the world, the past is an increasingly contested terrain. 
               Historic and prehistoric remains play prominent roles in peoples'  attempts to
              define ethnic and national identities, at the same time  that looting, illegal
              trade, and site destruction are accelerating.   Archaeology is coming under
              closer public scrutiny and  archaeologists today are more concerned about
              ethical practice and  accountability.  There has been little research on the 
              archaeological enterprise, however.  Although archaeology can  promote cultural
              preservation and sustainable community  development, it can also fuel site
              destruction and contribute to  social conflict.  The overall problem this
              project addresses is the  ethical relationship between archaeologists and the
              communities  where they work, particularly in foreign cultural settings, and
              the  practical ramifications of this relationship in the forms of  looting,
              support for preservation, and public perceptions of the  past.  This project
              will survey and interview a broad sample of  archaeologists, finding out about
              their views about ethical  standards and behavior, and asking about the ways
              they have  conducted their own field research.  The survey will have three 
              sections:  one about practice, how do archaeologists conduct  themselves in the
              field in relation to host communities; the second  is an opinion survey aimed
              at eliciting archaeologists' perceptions  of minimal ethical behavior; and the
              third uses scenarios to  investigate the relationships between professional
              ethics and  broader social concerns for cultural integrity, autonomy, 
              hierarchy, and equality.  The survey is expected to sample 300 to  500
              archaeologists; telephone interviews with 50 will provide  further detailed
              information about cases involving ethical concerns  and conflicts.  Results
              will provide documentation of prevailing  attitudes and practices among
              archaeologists, and ask if current  ethical standards and safeguards are
              sufficient.  ***
