Title       : The Preservation and Accumulation of Biogenic Silica and Organic Carbon in an
               High-Latitude Environment: The Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1993       
File        : a9310165

Award Number: 9310165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Nittrouer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project is the renewal of a study of the rates of deposition,             
              seabed regeneration, and sediment accumulation of biogenic silica              
              and organic carbon in the Ross Sea, and is part of a coordinated               
              study of the biogenic silica and organic carbon cycling in the                 
              water column and the sediments of the Ross Sea.  The antarctic deep            
              sea and continental shelf environment is the major repository for              
              silica accumulation in the global ocean, and dominates the global              
              silica budget.  The Ross Sea is a particularly anomalous area in               
              which large amounts of biogenic silica are accumulating in modern              
              sediments, while the surface production rates are generally below              
              the global average.  Moreover the usual similarity between the                 
              oceanic silicon and carbon cycle does not appear to hold around                
              Antarctica, and the two cycles are decoupled in that the rate of               
              particulate carbon deposition in the modern sediment is very low.              
              The overall project is an integrated study of the production,                  
              vertical transport, dissolution, and deposition processes, using               
              moored instrumentation and direct observations in a series of                  
              transects in the Ross Sea by R/V POLAR DUKE, carried out between               
              1989 and 1991.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              In this project, box cores, piston cores, and kasten cores were                
              collected along specific transects in the Ross Sea that included               
              both silica-rich and silica-poor sediments.  Based on carbon-14                
              chronologies and seabed analyses of biogenic silica and organic                
              carbon content, three sites with accumulation rates differing by               
              several orders of magnitude have been identified.  At these sites              
              large differences in seabed preservation efficiency exist for both             
              biogenic silica and organic carbon.  This renewed effort will be               
              concerned with further analysis of data from the two cruises,                  
              including seabed regeneration rates, carbon-14 sediment                        
              chronologies, and horizontal transportation rates for biogenic                 
              material in the water column, and to integrate these results with              
              production and vertical transport studies being completed by other             
              cooperating investigators.
