Title       : Dissertation Research: Social Power and Domestic Labor in Yoro, Honduras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1993       
File        : a9310671

Award Number: 9310671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosemary A. Joyce   (Principal Investigator current)
              Julia A. Hendon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Drs. Rosemary Joyce and Julia Hendon, Mr                
              Christopher Fung will collect data for his doctoral dissertation.              
              He will conduct excavations at sites which  are located in the Yoro            
              region of Honduras and which date to late Classic and Terminal                 
              Classic times. It was during this period that Mayan and related                
              societies reached their height of cultural development. Mr. Fung               
              will select a series of mounds which probably represent domestic               
              compounds. He will strip large lateral areas to uncover artifacts              
              in spatial context and use these to reconstruct the organization of            
              activities within each. On this basis he will attempt to determine             
              the role of food preparation activities and the relative importance            
              of this in contexts which, on the basis of other evidence, appear              
              to represent elites and non-elites. He will then attempt to                    
              determine the role which food preparation played in the development            
              and maintenance of status differentiation and also determine the               
              degree to which these Honduran societies were internally                       
              differentiated. He will use ethnographic models as the basis for               
              such analysis and will compare the results to those obtained from              
              nearby Mayan sites.                                                            
                                                                                             
              Honduras is of great interest to archaeologists who study Middle               
              America because it marks a frontier between Mayan and non-Mayan                
              societies. While the outline of Mayan prehistory in Honduras is                
              well known, the nature of their non-Mayan neighbors is less well               
              understood. If in fact the non-Mayan counterparts do not exhibit               
              such a strong degree of social complexity, it provides a situation             
              in which archaeologists can examine interaction along a frontier               
              zone. The sites Mr. Fung will study are non-Mayan and his work                 
              should yield new insight both into their level of complexity and               
              the nature of their interaction with the Maya.                                 
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              data of interest to many archaeologists. By its focus on food                  
              preparation and examination of the broader context within which                
              this takes place, it will help to develop an approach which                    
              archaeologists may employ in many situations in many parts of the              
              world. The project will also assist in the training of a promising             
              young archaeologist.
