Title       : Laboratory Investigation of the Interaction of Filamentary Currents in Space
               Plasmas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9310159

Award Number: 9310159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49913              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans Pfister PFISTER@DICKINSON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dickinson College
	      
	      Carlisle, PA  17013    717/243-5121

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9310159  Pfister  Based on astronomical observations and the laws of physics it
              is a  well accepted fact that more than 99% of our universe is in the  plasma
              state, the fourth state of matter.  Furthermore, it is  believed that most of
              these plasmas carry electric currents.  In-  situ measurements of plasmas in
              the earth's ionosphere, cometary  tails, and planetary magnetospheres have
              confirmed these plasma  currents.  The recent discoveries of helical and
              filamentary plasma  structures in the galaxy and double-radio sources are
              indicative of  magnetic configurations which result from plasma currents. 
              Also,  the great majority of laboratory plasmas (e.g. fusion research 
              experiments such as Tokamaks, Reversed Field Pinches, Spheromaks,  etc.) are
              current-carrying plasma.  The frequent occurrence of  plasma currents and the
              fact that the interaction of two current  filaments is a basic plasma physics
              process warrants a thorough  investigation of this mechanism, because recent
              experiments show  that the physics of the merging of two plasma current
              channels is  not well understood.  However, a new theory has been proposed
              which  challenges and extends the existing magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) 
              description, and therefore deserves an experimental test.  This  proposal is a
              request for funds to do laboratory research at  Dickinson College to help
              clarify the physical processes occurring  during plasma current merging using a
              novel diagnostic method in a  new plasma chamber.  The technique of correlating
              the probe data of  localized magnetic and electric fields with the computer
              controlled  placement of the probe tip within the plasma volume will result in 
              a set of three-dimensional data that should be able to advance our  knowledge
              of current merging and also distinguish between  theoretical predicitions of
              MHD phenomena.    We plan to use our experimental vacuum chamber equipped with
              our nw  computer-controlled probe drive diagnostic and data acquisition  system
              to perform a detailed investigation of  plasma current  channel interaction. 
              The initial experiment will involve the  generation of a pulsed current that
              will interact with the fisex  axial current rod and the uniform external
              magnetic field.  We will  observe the complex interaction of the current in
              this field  configuration to learn how these simplified structures behave.  The
               next step will be to introduce two or more pulsed current beams  without any
              fixed current.  Finally, pulsed current beams will be  injected into a
              pre-existing magnetoplasma environment and we will  relate all these plasma
              current results to both MHD and the  Salingaros fiber theory.  With our new
              experimental apparatus, the  previously observed complexity of the interaction
              will be  controlled and then diagnosed in greater detail than heretofore 
              possible, a necessary condition for a better understanding of the  physics of
              this universal phenomena.  ***
