Title       : Atmospheric Science and Environmental Politics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1993 
File        : a9310892

Award Number: 9310892
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Edwards   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
              9310892  Edwards  A central focus for research about the interactions of
              science,  technology and social institutions concerns the roles of science  and
              social movements in shaping the conceptual construction, public  debate, and
              political resolution of social problems.  This  Professional Development
              Fellowship will provide an investigator  who specializes in this research area
              with a year of training and  research in atmospheric science, particularly
              climatology and  climate modeling.  It is designed to help him answer two
              questions:   how atmospheric scientists are shaping social response and 
              responsiveness to global environmental problems, and how,  reciprocally, the
              political debates around these problems are  shaping atmospheric science. The
              training program includes  coursework, tutorial instruction and literature
              review under the  guidance of host scientists.  Research plans include
              attending  conferences, undertaking laboratory visits and interviews, 
              observation of the appearances of atmospheric scientists before  public
              agencies and NGOs, and interviews with representatives of  these groups.  The
              investigator will also research and analyze  three important cases of
              scientific models influencing global  environmental policy debates:  (a) the
              1972 Limits to Growth study  of the Club of Rome, (b) the 1987 Montreal
              Protocol and its several  successor agreements, and (c) the 1992 UNCED Rio
              global  environmental summit.  The training and research provide the basis  for
              future comparative studies of other similar social phenomena.   Since this is a
              training grant, publications are not the primary  goal.  Nonetheless, the
              investigator plans to complete a number of  articles and possibly develop some
              joint publications with his  hosts.  ***
