Title       : Immigration Economic Restructuring and Internal Migration among U.S.
               Metropolitan Labor Markets, 1965-1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1993     
File        : a9310647

Award Number: 9310647
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Wright richard.wright@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310647  Barff       Little is known about how flows of immigrants to a 
              particular destination affect the decision to leave or the  destination choice
              of native migrants.  That is, are flows of  immigrants into the United States
              linked to internal flows of  population, and does this activity form part of a
              broader system  of interregional labor exchange?  If so, then the hypothesis
              that  population movements within a country are unaffected by immigrant 
              streams must be reassessed.  Additionally, previous research  measuring the
              effect of immigration on the welfare of natives in  impacted labor markets also
              requires reevaluation.  Failure to  recognize important linkages between
              immigration and internal  migration of natives may result in serious
              underestimation  of  the effects of immigration on the welfare of natives since
              many  immigration impacts be dissipated within the migration system.  This
              project will measure the stability of the native migratory  response to
              immigration over time by developing a series of  migration models for the
              United States between 1965 and 1990.  The models will test the linkage between
              immigrant flows and  internal migration streams by occupation for all
              metropolitan  areas.  The 21 largest metropolitan areas will be examined in 
              detail in order to illuminate the contextual subtleties of  immigrant and
              migrant impact on each city's employment structure  through time.  A series of
              econometric models of migration will  be estimated using public use microdata
              samples from the U.S.  Census of Population for the time period in question.   
                 In 1965, landmark legislation was passed which relaxed the  upper limits on
              the volume of immigration to the U.S.  Econometric research so far has
              uncovered no instance where an  increase in the supply of immigrants
              significantly and adversely  affected the earnings or employment opportunities
              of natives.  This research project extends the analysis of immigrant impacts 
              to the question of whether immigrants cause native workers  to  move to other
              locations and what affect this movement has on the  employment situation of
              both groups.  It involves finding out if  the migration response to immigration
              is even across space, which  will add important new knowledge about the spatial
              context of  immigration into the United States.  ***
