Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Analysis of Problems in Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1993 
File        : a9310733

Award Number: 9310733
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene C. Gartland gartland@math.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310733  Gartland       The investigator undertakes the mathematical and
              numerical  analysis of problems related to the science of liquid crystal 
              materials.  He continues interdisciplinary work with the Glenn H.  Brown Liquid
              Crystal Institute (LCI) at Kent State University.   The primary focus of the
              project is on three areas: (1) numerical  minimization of the Landau-deGennes
              free energy for liquid  crystals (which involves tensor order parameters,
              finite-element  analysis, large-sparse optimization, and numerical
              bifurcation),  (2) automatic code generation for the finite-element analysis 
              of problems in liquid crystals (using modern computer  science technology from
              the area of symbolic and numeric  computing), and (3) numerical analysis and
              modeling of the optics  of display devices (involving the solution of Maxwell's
              equations  in nonhomogeneous birefringent media).       The study of liquid
              crystals is an area of materials  science that is rapidly growing in
              importance, driven primarily  by commercial applications in the display
              industry: watch  or calculator displays, notebook computer screens, 
              high-definition flat-panel TV screens, etc.  The Liquid Crystal  Institute at
              Kent State has a strong international reputation.   It is the only
              academically-based institute devoted solely to  research on liquid crystals,
              and it is the locus of the NSF  Science and Technology Center on "Advanced
              Liquid Crystalline  Optical Materials" (ALCOM). The investigator's research
              project  contributes to this activity in an interdisciplinary environment 
              involving physics and chemistry in addition to mathematics and  computer
              science.  He performs numerical simulations on current  problems of interest to
              the theoreticians and experimentalists in  the LCI.  He brings to bear
              state-of-the-art techniques from  modern numerical analysis and scientific
              computing to complement  theory and experiment. Investigators in the LCI are at
              their  limits, using sophisticated experimental techniques, in probing  the
              stru cture of liquid crystals in the very small (submicron)  size containments
              in certain display technologies currently under  development.  Also, the
              numerical simulation of the optical  properties of complicated liquid crystal
              devices (of the types  mentioned above) is in a rather primitive state of
              development.   The project's numerical work plays an important role in these 
              areas.  ***
