Title       : Collaborative Research: JGOFS (Arabian Sea): Effects of the Oxygen Minimum Zone
               on Mesozooplankton Distributions and Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1996   
File        : a9310591

Award Number: 9310591
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen F. Wishner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1315,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9310591  Wisher           This research, part of the Joint Gobal Ocean Flux
              Study  (JGOFS) of the Arabian Sea, addresses the question of  whether the
              widespread suboxic conditions below the euphotic  zone in the Arabian Sea
              restrict carbon cycling by metazoans  primarily to regions above and below the
              oxygen minimum zone  and whether this results in elevated carbon concentrations
               (in the form of plankton biomass) at depth.  This project  has two foci: (1) 
              the measurement of mesozooplankton  distributions and size-fractionated biomass
              in vertical  strata to the deep sea, with particular attention to the  oxygen
              minimum zone and its upper and lower interfaces, and  (2)  examination of
              oxygen minimum zone effects on  zooplankton trophic relationships, including
              the potential  zooplankton-bacteria link.  Vertically stratified  zooplankton
              samples down to 3500 m will be taken during four  seasons with a MOCNESS
              plankton net system day and night at  the four intensive JGOFS stations and at
              intervals along  transects between the stations for the determination of 
              mesozooplankton distributions and size-fractionated biomass.  Gut contents of
              zooplankton will be analyzed by transmission  electron microscopy for
              determination of trophic webs.  The  potential bacteria-zooplankton link will
              be investigated  further with the use of molecular probes.  The upper and 
              lower interfaces of the oxygen minimum zone, which may be  locations of high
              zooplankton and particle abundances and  intense processing of organic
              material, will be specially  targetted for studies of distributions and food
              webs.  Low  mesozooplankton abundances within the oxygen minimum zone  may
              contribute to enhanced fluxes of organic materials to  the sea floor, because
              the utilization of particulate  material in midwater by these detritivores
              would be reduced.  High mesozooplankton abundances and a short food chain 
              (bacteria to zooplankton) at the oxygen minimum zone  interfaces would suggest
              intense processing of organic  material localiz ed within a narrow depth
              window, possibly  acting as a filter for sinking particles.  This work will 
              help elucidate how organic material may be altered during  passage through the
              water column to the sea floor.  It will  contribute to understanding how the
              seasonal monsoom cycle  of the Arabian Sea and resultant productivity peaks are
               coupled to carbon fluxes and deposition and may provide some  analogies for
              predicting effects of climate change.
