Title       : Engineering Research Equipment Grant: Three-Dimensional Video Animation and
               Imaging for Crystal Growth and Thin Film Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1993       
File        : a9310649

Award Number: 9310649
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce M. Kramer                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27970              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vishwanath Prasad vprasad@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310649 Prasad          The equipment will primarily be used for ongoing
              research on continuous Czochralski (CCZ) crystal growth of silicon single
              crystals and thin film formation for VLSI/ULSI circuit fabrication.  In
              addition, they may also help in conducting research on liquid encapsulated
              Czochralski growth of indium phosphide single crystals and in basic
              melting/solidification research.  Computational research and full scale
              experiments in an industrial crystal puller have demonstrated that the velocity
              and temperature fields of CCZ growth process are inherently three dimensional
              and oscillatory except under special circumstances.  To understand the physical
              phenomena underlying the CCZ melt flow and melting of solid pellets when
              dropped in a rotating pool of melt, and to examine the effect of process
              parameters on growth conditions, three dimensional visualization and imaging of
              field variables is necessary.  The proposed video photography and image
              processing equipment, with the help of appropriate software, can perform this
              task on existing SUN workstations.  The video animation of growth processes
              produced from the computational results, can be used for a theoretical study of
              the effect of governing parameters as well as for designing new laboratory and
              industrial experiments.  The expanded scope of this research will help in
              faster development of this CCZ technique for commercial applications.         
              If the crystal growth process can be understood better, it may be possible to
              grow more perfect crystals at faster rates, resulting in better devices at
              lower cost.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
