Title       : Silicon Mediated Syntheses of Fluorophosphazenes and Other Fluorinated Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1994   
File        : a9310389

Award Number: 9310389
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean'ne M. Shreeve jshreeve@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Kirchmeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9310389  Shreeve  Professors Shreeve and Kirchmeier of the University of Idaho 
              will investigate the synthesis of fluorophosphazenes with  support from the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic  Chemistry Program.  Although
              synthetic phosphazene chemistry  has been a fertile area of research for many
              years, the  fluorophosphazenes have been relatively untouched.  Shreeve and 
              Kirchmeier will prepare cyclophosphazenes as well as  polyphosphazenes with
              fluorine atoms attached both to the  skeletal atoms as well as to substituent
              groups such as  fluoroalkoxides, fluorophenoxides, and fluoroalkyls.  Many of 
              the syntheses will take advantage of fluoro-organosilanes as  reagents to
              introduce the fluoro-groups into the phosphazenes.  It is anticipated that the
              phosphazenes, already a promising  class of compounds, will display improved
              properties in their  fluorinated forms.  %%%  There is a class of inorganic
              compounds, called the  phosphazenes, which are similar to organic compounds in
              the  sense that they are constructed around a skeleton of linked  atoms;
              however, instead of carbon atoms the skeleton is made  of alternating
              phosphorus and nitrogen atoms.  Phosphazenes can  be prepared both as discrete
              molecules and as polymers, and  they are finding certain commercial
              applications.  Just as  Teflon is related to simple organic compounds through
              the  replacement of hydrogen with fluorine atoms, in the present  research
              project a series of fluorine-substituted phosphazenes  will be prepared.  The
              basic chemistry of these compounds will  be explored, but it is anticipated
              that they will display  improved properties relative to their unfluorinated
              relatives.  ***
