Title       : Geological and Seismic Study of the Pakistan Himalayas, Visit of Two Pakistani
               Scientists for Collaborative Researchat New Mexico State University and Oregon
               State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9310376

Award Number: 9310376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13490              (Estimated)
Investigator: James Ni jni@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5943,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Description:  This project supports                                            
              collaboration by two scientists from Pakistan                                  
              with scientists from several U.S. universities                                 
              in investigating the crustal/mantle structure                                  
              and kinematics of deformation of Pakistan                                      
              Himalayas, and to relate deep structures to                                    
              geological features at the surface.  The two                                   
              Pakistani scientists are Dr. R.A. Tahirkheli of                                
              the University of Peshawar, and Mr. S.R.                                       
              Poonegar of the Department of Water and Power                                  
              in Pakistan.  They plan to visit Drs. R.                                       
              Lillie, R. Lawrence, and R. Yeats at Oregon                                    
              State University; Dr. Gary Johnson at Dartmouth                                
              College, as well as other scientists at the                                    
              University of Southern California and the                                      
              University of Nebraska.  During these visits,                                  
              the scientists will work to finalize a regional                                
              geological map of the northwestern sector of                                   
              the Indo-Kohistan and Eurasian Plates in                                       
              Pakistan.  A map at 1:1,000,000 scale is                                       
              currently not available for Northwest Pakistan                                 
              where three mountain ranges of the world, the                                  
              Himalayas, Karakorum, and Hindu Kush, meet.                                    
              U.S. scientists have contributed to exploring                                  
              this remote region in the areas of                                             
              sedimentology, stratigraphy, structure,                                        
              tectonics, seismotectonics, paleomagnetism,                                    
              radiometric dating, and fission track dating.                                  
              It is desired that information incorporated                                    
              into the regional geological map be checked and                                
              be correct.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Scope:  This project supports an important                                     
              visit by two key scientists from Pakistan who                                  
              can contribute greatly to the accuracy of a                                    
              proposed publication that will be of wide                                      
              scientific use.  The visit will help increase                                  
              collaboration between scientists of the U.S.                                   
              and Pakistan, and also help with opening                                       
              avenues to research in the area of global                                      
              seismic network.
