Title       : SGER: Molecular Identification of 106-kDa Ca2+ Release Channel Protein from SR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1993      
File        : a9310078

Award Number: 9310078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy Salama   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Excitation-contraction coupling (E-C coupling) is a fundamental                
              mechanism responsible for the initiation and control of force in               
              striated muscle.  The current hypothesis is that 2 calcium channels            
              are required in this process.  1) Voltage-gated calcium channels,              
              dihydropyridine receptors (DHP-Rs) at T-tubule membranes that act              
              as voltage sensors, and 2) 565-kDa junctional foot proteins (JFPs)             
              or ryanodine receptors that act as calcium release channels on the             
              sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR).  Despite intense work on E-C coupling             
              and SR calcium release, the molecular mechanism(s) linking DHP-Rs              
              to JFPs remain unknown.  This laboratory has accumulated evidence              
              on a low molecular weight calcium release channel protein in SR                
              that has been overlooked and may provide a key component of E-C                
              coupling.  This channel has been studied by a combination of                   
              biophysical, biochemical, and immunological techniques and has been            
              named the "sulfhydryl-gated 106-Kda calcium release channel" (SG-              
              106).  This goal of this research is to obtain cDNA clones                     
              corresponding to the 106-Kda release channel protein, sequence the             
              complete CDNA and determine the relationship to other, previously              
              characterized channel proteins.  Mouse monoclonal and chicken                  
              polyclonal antibodies will be raised against the 106-Kda protein               
              isolated from rabbit skeletal muscle.  Antibodies will be selected             
              for their reaction with the 106-Kda on Western blots and will be               
              used to isolate pure 106-Kda and screen cDNA libraries from rabbit             
              white skeletal muscle.  The immuno-purified 106-kDa protein will be            
              cleaved and the fragments used to obtain partial amino acid                    
              sequences.  This study will establish whether the 106-kDa protein              
              is a new protein or a fragment of JFPs.  Reconstitution of the 106-            
              kDa protein in planar bilayers exhibits the single channel                     
              properties of native calcium release channels and thus this protein            
              will be of great interest whether or not it is a fragment of the               
              JFP because it would be readily expressed to study structure-                  
              function relationships.                                                        
              %%%                                                                            
              Excitation-contraction coupling is a fundamental mechanism                     
              responsible for the initiation and control of force in striated                
              muscle.  The current hypothesis is that two calcium channels are               
              required for calcium release from an intracellular store in this               
              process. Despite intense work on excitation-contraction coupling               
              the molecular mechanism(s) linking the two calcium channels and how            
              they trigger calcium release remain unknown.  This laboratory has              
              obtained evidence that a low molecular weight calcium release                  
              channel may also be involved in excitation-contraction coupling.               
              This that has been overlooked by others may provide a key component            
              of the excitation-contraction coupling mechanism.  The goal of this            
              research is to isolate and determine the sequence of the gene for              
              this protein.  This will provide critical information about its                
              structure and possible relationships to other, known channel                   
              proteins and will contribute to understanding of its possible role             
              in excitation-contraction coupling.
