Title       : Mechanisms of Analogical Reminding and Priming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  1993 
File        : a9310614

Award Number: 9310614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith J. Holyoak holyoak@lifesci.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310614  HOLYOAK    This research will investigate the role of analogical
              similarity in  guiding retrieval of previous experiences stored in memory.  
              Analogical similarity depends on overlap in the underlying  structure of
              situations, such as a common theme shared by two  stories or a common goal
              structure underlying two different  problems.  Such "deep" similarities can be
              distinguished from more  superficial types of overlap, such as similar
              characters and events  in stories or similar objects involved in problems. 
              Previous  research has shown that access to memories is strongly influenced  by
              such surface similarities, but has generally failed to find  evidence that
              deeper types of similarity can allow one situation to  trigger reminding of
              another.  This project will use a variety of  more sensitive measures to
              determine whether and when human memory  is guided by deep as well as
              superficial similarities between  complex situations.    The influences of
              different types of similarity will be  investigated by experiments in which
              college students process a  series of stories in a context that does not make
              it apparent that  a memory test will follow.  After a delay ranging from a few 
              minutes to a week, the subjects will be cued with other stories  that differ in
              their similarity relations to the target stories in  memory.  In some cases a
              cue will be related to multiple target  stories in memory.  It is expected that
               the retrieval competition  triggered by having multiple related targets in
              memory (a situation  more in keeping with everyday experience that is the
              paradigm used  in previous studies) will greatly improve the sensitivity of 
              reminding to analogical similarity.  Other experiments will use  more indirect
              measures to determine which types of similarity  influence the way in which
              information is processed spontaneously.   These studies will determine whether
              reading a story that is  similar at a deep level, a surface level, or both,
              will render a  subsequent story more comprehens ible, or decrease the time
              required  to read and understand it.    These experiments will provide
              knowledge important for several  related topics.  Few current models of memory
              retrieval can account  for an influence of deep similarity on reminding.  If
              the project  reveals that analogical similarity indeed influences memory
              access,  this evidence would place important constraints on any adequate 
              theory of the way complex knowledge is represented in and accessed  from human
              memory.  The results will also provide guidance for  efforts to devise more
              psychologically realistic computer-based  models of memory retrieval.  In
              addition, sensitivity to analogical  similarity can provide a basis for
              flexible learning and transfer  in problem solving.  The results are therefore
              likely to have  important implications for training and education.    ***
