Title       : Laboratory Studies of Heterogeneous Gas-Liquid Interaction of Atmospheric Trace
               Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1995     
File        : a9310407

Award Number: 9310407
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $457104             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Davidovits paul.davidovits@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              93100470  Davidovits       Heterogeneous reaction pathways involving aqueous
              droplets in  clouds and fogs are important conduits for chemical transformation
               of atmospheric trace gases both in the troposphere and in the  stratosphere. 
              During the past eight years in a collaborative  effort between the Chemistry
              Department at Boston College and the  Center for Chemical and Environmental
              Physics at Aerodyne Research,  Inc., supported in part by the National Science
              Foundation, two  novel and powerful techniques have been developed for studying
              gas  uptake processes and for measuring mass accommodation coefficients  of
              trace atmospheric species on water and other liquids.  These  techniques can
              also yield information about the nature of chemical  interactions at the
              gas-liquid interface.       In the first method, suitable for measuring
              relatively large  gas uptakes, the gas phase species interacts with a
              controllable  stream of small (50 to 250 um radius) monodispered droplets of 
              known size, temperature and chemical composition.  A version of  this apparatus
              using sulfuric acid droplets has also been built to  study stratospherically
              important processes down to a temperature  of -50oC.  In the second method,
              used to study gases with  relatively smaller uptakes, the trace gas is
              contained in  controlled bubbles rising through the liquid of interest.      
              During the past two NSF support periods the uptake of more  than thirty gas
              phase species has been studied as a function of  temperature over a wide range
              of atmospherically relevant  conditions.  The species studied include SO2 and
              reduced sulfur  compounds, H2O2, N2O5, HNO3, HCl, ClNO3 and N2O5 the uptake by 
              aqueous sulfuric acid droplets was also measured as a function of  temperature
              down to -50oC.       This work provided values for the parameters determining 
              uptake for both tropospherically and stratospherically important  species and
              it led to the formation of a quantitative model for the  uptake of nonreactive
              gases.  Further, important  features of  chemical interactions at the
              gas-liquid interface were noted.  In  some cases, such as formaldehyde and
              phosgene, the uptake was  entirely consistent with the bulk aqueous chemistry
              of the species.  But in other cases, such as the uptake of sulfur dioxide and 
              acetaldehyde, results were not explainable by bulk phase chemistry.  Instead,
              these results indicate that reactions at the gas-liquid  interface dominate the
              gas or the liquid phase.  Reactions may be  orders of magnitude faster at the
              interface than either in the gas  or in the liquid phases.  It was also
              observed, that in the process  of uptake, some species such as SO2, form a
              chemisorbed complex at  the gas-liquid interface which is likely to participate
              in the  heterogeneous chemistry of the species.       The work plan in this
              grant will continue to pursue the study  of atmospherically important
              heterogeneous processes.  The research  will include gas uptake and
              co-deposition studies for NO, NO2, NO3,  N2O5, HNO3, HONO, NH3, SO2, CH2O and
              OH.  Experiments will be  constructed as a function of temperature with aqueous
              solutions,  with sulfuric acid and with nitrosyl sulfuric acid solutions.  The 
              effect on heterogeneous processes of photochemistry, surface charge  and
              various atmospherically relevant additives will be examined.         The two
              major objectives of the research studies are:           a)   To continue the
              measurement of parameters required to            assess the heterogeneous
              chemistry of species important            to troposphere an stratosphere.      
                b)   To obtain a general, predictive understanding of            chemistry at
              the gas-liquid interface.
