Title       : Coordination of Distributed Information and Decisions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9310670

Award Number: 9310670
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Les Gasser                              
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas M. Kiefer BDMJ@Cornella  (Principal Investigator current)
              Toby Berger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recognition of the importance of multiagent coordination has  mounted over
              recent years, to the degree that it has now assumed a  genuine sense of
              urgency.  In the engineering literature, attempts  have been made to address
              this issue in areas as varied as  multiuser information theory, the theory of
              distributed estimation  and detection, and decentralized control.  Economists
              have also had  a long standing concern with these issues.  Coordination of 
              distributed means, desires and information using market mechanisms  is a
              central area of economic research.  Computer scientists  working on distributed
              computing also have begun to address  coordination issues over the past decade.
               A glance at any popular  science magazine will reveal the increasingly
              distributed nature of  information in today's world and the timeliness of
              addressing this  trend intelligently.  In particular, it is of considerable 
              importance to combine ideas form such diverse areas as engineering,  economics
              and computational sciences, and fashion them into a  coherent theory of
              coordination.      The proposed work on multiagent coordination theory can be
              roughly  classified as (i) establishing fundamental bounds on the costs of 
              enabling coordination, (ii) understanding the optimal mechanisms of 
              coordination, and (iii) investigation aggregation methods for  situations where
              large numbers of agents are involved in the  coordination task.
