Title       : Angiotensin II-Induced Water Absorption Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1994      
File        : a9310352

Award Number: 9310352
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine R. Propper Catherine.Propper@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310352  Propper    Angiotensin II is a peptide antidiuretic hormone involved in
               maintaining water balance by acting both on peripheral targets to  enhance
              water uptake across tissues and on the central nervous  system to induce
              drinking behavior.  Since water is essential for  survival, understanding how
              this hormone enhances water-absorption  is of utmost importance.  The
              mechanism, however, by which  angiotensin II acts in the brain is not well
              understood.  While  most vertebrates have a regular and predictable water
              supply,  desert animals live in harsh conditions in which survival is 
              dependent upon the ability to find, obtain and conserve water.   These species
              have evolved mechanisms of water retention which  allows them to survive under
              these uncharitable conditions.  Dr.  Propper has selected two species that
              differ in genetic background  but live within the same austere environment. 
              She will employ a  combination of behavioral, neuroanatomical and endocrine
              techniques  to determine the underlying mechanisms of Angiotensin 11 action.   
              Dr. Propper will determine whether centrally administering this  peptide
              induces water absorption behavior, and whether the behavior  is blocked by
              antagonists to the receptor.  Moreover, Dr. Propper  will localize and
              characterize these angiotensin II receptors in  the brain.  Finally, she will
              determine the effects that  dehydration has on central and peripheral receptor
              concentrations  and correlate these changes with behavior in the natural 
              environment.  The results from this integrative work will provide  new insights
              into the neural mechanisms underlying angiotensin  action.  Furthermore, since
              Dr. Propper is comparing species that  differ in their genetic background, she
              will discover whether  similar neuroendocrine mechanisms are employed to manage
              water  balance in vertebrates in general.  These findings may lead to a  better
              understanding of how the neuroendocrine basis of adaptive  behavior has
              evolved.   ***
