Title       : Classicism, Constructivism, and Scientific Indispensability Arguments in
               Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9310667

Award Number: 9310667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey P. Hellman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310667  Hellman  How much of the apparatus of modern mathematics is really
              needed  for its applications in contemporary science, especially physics?  
              Could some smaller subset of contemporary mathematics (some of  these
              alternatives are finitism, constructivism, intuitionism, or  predicativism). 
              This is the central question which Professor  Hellman is addressing.  He is
              further developing and extending his  ongoing work on the question of the
              scientific indispensability of  classical infinitistic (i.e.
              "non-constructive") mathematics and on  the question of the significance of
              such indispensability for the  philosophy of mathematics.  The first part of
              his project focuses  on constructivist programs, one of the groups of
              alternatives to  classical mathematics, and their capacity to recover
              empirically  significant portions of mathematics employed in the physical 
              sciences that appear to pose special challenges, especially the  calculus of
              variations and the singularity theorems (Hawking and  Penrose) of space-time
              physics.  The second part concerns  philosophically interesting intermediary
              systems falling "between"  (in special senses) constructivist and full
              classical systems,  especially the quasi-constructivism known as predicativism 
              (originating with Poincare and Weyl) and certain nominalistic  systems.  He is
              examining both scientific and mathematical-  philosophical challenges to
              predicativism  with the aim of  assessing predicativism's viability as a
              foundational framework for  mathematics.   Finally, in the third part of his
              study,  Professor  Hellman is beginning to assess the overall scope and force
              of  "indispensability" arguments (as justification for abstract  mathematics)
              in light of results of his earlier work and also in  light of recent challenges
              to the effectiveness and cogency of such  arguments.  ***
