Title       : Dissertation Research: Contested Terrain: Gender and Labor Dynamics in
               Horticultural Contracting, Meru, Kenya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1993  
File        : a9310537

Award Number: 9310537
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond B. Hames                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5042               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter D. Little   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0312000   Population                              
              0314000   Rural Development                       
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Little/Dolan  9310537    The recent and widespread growth of contract farming in
              East Africa has the potential to fundamentally alter the division of labor and
              power relations between men and women.  This project will examine how the
              institution and expansion of horticultural contracting is changing gender
              relations in Meru District, Kenya.  Because gender relations are redefined in
              the face of shifting economic relations, the delineation of power relations and
              social divisions based on the traditional household is key to an analysis of
              contract farming.  In some areas the participation of women in contract farming
              has provoked intra-household struggles over labor rights and resource
              allocation.  While a small number of contracting schemes in Kenya have been
              intensively researched there are virtually localized analyses that examine
              contract production from either a household or gender perspective.  Moreover,
              although research on the connection between gender-based crop and property
              rights has been extensive in West Africa, it is largely absent in East Africa. 
              This gap provides a fertile opportunity for an in-depth local study on the
              interface of gender relations and contract production in Kenya that will
              provide valuable data for comparative studies of agrarian change in Africa.   
              This project will synthesized various methods of inquiry-feminist anthropology,
              political economy and practice theory - to integrate symbolic and materialist
              approaches to social change.  Significant questions to be addressed include: 1)
              how do socioeconomic conditions enable or constrain indigenous gender
              relations?  2) To whom are the ben efits of contract farming accruing?  3) Is
              there a change in the sexual division of labor of subcontracting?  4) How are
              customary social practices manipulated or recast in the context of contract
              farming?  5) How do indigenous gender ideologies affect the reproduction of
              contract farming as both a social institution and a means of capital
              accumulation?  ***     s( t( gh their RTG's.   I assume you already know of the
              regular NSF Graduate Fellowship program that supports graduate study in all
              sciences as well as history and     Z   a                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      S   X   Z                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               !             
                       !                f     ?                             Z                
                      a         Z     L    Times New Roman    Symbol  & Arial  & Lucida Sans 
                Bookman Old Style       z   z     | | z       c   "             h     )   @  
                                      g    little dolan abstract abstract  thesis abstract
              little dolan  Raymond Hames Raymond Hames                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
