Title       : CAA: Phonological and Phonetic Investigation of Syllable Weight Distinctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1994     
File        : a9310058

Award Number: 9310058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul G. Chapin                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Broselow ellen.broselow@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              9310058  Broselow      Research on the sound structure of human language has
              generally  proceeded from two directions.  Phoneticians have traditionally 
              focused on creating abstract models of the mental representation of  sound
              structure, with the ultimate goal of discovering universal  constraints
              underlying the surface diversity of human language.   With the increasing
              availability of sophisticated technology for  speech analysis, these two
              strands of research have begun to  converge, with the beneficial result that
              abstract phonological  models can be tested against precise descriptions of
              sound  properties.  This project will investigate one candidate for a 
              universal constraint on linguistic structure from both a  phonological and a
              phonetic perspective; the goal is to compare the  abstract representations
              motivated by phonological analysis against  the phonetic properties revealed by
              instrumental analysis.    The particular structures to be investigated are
              syllables of  different types.  It has long been recognized that syllables are 
              one of the basic structural units of human language, and that  syllable weight
              (the length of a syllable's vowel and the number of  consonants following that
              vowel) plays a fundamental role in many  grammatical processes, such as the
              positioning of stress and  accent.  One currently controversial issue concerns
              the number of  distinctions in syllable weight to which languages make
              reference:  while most languages seem to distinguish only two degrees of 
              syllable weight, a few languages have been argued to require  additional
              distinctions.  The question of whether syllable weight  distinctions are
              maximally binary reflects a more fundamental  issue:  since it has been
              proposed that no linguistic process  requires reference to more than a binary
              distinction, limiting  syllable weight distinctions to binary would be
              consistent with a  significant constraint on possible variations across human 
              languages.  One approach to maintaining the claim that syllable  wei ght
              distinctions are maximally binary involves the postulation  of particular
              phonological representations for syllables that  reduce all syllables to one of
              two categories:  light vs. heavy.   The project involves both detailed analysis
              of the phonological  evidence for these abstract representations of syllable
              weight, and  testing of the predictions made by these representations against 
              the instrumental data available from phonetic analysis.  ***
