Title       : Dissertation Research: Architectural Patterns and Political Organization in the
               Prehistoric Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9310503

Award Number: 9310503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4363               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary P. Metcalf  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Stephen Plog, Ms. Mary Metcalf will                 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will visit a                   
              number of archaeological repositories in the United States and                 
              study the notes and drawings of archaeologists who excavated                   
              prehistoric Anasazi sites in the U.S. Southwest. The goal of this              
              work is to understand the political and social organization of                 
              these prehistoric peoples and the extent to which their society                
              was organized along egalitarian or hierarchical lines. To do                   
              this, Ms. Metcalf will work primarily with site plans and                      
              descriptions of site architecture. She will calculate the areal                
              extent and number of buildings devoted to public as opposed to                 
              family activities. She will also look at methods of construction               
              and amount of labor which were devoted to each. Finally she will               
              examine the location of public areas to determine the extent                   
              their access was restricted. A large number of sites covering                  
              three geographical areas and spanning several hundred years will               
              be examined and by means of comparison Ms. Metcalf will determine              
              how political organization changed over time.                                  
                                                                                             
              Without writing and with a relatively simple technology the                    
              prehistoric Anasazi peoples of the U.S. Southwest constructed                  
              large multistory stone and adobe structures consisting of                      
              hundreds of rooms. Their society integrated thousands of peoples               
              and constructed roads to move goods over long distances. They                  
              accomplished this in arid and unpredictable environmental                      
              conditions. Archaeologists wish to understand the political and                
              social system which made this achievement possible. To date they               
              do not know the extent to which centralized political                          
              organization existed. While some reseachers believe that this                  
              level of development can take place in a relatively "egalitarian"              
              context, others believe that accomplishments of this kind are not              
              possible in such a situation. Ms. Metcalf's research should help               
              to answer this question.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of how complex societies arise. It will provide              
              data of interest to many archaeologists and shed new light on one              
              of the highpoints of Native American culture. It will also assist              
              in the training of a promising young scientist.
