Title       : An Evaluation of the Desirability of Evidentiary Procedures for Identifying
               Carcinogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9310795

Award Number: 9310795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77927              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl F. Cranor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 9187,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9310795  Cranor  This study will examine scientific and ethical parameters in 
              decision procedures for identifying carcinogens.  It involves   philosophic and
              scientific examination of the desirability of  various carcinogen
              identification procedures.  The focus of the  project is on substances that
              have been introduced into commerce as  products or into the environment as
              by-products of production  without having been subjected to extensive toxicity
              testing, where  a governmental burden of proof must be satisfied before they
              could  be removed from commerce.  The desirability of imperfect  institutional
              procedures for identifying carcinogens is a complex  function of their
              accuracy, their rate, their costs, and the social  costs of evidentiary
              mistakes.  The philosophical research in the  project will assess the social
              costs of mistakes and their relative  importance and develop a philosophic
              rationale and a model to  assess the desirability of different procedures.  The
              investigation  will consider ways to vary relevant parameters so as to 
              contextualize the ethical questions.  For instance, costs of  mistakes may be a
              function of size of exposed population, its age,  or whether it can consent to
              the risk.  Costs may include social as  well as biological costs, factors such
              as perceptions of risk and  social distrust.  Scientific research, augmenting
              the  philosophical, will evaluate the accuracy, rate, and costs of the 
              identification procedures, and will be incorporated into the  overall
              evaluation and model.  It will use identified carcinogens  as a reference
              class, comparing standard hazard identification  procedures with alternatives
              that are being currently used,  developed, or considered.  Results from the
              research will be  published in journals and reported at conferences and
              professional  meetings.  ***
