Title       : Impersonal Influence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  1993    
File        : a9310039

Award Number: 9310039
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana C. Mutz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310039  Mutz    An important force in contemporary political life involves what
              may  be termed "impersonal influence," that is influence that derives  from
              people's perceptions of others attitudes, beliefs, or  experiences.  Others in
              this case refers not to close friends and  acquaintances, but rather to the
              anonymous others outside an  individual's realm of personal contacts.  For
              example, when the  outcomes of early presidential primaries affect attitudes
              toward  candidates in later primaries, or when the results of national  opinion
              polls influence subsequent political behavior, impersonal  influence is taking
              place.  Likewise, when people vote on the basis  of their perceptions of how
              the nation as a whole is faring  economically rather than on their own personal
              economic fortunes,  they are also being influenced by perceptions of impersonal
              others.    Influences are deemed impersonal in two respects:  they are 
              mediated and do not involve face-to-face interpersonal  communication, and they
              involve information about the attitudes,  beliefs and experiences of
              collectives outside of an individual's  personal lifespace.  Mass media play a
              crucial role in constructing  people's images of the larger social world
              outside the realm of  personal experiences and contacts.  These perceptions, in
              turn,  have important consequences for the political behavior of elites  and
              mass publics.    To date, the concern with social influence has been
              investigated  most thoroughly at the level of personal acquaintances and group 
              influence.  Nonetheless, a variety of contemporary theories and  research
              findings point to impersonal others as an important  influence on political
              attitudes and behavior.  In this  investigation, the researchers employ a
              hybrid methodology  involving experiments embedded within national opinion
              surveys.   This project will explore the social psychology of impersonal 
              influence in an attempt to understand when and why people are  influenced by
              their perceptions of mass opinion or expe rience.    Findings from this
              research will shed light on mass media's role in  contemporary political
              processes.  Although the potential for  impersonal influence is clear in a wide
              variety of contemporary  political situations, the extent of its influence and
              normative  implications are not.  In order to understand fully the 
              implications of these processes for American politics, it is  essential to
              understand the actual mechanisms by which impersonal  influence occurs.  ***
