Title       : Intrapersonal and Interpersonal Moderators of Cognitive Appraisal and
               Cardiovascular Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9310202

Award Number: 9310202
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leslie Zebrowitz                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141517             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Blascovich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                          ABSTRACT                                            
                                                                                            
              The precipitation of arousal as well as its maintenance, reduction,            
              and enhancement are the focus of arousal regulation theories in the            
              fields of personality, social psychology, and psychophysiology.                
              Arousal regulation theories in these fields have advanced markedly             
              over the last three decades reflecting increased theoretical and               
              methodological sophistication. Yet, these advances have occurred               
              relatively independently. Because arousal regulation processes are             
              multiply determined, integration of diverse theories and methods               
              should advance understanding of arousal regulation processes                   
              substantially.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This research will examine the viability of the biopsychosocial                
              (BPS) arousal regulation model. The BPS model is applicable to a               
              broad range of arousal-based psychological phenomena and behaviors.            
              Recent BPS research has demonstrated consistently that cognitive               
              appraisal of potentially evocative situations mediates                         
              physiological responses such that challenge appraisals result in               
              increased myocardial reactivity and threat appraisals in increased             
              vascular reactivity. These data represent the first demonstration              
              of the fractionation of cardiovascular responses as a function of              
              categorically different appraisals of an active coping task. This              
              research will help disentangle apparently conflicting literatures              
              linking cardiovascular reactivity to both performance increments               
              and increased risk for heart disease. The experimental tests of the            
              BPS model proposed are based on theoretical and empirical  work                
              from diverse areas including affect, self-esteem, and mere                     
              presence. A series of five experiments employing both self-report              
              and physiological measures will examine intrapersonal and                      
              interpersonal variable moderating cognitive appraisal and autonomic            
              reactivity as specified in the BPS model.                                      
                                                                                             
              The results of this research will not only have important                      
              implications for the BPS model but also for theory and research in             
              the domains of the moderating variables (e.g., affect and self-                
              esteem) themselves. In addition, the results of the research will              
              have direct implications for cardiovascular and mental health.
