Title       : Instruments and Methods for Determining the Role of Charge in Macromolecular
               Structure and Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9314040

Award Number: 9314040
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1994     
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1301546            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Laue Tom.Laue@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9314040  Laue  Previous NSF support of this lab has resulted in the  development
              of devices uniquely capable of measuring  macromolecular charge directly in
              solution and has helped  lead the world in the modernization of the analytical 
              ultracentrifuge. The work outlined here will combine and  expand these previous
              efforts to provide the experimental  means to examine the role of electrostatic
              charge in the  energetics dictating rnacromolecular structures and 
              interactions. Correlations will be made between measured  charge and molecular
              structures, yielding direct  experimental assessments of: 1) the contribution
              of charge  to the stability of the native state of proteins, 2) the  change in
              charge that accompanies structural changes in  proteins and nucleic acids and
              3) the charge contribution to  the energetics of rnacromolecular associations.
              To  accomplish these goals, new instrumentation and  methodologies for
              analytical ultracentrifugation and  equilibrium electrophoresis are needed. New
              instrumentation  resulting from this proposal will include: 1) the  development
              of fluorescence detection for the XLA analytical  ultracentrifuge, 2)
              equilibrium electrophoresis devices with  greater accuracy, that require less
              the time to reach  equilibrium and need less sample, 3) fluorescence detection 
              capabilities for equilibrium electrophoresis devices, and 4)  a new means of
              determining and regulating small electric  fields in a conducting fluid.
              Improved rnethods for  examining rnacromolecular associations will include: 1)
              on-  line determination of extinction coefficients and  fluorescence quantum
              yields to improve the deconvolution of  spectra, 2) the use of
              biologically-produced spectrally-  enhanced protein for the analysis of
              complicated equilibria,  3) combining fluorescence, absorbance and refractive
              data to  increase the concentration range studied and 4) combining  results
              from fluorescence depolarization and sedimentation  velocity to better define
              molecular shapes. Test systems for  thes e developrnents will be provided by
              on-going  collaborations involving: 1) the change in charge associated  with
              urea denaturation of proteins, 2) the role of charge in  protein-protein and
              protein-nucleic acid interactions  relating to gene regulation, 3) associations
              involving  proteins important to blood coagulation, 4)macromolecular 
              interactions important to proteoglycan structure and  assembly, and 5) the
              change in charge as supercoiled DNA is  first relaxed, then linearized. For the
              first category,  charge mutants of T4 lysozyme and "leucine zipper" peptides 
              will be used. For both, good native-state structures are  available, and the
              denatured state is presumed to be a  random coil. In the second category, we
              have used 5-OH-  tryptophan-spectrally-enhanced  cI repressor to detail the 
              linkage between protein self association and DNA binding.  Similar studies with
              the more complicated CytR-CRP system  are being initiated. Fluorescence
              detection is needed to  characterize the tight binding events in these systems.
              In  the third category, long-standing projects involving the  structures and
              interactions of various blood coagulation  complexes will continue. Specific
              fluorescent labeling of  many of these proteins is possible, so that the
              increased  sensitivity and selectivity afforded by fluorescence optics,  will
              allow the examination of both higher affinity and more  complicated
              interactions. In the fourth category, work will  continue on gathering basic
              information concerning  proteoglycan assembly and their interactions with
              peptide  hormones. In the last  category, the charge on plamid dsDNA  will be
              measured when the molecule is in supercoiled,  relaxed and open forms, and
              correlated with hydrodynamic  shape and size. Knowledge of the charge in each
              of these  categories has scientific importance beyond the  instrumentation
              development. Likewise, each test system  serves as a paradigm for how the
              instruments and methods  developed in this proposal can be applied to other,
              similar  prob lems. Funds are sought for the equipment, supplies and  technical
              personnel needed to: 1) develop fluorescence  detection capabilities on the XLA
              analytical  ultracentrifuge, 2) refurbish/replace a circular dichroism 
              instrument, 3) continue the development and optimization of  equilibrium
              electrophoresis equipment and 4) continue  ongoing collaborative experiments on
              equilibrium  electrophoresis and the analysis of heteroassociating  systems by
              sedimentation and equilibrium electrophoresis.
