Title       : Effect of Interface Structure on Transport Properties of Metallic Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9314018

Award Number: 9314018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David V. Baxter baxterd@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9314018  Baxter  This project will study the effects of interfacial structure on
               electron transport in a variety of metallic multilayers.  Multilayered
              materials with varying degrees of interfacial order  will be prepared using
              both UHV electron beam evaporation and  magnetron sputtering.  The effect of
              structural changes on  interface sensitive transport properties such as the
              anisotropy  of the electron diffusion constant in non-magnetic multilayers  and
              the Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR) effect in magnetic systems  will be studied. 
              Controlled changes in the structure of the  interface will be made by combining
              thermal annealing with in-  situ X-ray diffraction studies, and such changes
              will be  correlated with associated changes in the transport properties.  This
              project involves a collaboration between researchers at  Indiana University and
              the General Motors Research and  Development Center.  %%%  The behavior of
              electrons at interfaces between two different  materials plays an important
              role in technologies such as  integrated circuits, magnetic recording, and
              sensors.  Modern  technology makes possible the production of thin films in
              which  the atomic composition alternates periodically few atomic layers, 
              thereby providing an ideal laboratory for studying the electronic  properties
              of interfaces.  The large concentration of interfaces  in such "multilayered
              materials" can cause their properties to be  quite different from those of the
              corresponding bulk materials.  An example of this can be seen in the recently
              discovered Giant  Magnetoresistance effect which holds great promise for the 
              development of new magnetic sensor materials.  Future development  of such
              materials will require detailed understanding of how  their electronic
              properties depend on the atomic structure of the  interfaces between the
              individual layers.  This project, which  combines research at Indiana
              University and the General Motors  Research and Development Center, is
              dedicated to the study of  this fundamental an d technologically important
              question.  ***
