Title       : A Workshop on the Global Omnibus Environmental Survey; Palo Alto, California;
               1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  1993    
File        : a9314750

Award Number: 9314750
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1993      
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold K. Jacobson hkj@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              85        Political Sciences                      
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
                   A critical facet of research on the human dimensions of                   
              global environmental change is identification and analysis of                  
              public perceptions of and attitudes toward environmental                       
              problems.  In order to foster cross-national comparisons of                    
              perceptions and attitudes, the international Human Dimensions of               
              Global Environmental Change Programme (HDP) has proposed the                   
              creation of a Global Omnibus Environmental Survey (GOES).  GOES                
              would be designed for the following purposes:  (1) to gauge                    
              public opinion toward the environment, including measurements of               
              knowledge, attitudes, and behavior; (2) to provide a                           
              comprehensive comparison of public opinion across a range of                   
              countries throughout the world; (3) to monitor changes in public               
              opinion over time in a systematic way; and (4) to contribute                   
              toward the understanding of public opinion on global                           
              environmental issues in its economic, social, and political                    
              contexts.  This award will support a planning workshop to be held              
              in Palo Alto, California, in late May 1993.  The workshop will be              
              the first in a series, with following workshops supported by                   
              organizations in other nations participating in the HDP.  A                    
              primary purpose of this workshop will be to develop an                         
              operational strategy for planning and implementating GOES.  This               
              award will directly enable participation of a critical group of                
              scientists in this workshop, and it will ensure prompt and                     
              complete dissemination of the workshop results.                                
                   This planning workshop will bring together scientists from a              
              number of different disciplines and nations to assess what data                
              already exist and what strategies might be most useful as ways to              
              fill critical gaps in information about public opinion regarding               
              the environment.  This workshop will serve as a critical step in               
              assembling an multi-national, multi-disciplinary group of social               
              scientists to address critical information needs.  Because                     
              support for a number of follow-up workshops has been offered from              
              organizations in other nations, the results of this workshop will              
              feed directly into an ongoing development process of an effort                 
              that ultimately will provide a systematic and comprehensive                    
              understanding of attitudes toward global environmental change.
