Title       : Effects of Irrigation On Growth of Polychaetes in Sedimentary Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  1994   
File        : a9314681

Award Number: 9314681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta L. Marinelli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,9221,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314681  MARINELLI  A potentially important class of interactions among infaunal
               organisms involves infaunal-driven changes in the chemistry of the 
              sedimentary environment and responses of other organisms to the  modification. 
              This project will examine how one important infaunal  activity, irrigation of
              burrows by polychaete worms, affects the  growth of co-occurring organisms.
              Polychaetes are a dominant taxon  in sedimentary assemblages. Evaluation of the
              importance of burrow  irrigation is made in light of species-specific traits
              and  community organization.  The specific questions to be addressed  include:
              (1) To what extent does burrow irrigation by co-occurring  organisms affect the
              growth of individual polychaetes?  Is the  benefit related to the density and
              distribution of irrigated  burrows, and the frequency of irrigation?; (2) To
              what extent is  the benefit of burrow irrigation experienced by an individual 
              dependent on the physiology or tube characteristics of the  individual?; (3)
              How are biological-chemical interactions among the  polychaetes affected by
              other biological processes, such as  competition or predation, in benthic
              communities?  These questions  will be evaluated using a combined approach that
              incorporates the  biology of organisms, and transport and reaction processes in
               sediments.  This approach includes manipulative experimentation in  the
              laboratory and field, and diagenetic modelling of target  substances that
              affect, and/or are influenced by, infauna.    The research in the planning
              period will examine the feasibility of  using biochemical indices of growth or
              growth potential for the  polychaetes.  These indices include (1) analysis of
              lipid  composition and (2) RNA:DNA ratios.  These indices have proven  useful
              as tools for examining nutritional status and environmental  conditions for a
              number of marine invertebrate and vertebrate taxa,  including copepods, fish,
              echinoderms, bivalves, and crustaceans.   Development of these techniques for
              the polychaetes wo uld provide  an important alternative method for examining
              ecological and  environmental questions for a prominent taxon in benthic 
              assemblages.  The planning research is a necessary precursor  because
              commonly-used methods of assessing growth in polychaetes  are likely to be
              inadequate.    Taken together, the research in the planning period, and the
              future  to be developed research project, will provide a novel perspective  on
              the forces which drive the distributions of, and interactions  between benthic
              organisms.  Furthermore, they will have important  implications for
              understanding how different macrofaunal  assemblages affect solute transport in
              sediments, and evaluating  the nutritional status or growth potential of
              polychaetes in the  natural environment.  ***
