Title       : Collaborative Research: Molecular Dissection of Epibiotic Symbiosis in a Highly
               Thermotolerant Metazoan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1993   
File        : a9314595

Award Number: 9314595
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63796              (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Craig Cary   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1319,9117,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9314595  CARY  Closely integrated symbiotic associations between bacteria and 
              eukaryotic hosts abound in nature.  This is particularly the case  in marine
              systems where novel associations are being routinely  discovered.  Whether the
              bacteria reside externally to the host or  endosymbiotically the functional
              role of the association have  remained poorly understood. This research project
              seeks to  understand the structure and function of the diverse epibiotic 
              bacterial populations found associated with the Alvinellid  polychaete,
              Alvinella pompejana, which inhabits the high  temperature environment
              surrounding deep-sea hydrothermal vents.   The polychaetes are considered the
              most thermotolerant eukaryotes  known.  The primary thesis of the project
              maintains that within the  evolutionary confines of this symbiosis the symbiont
              and host have  evolved unique adaptations to survive this harsh environment.   
              The primary objective of this research project is to metabolically 
              characterize the predominant symbionts within the mixed population  in order to
              determine their functional role in the symbiosis.   Specifically the project
              will: 1) phylogenetically characterize the  dominant symbionts in the
              population, 2) determine the spatial  orientation and metabolic state of these
              symbiont in situ, 3)  determine the metabolic capabilities and segregation of
              activity  within the structure of the symbiont population.  In order to 
              achieve these goals two powerful molecular techniques which were  developed
              with the philosophy that bacteria from natural  ecosystems, like organelles,
              can be studied without cultivation  will be integrated.  Past studies have
              demonstrated the utility of  nucleic acid probing technology to identify and
              localize target  sequences in situ with a high degree of specificity.  The
              utility  of Bacterial Artificial Chromosome (BAC) vectors to characterize 
              mixed marine microbial communities by preserving their genomic  content in the
              form of "environmental libraries" has recently  been   demonstrated. This
              project proposes to combine these technologies  to genetically dissect the
              predominant symbionts from the mixed  population and to identify and quantify
              in situ the expression of  metabolically important genes implicated in the
              symbiosis.  The  descriptive nature of these techniques will provide not only 
              valuable insights into the ecology of this symbiosis but will  provide
              characterization of novel genes that confer adaptation to  the extremes of the
              hydrothermal vent environment.  ***
