Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Analytical Gauge Theory; January 5-9, 1994; Las Cruces,
               New Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1994   
File        : a9314382

Award Number: 9314382
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16291              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross E. Staffeldt ross@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Finston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Rogers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Wisner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314382  Staffeldt       The story can be traced back to the fundamental work of
               Riemann, Klein, and Betti at the turn of this century, on  the classification
              of surfaces and their higher dimensional  analogues, called manifolds.  Loosely
              peaking, they showed  that for each surface there is a geometrically defined 
              natural number called its genus, that characterizes the  surface up to certain
              transformations, i.e. two surfaces  with the same genus are indistinguishable. 
              Moreover, given  any natural number there is a model surface with that genus 
              (to visualize a surface of genus g, imagine the surface of a  coffee cup with
              g- 1 extra handles).       A manifold of dimension n is a geometric object that
               looks locally like n dimensional space, in the same way that  a surface looks
              in a small enough region, like a plane.  Albert Einstein's relativity theory,
              with its emphasis on  the four dimensional manifold of space-time, convinced
              the  scientific world of the necessity to come to terms with  manifolds of
              dimension greater than two.  Mathematicians in  the fields of algebraic and
              differential topology,  differential geometry, among others, and physicists
              have  devoted considerable effort in this century to developing  classification
              schemes for manifolds of dimension three and  higher.     Although a great deal
              is known, no such schemes have been  established that successfully classify
              manifolds of  dimension three.  Amazingly, in the 1960s a multistage 
              classification scheme was developed for manifolds of  dimension five and
              greater.  The methods used to establish  that scheme simply don't apply in the
              lower dimensions.       In the early 1980s Michael Freedman proved results that
               led to the classification of a large natural family of four  dimensional
              manifolds, the simply-connected ones, up to  topological type, the coarsest
              classification that had been  sought.  Part of his work was devoted to
              constructing many  manifolds not previously know to exist.  Soon after Freedman
               produced his top ological classification theorem, Simon  Donaldson used
              techniques of gauge theory, the subject of  the conference, to shed light on a
              finer classification of  four dimensional manifolds: the classification up to
              smooth  equivalence, or up to diffeomorphism.  Donaldson's main idea  is to
              study the finer structure on simply connected smooth  four manifolds by
              analyzing the geometry of spaces of  auxiliary structures that can be
              associated with simply  connected smooth manifolds.  His first result was that 
              hardly any of Freedman's new manifolds could be smooth, the  main reason why it
              was so hard to find them.  Later work has  produced a host of new variants for
              distinguishing smooth  manifolds within a given coarse, topological, Freedman
              type.       The conference will review the properties of gauge  theory which
              are crucial for understanding the geometry of  the spaces of auxiliary
              structure and will clarify the  connections.  Then the speaker will turn to a
              situation  which has the same formal properties of gauge theory a la 
              Donaldson, but whose analysis is incomplete and for which  several avenues for
              further research seem to be open.
