Title       : An Electro-Optical Cable Linking a Shore Laboratory with Observing Capabilities
               on the Continental Shelf off New Jersey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9314823

Award Number: 9314823
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1781897            (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Frederick Grassle grassle@ahab.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9197,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314823  Grassle    The Rutgers University Institute of Marine and Coastal
              Sciences  (IMCS) and the Oceanographic Systems Laboratory (OSL) of the Woods 
              Hole Oceanographic Institution (WHOI) will collaborate and install  a long-term
              underwater observing system that connects remotely-  operated seafloor
              observatories with shore-based laboratories/  control stations via an
              electro-optical cable.  The Long-term  Ecosystem Observatory-15 (LEO-15) will
              be established offshore from  the Rutgers University Marine Field Station
              (RUMFS).  An electro-  optical cable will be buried from RUMFS, near Little Egg
              Inlet, NJ  to about 10 km out onto the continental shelf, thence to two 
              initial platforms at two sites on the continental shelf.  A system  of this
              nature will provide remote operational control of intercon-  nected ocean-based
              sensors and vehicles for an extended period of  time.  The buried seafloor
              cable will provide electrical power and  real-time, broad bandwidth,
              bi-directional communication to a  number of seafloor based systems.  With some
              routine maintenance,  a reliable long-term system can be developed and put into
              opera-  tion.  The successful installation and operation of the LEO-15 
              facility will provide the engineering experience and motivation  necessary to
              expand this system into deeper water, and to install  additional sites,
              worldwide, in both coastal and deep-water.                The system will
              provide simultaneous real-time data from a broad  array of sensing systems on
              time scales from seconds to years and  spatial scales from millimeters to
              within radii of 100 m of nodes  along the cable and, with autonomous underwater
              vehicles (AUVs), to  kilometers.  Data from LEO-15 may be used 1) to calibrate
              informa-  tion from earth-orbiting satellites; 2) to measure boundary condi- 
              tions for coupled benthic boundary layer and coastal circulation  models; 3) to
              monitor in situ experiments on processes related to  upwelling, plankton
              blooms, benthic flux, sediment transport and  cross-s helf transport, and 4) to
              study the behavior, recruitment,  and sources of mortality in commercial fish
              and shellfish species.                 The Institute of Marine and Coastal
              Sciences has committed to a  long-term research that would utilize the
              Observatory, and has made  a substantial financial commitment to the project as
              well.
