Title       : Directed Mutagenesis of a Photosystem II Extrinsic Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1994     
File        : a9314743

Award Number: 9314743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary Cecchini                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Yocum cyocum@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9314743  Yocum  Photosystem II is a complex  enzyme system that harvests light
              and  uses this energy for a series of reactions, one of which is the   
              oxidation of H2O to O2.  A cluster of hydrophobic membrane proteins  provide
              ligation sites for the inorganic cofactors (Ca2+, C1, Mn)  required for minimal
              levels of O2 evolution activity.  However,  stable ligation of these cofactors
              and kinetically efficient H2O   oxidation minimally requires the presence of an
              extrinsic 33 kDa  polypeptide known as the Manganese Stabilizing Protein, or
              MSP.  A  critical function of this protein in vivo and in purified  photosystem
              II preparations is to confer stability to the site that  ligates the Mn atoms
              that catalyze oxidation of H2O.  Although     one site of binding to
              photosystem has been identified for MSP, the  protein's mode of action, whether
              purely structural or in addition  as a possible contributor of metal ligands,
              remaining unsettled.   The question of MSP function in photosystem II will be
              addressed by  site-directed mutagenesis.  Expression of mutagenized MSP in E. 
              coli will be used to obtain amounts of protein sufficient for  reconstitution,
              structural and spectroscopic investigations in a  system using purified
              photosystem II preparations from Arabidopsis  and spinach. Residues targeted
              for mutagenesis have been selected  on the basis of their possible
              contributions to the tertiary  structure of the protein or to binding of MSP to
              photosystem II.   Analyses of reconstituted preparations are designed so as to
              reveal  modifications in inorganic ion cofactor binding, alterations in the 
              structure of the manganese cluster that catalyzes H2O oxidation,  and defects
              in the ability of preparations reconstituted with  mutagenized MSP to bind
              other extrinsic proteins that area also  essential for long-term sustained
              activity under physiological  conditions.  The proposed experiments will
              provide a better  understanding of the structure of an important photosynthetic
               protein and its contributions t o both the organization and  catalytic
              function of the site of photosynthetic O2 evolution.  %%%  Photosynthesis
              produces the oxygen that sustains life on earth.   The enzyme that carries out
              this process is called photosystem II,  and is found  in all plants and algae.
              Although, it is known that  certain ions (manganese, calcium and chloride) are
              needed for  oxygen production to occur, the role of photosystem II proteins in 
              oxygen production is not well understood.  This project will  examine a
              photosystem II protein, called the Manganese Stabilizing  Protein, that is
              essential to oxygen production, if it is removed,  oxygen production is
              impaired and exposure to light begins to  destroy the enzyme.  To examine how
              Manganese Stabilizing Protein  protects photosystem II and enhances oxygen
              production, the genetic  code for the protein is first transferred to a
              bacterium, E. coli,  which can be induced to produce the native protein or
              alternative  versions containing mutations in large amounts.  Once isolated, 
              these protein will be examines for mutation-induced changes in  their structure
              and, when they are added back to photosystem II,  for changes in their ability
              to affect the activity and stability  of oxygen production.  The method to be
              employed permits the    investigator to produce many mutations in the protein.
              By  systematic modifications, it will be will be possible to determine  which
              parts of the protein are important in stabilizing photosystem  II, and which
              parts of the protein are involved in promoting the  chemical reactions that
              produce oxygen.  Although these experiments  are directed at understanding a
              very fundamental biological  reaction, they also will provide new information
              that may prove  useful in 2 areas: first, when the mechanism by which model
              plant  system such as Arabidopsis and spinach produce oxygen is fully 
              understood, this knowledge may point the way to new chemical  methods for
              carrying out oxidation/reduction reactions that are at  present very
              energy-inte nsive.  Second, determination of protein  features that are
              required for efficient oxygen production can  provide information on methods
              that may prove useful in protecting  plant life from environmental factors such
              as global warming.  ***
