Title       : Application of Molecular Dynamics Simulations to Conformational Stability of
               Peptides and Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9314854

Award Number: 9314854
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Hermans   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9314854  Hermans  This study will investigate the equilibria involved in the 
              initiation and growth of alpha-and 310 helices, of turns and of  beta strands
              and the differences in propensity towards formation  these structures for
              different amino acid types.  These methods  will also be applied to simulation
              of the activities and inhibition  of two enzymes, cytidine deaminase and
              cyclophilin.  The proline  isomerase activity of cyclophilin is thought to
              involve the  catalysis of a conformation change, without formation of breaking 
              of a chemical bond.  Catalysis by cytidine deaminase appears to  require
              significant conformation change to admit substrate and  expel product.  Several
              components of the project will be directed  at development or improvement of
              techniques that may have general  applicability.  Development of a method
              (based on work published by  Friedman in 1975) to do molecular dynamics
              simulations of proteins  in a spherical "bath" filled with explicit water
              molecules, with a  so-called reaction field that accounts for the presence of a
              medium  with high dielectric constant (water) on the outside, even though  no
              molecules are explicitly represented there.  If this  implementation is
              successful, then it will be combined with the  fast multipole method
              (Greengard; Board) for calculation of all  long-range electrostatic forces. 
              Other proposed new developments  include an improved method for the calculation
              of absolute binding  free energies and the implementation of molecular dynamics
              programs  on parallel machines with many processors.    %%%  Hardly a single
              processes involving the action of a protein does  not involve a conformation
              change of some kind, and is fully  understood without an understanding of the
              nature of conformation  change.  The very process of formation of native
              protein molecules  from an unordered state is a process of coupled and
              sequential  conformation changes that is not at all well understood, and 
              conformation change is critical in the action of nearly  all  enzymes.  This
              project will apply accurate computer simulation  methods to the study of
              conformation change of peptides and  proteins.  Molecular dynamics simulations
              and specialized versions  thereof, capable of calculation of free energy
              differences will be  used with a variety of problems.  In earlier work the
              focus of this  project has been on validation of the method by application to 
              problems for which precise experimental results are available.   This will
              continue, but increasingly the project will include to  problems where
              experiments have given little or no information  about conformational
              equilibria.  %%%
