Title       : Design of Joint Source/Channel Codes for Rayleigh Fading Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9314221

Award Number: 9314221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347587             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas N. Georghiades georghia@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vinay A. Vaishampayan  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jay N. Livingston  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9314221  Vaishampayan       We address the issue of combined source and channel
              coding for  fading channels.  It is well-known that channel coding, together 
              with interleaving, can be used to achieve an improvement n  diversity order. 
              However, these codes have traditionally offered  uniform error protection for
              all bits transmitted.  In reality, for  many sources, some bits from the
              quantizer are more important than  others.  We show that unequal error
              protection schemes can offer  greatly improved performance on the fading
              channel given a fixed  diversity level in the system.  We also provide a method
              for  designing unequal error protection schemes in order to minimize a 
              distortion criterion, subject to an overall system diversity level.  
              Additionally, we note that the interleaving delay required in  interleaved
              systems is very large compared to the diversity orders  that the code provides.
               In speech coding applications the entire  communications system must be
              designed to meet a delay budget.  The  interleaving delay thus restricts the
              delay that can be allocated  to the source coder/decoder.  We show that the
              construction of a  channel code with a constraint on the interleaving delay can
              be  treated as a problem of designing a code for a restricted number of 
              independently slow fading channels in which interleaving is not  allowed on any
              of the slow fading channels.  The diversity order  that the code can achieve is
              restricted to the number of  independent channels available.  However, the rate
              of the code is  then restricted to the reciprocal of the diversity order.  In
              order  to get around this constraint, we use the fact that for continuous 
              alphabet sources, not every transition probability for the  effective channel
              as seen by the source coder/decoder need exhibit  the maximum order of
              diversity.  This allows the rate to the code  to be increased.  We will examine
              structured techniques for  constructing combined source and channel codes for
              the Rayleigh  fading channel.  ***
