Title       : Genetic Analysis of Eukaryotic DNA Mismatch Repair Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1995      
File        : a9314116

Award Number: 9314116
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1993      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Michael Liskay liskaym@ohsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Health Sciences U
	      3181 S W Sam Jackson Rd
	      Portland, OR  972013011    503/748-1031

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9119,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              In both prokaryotes and eukaryotes DNA mismatch repair plays major             
              roles in replicative error correction and genetic recombination.               
              Disruption of DNA mismatch repair has also been proposed as one                
              step in the progression of human neoplasias.  In addition, DNA                 
              mismatch repair is likely to impact the DNA rearrangements and                 
              "hypermutation" characteristic of immunoglobulin diversification in            
              higher animals. Mismatch repair might influence the rate of                    
              expansion of simple sequence repeats that underlies certain forms              
              of human genetic disease.  The overall goal of this study is to                
              determine the roles of newly discovered yeast genes that encode                
              polypeptides with structural similarity to bacterial and other                 
              yeast proteins known to have roles in DNA mismatch repair.  We have            
              discovered additional genes in yeast (the MLH genes) that show                 
              significant amino acid homology with the MutL gene of the bacterium            
              E. coli, and the PMS1 gene of yeast (a mutL-like mismatch repair               
              gene).  We will determine the nucleotide sequence of the yeast MLH             
              genes, perform the requisite gene disruptions and determine initial            
              phenotypes of the mutants in vegetative cells, e.g. mutator                    
              effects.  We will examine the role of the MLH genes in genetic                 
              recombination.  We will test for functional similarity between the             
              yeast and mammalian MLH gene products.  A study of these newly                 
              found PMS1/mutL homologs should lead to a better understanding of              
              mismatch repair in yeast.  Finally, structural and functional                  
              comparisons of the yeast and mammalian MLH genes should help to                
              guide the more demanding analysis of MLH gene functions in the                 
              mouse.                                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              In all organisms DNA mismatch repair plays major roles in gene                 
              recombination and in correcting errors in gene replication.  DNA               
              mismatch repair may also be a significant factor in the development            
              of human tumors and in certain human genetic diseases; it probably             
              also important in the normal functioning of the immune system.  The            
              overall goal of this study is to determine the roles of newly                  
              discovered yeast genes that encode proteins with structural                    
              similarity to other proteins known to have roles in DNA mismatch               
              repair.  This study should lead to a better understanding of                   
              mismatch repair in yeast and should help to guide the more                     
              demanding analysis of the phenomenon in mammals.
