Title       : Global Climate Change Studies on Long and Short Time Scales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1997   
File        : a9314730

Award Number: 9314730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323251             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia H. Reiff   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara Ledley  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1303,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9314730  Ledley     Global Climate Change Studies on Long and Short Time Scales 
                     Climate changes on a very wide variety of time and space  scales and
              involves the interaction of all of the components of the  climate system.  Most
              modeling studies of the climate system tend  to focus on a particular range of
              time and space scales; however,  many of the interdisciplinary climate
              questions that need to be  addressed require an understanding of the mechanisms
              of climate  change on a wider range of time and space scales than would 
              normally be addressed in one study.  In this research program the  plan is to
              use a coupled energy balance climate-thermodynamic sea  ice-continental ice
              sheet model to identify the important  mechanisms of climate change on a wide
              range of time scales in  order to gain a better understanding of how these
              mechanisms affect  the climate system.         The particular questions that
              will be addressed include:    1) What is the impact of increased greenhouse
              gases on the  cryosphere and hydrologic cycle, of the Earth-atmosphere system, 
              especially with respect to the initiation of ice sheet growth, and  what are
              the mechanisms that produce those changes, for the present  and projected
              increases in greenhouse gases, and for the variations  in greenhouse gases on
              ice age time scales as observed in the  geologic record?  In particular the PI
              will address the question of  how the cryosphere, both sea ice and continental
              ice, responds to  the changes in radiative forcing and its impact on the
              hydrologic  cycle; and in turn how the resulting changes in the cryosphere 
              affect the climate.  2) How do Milankovitch solar radiation variations affect
              the  hydrologic cycle, and the cryosphere to produce initial ice sheet  growth
              and the large scale glacial/interglacial cycles as observed  in the geological
              record.  The PI will specifically examine the  role of the hydrologic cycle in
              producing glacial/interglacial  cycles and use this information to gain a
              better understanding of   the role of spatial and temporal variations in the
              seasonal cycle  of solar radiation on producing climate change on all time
              scales.  3) What is the impact of particulates in and on snow and ice on the 
              global climate system, and how important is the mechanism of  inclusion or
              deposition of the particulates in affecting the  climate system?         The
              use of the coupled energy balance climate-thermodynamic  sea ice-ice sheet
              model to address these questions is particularly  attractive because of its
              relative simplicity, while retaining many  of the large components of the
              climate system.  This type of model  allows a detailed analysis of the response
              of the climate system to  various perturbations, that will include following
              the effect from  initial perturbation, through all of the included feedback 
              processes, to the final climatic effect.  Understanding the  processes of
              climate change in this type of detail permits the  application of what we learn
              in one set of experiments to questions  of climate change that occur on other
              time scales, extending our  understanding of the climate system and how it
              changes.  ***
