Title       : Observations of Mid-Atlantic Ridge Earthquake Activity Using U.S. Navy
               Hydrophone Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1995      
File        : a9314374

Award Number: 9314374
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David E. Epp                            
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Slack pslack@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G. Michael Purdy  (Principal Investigator former)
              Robert S. Detrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Bergman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1620      MARINE GEOLOGY AND GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1319,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9316810  Roise    This project will focus on an effort to apply quantitative 
              fluorescence techniques to tde study of the import of a full-  length
              mitochondrial precursor protein into isolated yeast  mitochondria.   These
              studies will provide quantitative  information about binding and import that is
              not currently  available using radiolabeled precursor proteins.  The 
              approaches may also be useful in the characterization of  import intermediates
              that span the mitochondrial membranes.  The precursor under study is a fusion
              between the amino-  terminal 25-residue mitochondrial targeting sequence of 
              yeast cytochrome oxidase subunit IV (CoxIV) and the complete  amino acid
              sequence of mouse dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR).  The pCoxIV-DHFR fusion
              protein is efficiently imported by  mitochondria both in vitro and in vivo and
              has been used  extensively to study the import process.  The protein has 
              recently been labeled with the NBD fluorophore specifically  attached to
              cysteine-19 of the presequence.  The labeled  precursor can now be used in
              studies similar to those  developed with the fluorescent presequence peptide.  
              In  addition, the laboratory will test whether or not the full-  length
              precursor can be imported in Paracoccus  denitrificans, a gram-negative
              bacterium that is typically  used as a model for the ancestral mitochondrion
              and which  has recently been shown to be capable of importing a  synthetic
              mitochondrial presequence.    This ability would  be important in the context
              of understanding the evolution  of the protein transport system in the
              mitochondria of  modern eukaryotic cells.  The results obtained in the import 
              experiments with mitochondria will be used to develop  optimal conditions to
              look for import with the bacteria.  Even if the precursor is not fully
              translocated, the  fluorescent approaches should provide information about the 
              extent and type of interaction of the precursor protein with  these bacteria. 
              %%%  Eukaryotic cells are believed to have evolved from  endosym biotic
              relationships between certain protistan "host"  cells and other "endosymbiont"
              protists.  Modern eukaryotes  contain specialized organelles (mitochondria and
              plastids)  which still retain substantial vestiges of autonomy (genomes  and
              protein-synthesizing machinery).  The successful  function of a modern
              eukaryotic cell hinges on the  interdependence and appropriate exchange of
              proteins and  other information between these organelles and the the rest  of
              the cell (nucleus and cytoplasm).   This project  addresses not only the
              mechanism whereby nuclear-encoded  proteins get into the mitochondrion in order
              to carry out  their proper functions, but also begins to address, at the 
              biochemical and molecular levels, the question of how this  mechanism may have
              evolved.   The kind of information that  is expected to come from such studies
              will be valuable in  biotechnological applications that require specific 
              manipulation of transport phenomena involving proteins  inserting into or
              crossing membrane barriers.  ***
