Title       : Ice Crystal Scavenging of C1 - C4 Alcohols and Ethylene Glycol
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1995        
File        : a9314358

Award Number: 9314358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jefferson R. Snider jsnider@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9314358  Snider       Capture of supercooled cloud droplets by snow crystals 
              (riming) and depostion growth (from the vapor are the mechanisms  which lead to
              ice crystal sizes sufficient for removal as  precipitation from mid-latitude
              tropospheric clouds.  During  ricing, cloud-droplet-dissolved pollutant gases
              are incorporated  into nascent precipitation particles.  The efficiency of gas 
              scavenging during this process has been studied in both laboratory  and field
              experiments.conducted in natural clouds at a remote  continental mountain-top
              site (Elk Mountain Observatory in  southeastern Wyoming) and involving
              hydrophilic chemical species  are proposed to provide specific information
              about the extent to  which trace gases are incorporated into ice crystals
              growing by  vapor deposition.       Our experimental strategy is to grow ice
              crystals attached to  a ventilated substrate in water-saturated air that is
              pre-  conditioned to remove supercooled cloud droplets and by addition of 
              known amounts of each study compound (either methanol, ethanol, or  normal
              butanol).  We intend to measur, as a function of  concentrations in the
              gas-phase, the amount of study compound  incorporated into the sampled ice
              crystal.  The resulting data set  will afford an examination of how both
              hydrophilic properties and  substituent chain length affect gas scavenging. 
              These studies will  be complimented by an examination of the extent to which
              ambient  amounts of these normal alcohols are retained in ice formed by 
              ricing.       The compounds selected for study are of interest because their 
              lifetimes with respect to reaction with wintertime concentrations  of hydroxyl
              radical are generally comparable to estimated lifetimes  corresponding to
              removal in precipitation.  Therefore, it is  important to characterize the
              efficiency of removal for alcohols,  as well as other hydrophilic compounds, by
              ice-phase hydrometeors.   In addition, the selected compounds that play
              important roles in  the atmosphere.       In addition  to these studies, we
              plan to conduct concurrent  gas-phase measurements of the xxx alcohols and the
              inorganic  species xxxxxxxxxx  Using the inorganic gases as tracers of air 
              contaminated by man-made pollution, the relative importance of  biogenic and
              anthropogenic source processes corresponding to the  low-molecular weight
              alcohols will be examined.
