Title       : Mathematiical Sciences: Mathematical Study of Nonlinear Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  1994   
File        : a9314082

Award Number: 9314082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jean Thiebaux                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiangsheng Xu   (Principal Investigator current)
              Itrel Monroe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314082  Xu        The 1994 Arkansas Spring Lectures in Mathematics will be held
              in the  Center for Continuing Education on the Square in downtown Fayetteville,
               Arkansas from March 31 to April 2.  The principal lecturer will be Professor 
              David Kinderlehrer of Carnegie Mellon University.  In addition, talks will be 
              given by a number of other scholars studying mathematical systems which, it is 
              believed, will be useful in the study of nonlinear materials.        One of the
              foci of considerable research in both the sciences and  mathematics is how
              local or micro behavior affects global or macro behavior.   In general, it is
              often very difficult to predict the properties of a large  structure when only
              the properties of its constituent parts are known.  This  general problem
              presents itself in fields as diverse as economics and solid  state physics.    
                 Professor Kinderlehrer will be lecturing on mathematics that addresses  the
              response of materials to changes in its environment.  In general, one  knows
              the properties of the individual atoms that make up a material and one  knows
              the ways in which they can fit together.  This knowledge can be used to 
              predict, for instance, the structure of crystals and the magnetic properties 
              of iron.  However, when a material is subjected to changes in its environment, 
              for example changes in temperature. pressure, or electromagnetic fields, the 
              atoms begin to realign themselves in sometimes surprising ways.  The 
              phenomenon has already lent itself to the development of many useful 
              applications such as shape-memory alloys and liquid crystals.  However the 
              mathematical questions that are posed by an attempt to obtain a detailed 
              understanding of this phenomenon are deep and require the development of new 
              mathematical machinery.        Recent, progress has been made with some
              averaging methods which enable  one to cope with the rapidly spatially varying
              systems involved.  Professor  Kinderlehrer's lectures will be on the
              application of these averaging met hods  which promise a more unified theory
              and treatment of the subject.  The other  invited speakers for the conference
              have been selected because of their  knowledge of and contributions to this and
              related material in order to  achieve a rich and productive interaction between
              researchers currently active  in this area.  ***
