Title       : Equilibrium and Nonequilibrium Phenomena in Condensed Matter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 14,  1997   
File        : a9314938

Award Number: 9314938
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $728000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Goldenfeld nigel@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yoshitsugu Oono  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,9162,9216,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9314938  Goldenfeld  This proposal concerns the study of non-equilibrium
              phenomena,  primarily in polymeric systems. The PIs have had much prior success
               in studying the approach to equilibrium following phase  transitions; growth
              of complex spatial patterns; and the use of  Renormalization Group methods to
              access the long time behavior of  systems far from equilibrium. They have also
              developed a cellular-  automata-type numerical scheme, the "Cell Dynamical
              Systems"  approach, to study mesoscale phenomena. They propose to study 1) 
              spinodal decomposition in binary alloy systems; 2) descriptions of  vibrating
              powder systems; 3) chiral symmetry breaking in Langmuir  monolayers; 4)
              Renormalization Group methods to study the long-time  behavior of spatially
              extended non-linear systems; 5) theory of  vulcanization; 6) Large Deviation
              approaches to nonequilibrium  systems (both the fundamentals of the method and
              some concrete  applications).  %%%  The PIs work in the area of understanding
              the behavior of  nonequilibrium systems; particularly of complex systems such
              as  polymers, rubbers, alloys etc. Here, they propose to study what  happens to
              mesoscale structures of alloys when they are quenched;  how best to descibe the
              state of a powder when it is vibrated;  mathematical methods to understand the
              time dependent behavior of  systems which have been moved out of equilibrium
              (and how they  thence may establish spatial patterns as they evolve) and,
              lastly,  a new (at least to many physicists) theoretical method for  describing
              the thermodynamics of both equilibrium and  nonequilibrium systems which relies
              on the mathematical laws  governing large numbers. These two PI's are held in
              the highest  esteem by their community and their work is rated at the very
              front  of this field. They do a nice combination of fundamental work and 
              "real-world" problems - for example they have helped  experimentalists with the
              understanding of their experiments.  ***
