Title       : Photodeposition in Porous Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1997   
File        : a9314033

Award Number: 9314033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Schwarz sasqc@qcunixl.acc.qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry D. Gafney  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1038,1762,9161,9166,AMPP,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9314033  Gafney    This research is concerned with the study of methodologies 
              capable of incorporating and patterning new materials in  transparent media
              such as glasses needed for new optical  technologies.  One approach is the
              photolysis of transition  and main group organometallic reagents adsorbed on 
              porous  Vycor glass and tetramethylorthosilicate-methanol-water 
              (TMOS/CH3OH/H20) xerogels followed by thermal consolidation  to a nonporous
              glass.  Deposition changes the refractive  index, and standard
              photolithographic  techniques offer a  means of patterning refractive index
              gradients, magnetic  impregnates, and regions of porosity within the host
              glass.  However, there is little information on the nature of the  species
              deposited, their properties, or their effect on the  host matrix.  In this
              work, a number of techniques will be  used to determine the nature and
              properties of the deposits.  These techniques include electronic and diffuse
              reflectance  fourtier transform infra-red spectroscopy, Mossbauer,  electron
              spin resonance, and other spectroscopic techniques.  Specifically, it is
              proposed to determine the criteria for  the deposition of transparent,
              magnetically-ordered iron in  the different glasses, and through a comparison
              of the  results in the different matrices, probe the effect of the  host
              matrix. Cluster precursors and applied magnetic fields  will be examined as
              means to enhance magnetic ordering  without necessarily increasing impregnate
              aggregation.  Similar experiments will be conducted using  trimetholtin  iodide
              (CH3)3SnI, except in this case, the goal will be to  determine how tin prevents
              consolidation of Si-based  glasses.  Because porosity offers access into an
              optical  network, this work will examine polymer diffusion as a way  to carry
              reagents that are unable to withstand glass  consolidation temperatures,
              typically >1000C, into an  optical network in glass.  The photo deposition of
              Cr-,  Er,  Nd- organometallics will be examined as a means to deposit  laser ac
              tive species, and tailor optical and magnetic  properties.  To determine the
              generality of the technique,  photo deposition in Al-, Se and Te-based glasses
              will be  examined.  The nature of the species deposited and their  properties
              will be compared to those obtained in Sibased  glasses to better understand the
              role of the host matrix.   %%%  This research is concerned with the study of
              methodologies  capable of incorporating and patterning new materials in 
              transparent media such as glasses needed for new optical  technologies.  It is
              proposed to determine the criteria for  the deposition of transparent,
              magnetically-ordered iron in  the different glasses, and probe the effect of
              the host  matrix.  To determine the generality of the technique, photo 
              deposition in aluminum-, selenium- and tellurium-based  glasses will be
              examined.  The nature of the species  deposited and their properties will be
              compared to those  obtained in silicon-based glasses to better understand the 
              role of the host matrix.
