Title       : SGER: Effects of Hurricane Andrew on Subtropical Hardwood Hammocks of Everglades
               National Park, Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1993       
File        : a9314265

Award Number: 9314265
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15299              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Platt billmaggie1@home.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                   Hurricanes disrupt forest canopies, resulting in increased                
              light levels both in gaps and beneath overstory trees.  Because                
              such increases are likely to be transient in forests in which                  
              advance recruits and resprouting trees grow rapidly, study of the              
              responses of vegetation to hurricanes must occur within a short                
              period of time following impact.  On August 24, 1992, the south                
              eyewall of Hurricane Andrew impacted patches of subtropical                    
              hardwood forests (hammocks) imbedded in slash pine savannas on Long            
              Pine Key in Everglades National Park, Florida.  Mapped plots in                
              which all tress > 2 cm dbh had been tagged and measured had been               
              established at the time of the hurricane in both burned and                    
              unburned hammocks.  First, the project will measure damage and                 
              mortality of trees in burned and unburned subtropical hammocks and             
              examine patterns of recovery of trees in burned and unburned                   
              subtropical hammocks and examine patterns of recovery of trees over            
              the year following the hurricane.  Second, it will assess effects              
              of the hurricane on epiphytes by censusing plants in plots located             
              in both burned and unburned hammocks.  These data will be used to              
              explore whether the trees and epiphytes respond similarly (and in              
              what ways) to the large-scale disturbances of fires and hurricanes.            
              %%%                                                                            
              Ecological systems must constantly respond to stresses on several              
              temporal & spatial scales.  This study provides quantitative                   
              assessment if the damage & patterns of recovery of populations of              
              tropical trees in subtropical hammocks.  Results of this study will            
              be directly comparable to others in the impacts of severe                      
              hurricanes on subtropical forests.  In addition, by comparing the              
              impact of Hurricane Andrew on trees in burned & unburned hammocks,             
              this study provides a rare opportunity to compare the effects of               
              two major disturbances.
