Title       : A 3-D Acoustic Current Meter for Upper Ocean Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1998   
File        : a9314357

Award Number: 9314357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $612000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert J. Williams awilliams@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              OCE93-14357  Williams            The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will
              undertake an Ocean  Sciences Instrumentation development project to develop a
              low-cost,  modular 3-D acoustic current meter for moored, upper ocean measure- 
              ments.  The development will be accomplished in incremental steps  building
              from the existing Benthic Acoustic Stress Sensor (BASS);  through a single
              sensor cable suspended instrument; to a self-  contained flux meter
              configuration; and finally to a modular,  expendable velocity sensor.  At each
              step, the prototype will be  tested in an experimental program.  The
              self-contained flux meter  will be tested in DOE's Ocean Margin Program, and
              the modular  velocity sensor will be tested as a Richardson number float in 
              association with a separate NSF project.  During at sea testing, an  acoustic
              vorticity meter will be deployed to measure the shear and  turbulence
              associated with 3-D coherent motions of the Langmuir  type.  Each prototype
              including the vorticity meter, will be tow or  tank tested to determine its
              flow distortion, wake obstruction,  vortex shedding and compass response.   
              Measurement of flow is a first order task in ocean studies, yet  except for
              several specialized studies such as turbulence in  boundary layer flows, one
              depends on two axis velocity measurements  from expensive (as opposed to
              expendable) current meters for this  flow determination.  There are now three
              general research areas  where 3-D current meters are needed: in near surface
              measurements  where coherent 3-D motions are present and where surface and 
              internal waves produce significant vertical flow; in transport  studies where
              the product of vector flow with a scalar quantity  must be averaged over time
              and depth and perhaps across a section;  and in vorticity resolving arrays for
              determining shear in the  presence of wave motions.  The most promising
              transitions to a 3-D  solution today are acoustic techniques and this project
              builds upon  experience with an acoustic vector veloc imeter to address each of
               these tasks.
