Title       : Swarming Behavior of Zooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1998      
File        : a9314934

Award Number: 9314934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeannette D. Yen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Akira Okubo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314934  Yen    Swarming of zooplankton at various temporal and spatial  scales
              have been observed:  where fist-sized ephemeral  clouds of Acartia form in
              eddies behind coral heads or are  found milling around  shafts of light, to
              extensive layers  existing at depth or migrating as deep-scattering layers. 
              While aggregative behavior has been well-studied in larger  aquatic organisms
              (fish, krill) and terrestrial animals  (birds, insects), little is known of how
              copepods form  aggregates nor how they maintain the patch against the  tendency
              of spreading by random motion and the dispersive  energy of mixing in the
              ocean.  Furthermore, there is little  quantitative knowledge of the cues  that
              cause aggregations  in zooplankton nor of the purpose of these aggregations.  A
               detailed study of swarming behavior in copepods is needed  yet this has not
              been done before because of limitations in  making actual observations of
              swarming behavior or in  monitoring situations where one can quantitatively
              evaluate  their  aggregative dynamics.    This research project will observe
              and record zooplankton in  a laboratory setting using laser-illuminated video
              imaging,  and it will examine the kinematics of the formation and  maintenance
              of zooplankton swarms to an attractive marker  with a quantification of the
              3-dimensional animal-animal  interactions as well as the 3D animal-fluid
              motion.  The  project will determine the sensitivity  of copepods to cues  of
              different modalities (light-, odor-, motion- reception)  which attract swarm
              members and to quantify the forces that  maintain a swarm against dispersion by
              motion.  The effects  of attractant intensity and the species of the swarm
              member  (stage, sex, size ) on swarm size, density and distribution 
              (separation distance) as well as on swimming behavior  (posture, orientation,
              turning and collision frequency,  velocity and acceleration) will be
              investigated.  To verify  laboratory findings, the behavior of swarms and the
              dynamics  of swarm formation in respo nse to a designated attractant  will be
              examined in situ in nature.    ***
