Title       : The Quantitative Significance of Saltmarsh Microheterotrophsin Mediating the
               Flow of Nitrogen and Detrital Carbon to Higher Trophic Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1996     
File        : a9314584

Award Number: 9314584
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger I. E. Newell newell@hpel.cees.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diane K. Stoecker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 0000,1650,9189,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Newell  9314584    Stable isotope studies have shown that in many salt-marsh 
              metazoans obtain a large fraction of their carbon from  cordgrass, Spartina
              alterniflora.  However, the ribbed  mussel, Geukensia demissa, a dominant
              metazoan in eastern  salt marshes, has only a limited capacity to digest plant 
              detritus.  Thus, these scientists hypothesize that  bacteria  and other
              protists are important food-web components in  mediating the flow of cordgrass
              carbon, and nitrogen, to  higher organisms.  To address this hypothesis, 
              scientists  will first determine the concentration of microheterotrophs, 
              phytoplankton, and cordgrass carbon  near  mussel  populations over seasonal
              and geographical  scales and then  integrate this information in a model with
              measurements of  the metabolic carbon and nitrogen demands, feeding activity, 
              and assimilation efficiencies of G. demissa.    Such a model  will allow these
              scientists to determine if the  microheterotrophs are sufficiently abundant to
              act as a  major food source and to explore how metazoans exert top-  down
              control on microheterotrophs in salt-marsh ecosystems.  To examine how general
              this concept is among eastern  estuaries,  Newell and Stoecker will transplant
              mussels from  a mid-Atlantic marsh to northern and southern marshes for  stable
              isotope analyses.  The purpose is to demonstrate  fundamental differences in
              patterns of carbon cycling in  spatially separate salt marshes.  When
              completed, this  project will provide a more comprehensive understanding of 
              food-web interactions in the detritus-based, salt-marsh  ecosystems.  ***
