Title       : Global Opitmization of Vector Quantizer Based Communication Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9314335

Award Number: 9314335
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rodger E. Ziemer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564050             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Rose rose@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allen Gersho  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9314335     Rose       This project addresses fundamental problems in vector
              coding  for digital communication of audio and visual signals.  The overall 
              signal compression problem is reformulated as a generalized vector  quantizer
              design problem, which incorporates signal decomposition,  quantization, and
              reconstruction.  The main line of attack, using  this new paradigm, is to embed
              the optimization problem within the  probabilistic framework of deterministic
              annealing, which is  derived based on the principle of maximum entropy and its 
              generalization, the principle of cross-entropy.  This yields two  main
              benefits: ability to avoid some of the local optima that trap  greedy methods,
              and extendibility to joint optimization of various  objectives by incorporating
              additional constraints.  The first  phase of the project will include
              optimization of isolated problems  of particular importance to data
              communications: source-channel  vector coding, entropy constrained vector
              quantization,  structurally constrained vector quantization, generalized vector
               quantization, and unbalanced tree vector quantizer growing.  The  first phase
              is expected to yield substantial improvements over  methods currently in use,
              and at the same time provide the basis  for the second phase which consists of
              synthesizing the different  optimization problems.  The second phase of the
              project will  include joint and simultaneous optimization of subsets of the 
              problems addressed in the first phase, thus removing the  suboptimality due to
              independent piecewise optimization.  A  particularly important special case to
              be addressed is the combined  optimization problem of a vector quantizer design
              for a given  source and noisy channel, subject to encoding complexity and bit 
              rate constraints.  A method addressing these issues simultaneously  in a
              nonheuristic manner is expected to provide a theoretically  exciting yet
              practically useful solution to reliable and efficient  communications in the
              demanding context of critically b andlimited  channels, such as the future
              generation of cellular networks.  In  order to validate the new optimization
              methods developed in this  project, specific speech and image compression
              targets utilizing  these methods will be tested and simulate.  Benchmarks of 
              performance improvement will be determined with the intent of  convincing
              future designers of practical signal compression systems  of the practical 
              utility of the new techniques.  In particular,  two widely studied problems,
              the quantization of LPC parameters for  spectral modeling in speech coding and
              low-rate transform coding of  images with serve as targets for benchmarking
              performance.  In one  or both cases, a model of channel errors will be included
              to assess  overall source-channel coding performance.  ***
