Title       : RDP: Ribosomal Database Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9314392

Award Number: 9314392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $913028             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Woese carl@phylo.life.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Olsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                          Ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequences are central to biology from both the
              basic and the  methodological perspectives.  As the key elements in the
              cellular translation process they are  worthy of detailed structure/function
              studies in their own right.  In addition, their  "evolutionary characteristics"
              make them extremely useful as tools in a number of other  areas, microbiology
              in particular.  Comparative analysis of rRNA sequences has (1) provided  the
              secondary structure of the rRNAs themselves; (ii) led to the inference of the
              universal tree   of life--a basis for a natural microbial classification--and
              the discovery of the Archaea; (iii)  provided the basis for new and powerful
              approaches to microbial ecology; (iv) defined targets  for much of the "probe"
              development in medical diagnosis; and (v) provided new methods  for
              environmental impact and bioremediation assessment.  All such studies require
              large  amounts of rRNA data, and these can be used effectively only in the
              context of the  appropriate database of rRNA sequences; one that not only
              provides the raw sequence data,  but also organizes the data into alignments,
              provides a phylogenetic overview, makes  available programs for data handling
              and analysis, and (for many users) offers a suite of  services to assist them
              in their handling and analysis of the data.    In  that an rRNA sequence
              database this useful, this versatile, did  not exist, the Ribosome  Database
              Project (RDP) has been established at the University of Illinois (with a grant
              from  NSF).  Through its E-mail and FTP servers, the RDP offers aligned and
              phylogenetically  ordered rRNA sequences in a variety of user-selected formats,
              as well as various software for  handling and analysis of data.  In addition,
              services such as automated sequence alignment,  probe design checking,
              user-selected subsets of the sequence data and phylogenetic trees, and  rRNA
              secondary structures are provided.    Major objectives of this proposal are: 
              (i) provide current alignments of rR NA data; (ii)  provide a phylogenetic tree
              for those data; (iii) further automate the internal data updating  and data
              management procedures; (iv) develop a "next generation" sequence alignment
              editor;  (v) improve and expand the sequence data handling and analysis tools,
              including those for  probe development, sequence alignment, and phylogenetic
              analysis; (vi) add new and  improved software and services to the RDP servers;
              (vii) add new forms of data access and  distribution; and (viii) increase the
              types of ribosome-related sequence alignments offered.    Given the present
              volume of rRNA sequence data (approximately 2000 sequences) and the  estimated
              future level (some estimates running into the millions), the RDP has an
              essential  role to play in biological, medical and environmental research in
              the future.
