Title       : A Core Lexical Engine: The Contextual Determination of Word Sense
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1997  
File        : a9314955

Award Number: 9314955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390697             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Pustejovsky jamesp@cs.brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Branimir K. Boguraev  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,1509,6845,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9314959  Cole       This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA
               Human Language Technology  initiative involving cooperation  between the
              Oregon Graduate Institute and the International  Computer Science Institute. 
              The proposed project  considers  research on: a) signal representation
              methodologies that would  combat environmental noise and non-linearities which
              detract from  automatic speech recognition,  b)  speaker variability which is a
               source of uncertainty also in recognition, and is to be tackled  from a
              probabilistic point of view from collected (telephone)  speech corpus,  and, c)
              dialogue enhancement methodologies and  strategies, including recovery, in
              order to increase the  probability of correct recognition. Each of these three
              areas  comprise major deterrents to robust recognition that will be 
              investigated.  The overall objective of the project is to  consider integrated
              approaches to spoken-language system  robustness.         9314946  Flanagan    
                  This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA  Human
              Language Technology  for cooperation between researchers at  Rutgers
              University's Center for Computer Aids for Industrial  Productivity (CAIP), AT&T
              Bell Laboratories and General Dynamics  Electric Boat Division.  The research
              to be conducted concerns  the generation of speech signals in terms of (a) an
              articulatory  description of the vocal system, and (b) a fluid dynamic solution
               to the generation, propagation, and radiation of audible sound  produced by
              the acoustic system.  This includes the computation  of the speech signal from
              first principles, using the Navier-  Stokes description of fluid flow, already
              demonstrated feasible.   Anticipated results include a potentially significant
              improvement  in the quality of synthesized speech and fundamentally new and 
              more robust designs of speech recognizers stemming from a better  understanding
              of the speech phenomena and how it can be made more  immune to interference. 
              Also it is expected that t his research  influence improvements in the coding
              of speech at lower bit  rates.       9314967  Price         This is the first
              year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA  Human Language Technology 
              initiative involving cooperation  between researchers at SRI International,
              Stanford University and  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   The
              proposed project   considers research on the hypothesis that disfluencies in 
              spontaneous speech - pauses, repeated words, repairs, filled  pauses, word
              fragments,  and elongated segments - are far from  random and that knowledge
              about their regularity would shed light  on aspects of human cognition  and
              provide principled methods for  dealing with them in spontaneous speech
              processing.  Several  relevant disciplines are involved in this effort such as
              human-  computer interaction, linguistics, psycho-linguistics,   computational
              linguistics, prosody, and speech technology.  The  multi-disciplinary approach
              includes investigating the forms and  distribution of disfluencies across many
              corpora, conducting  perceptual experiments to assess the saliency of specific
              cues in  the signal, and developing and evaluating new methods for  automatic
              processing of speech.   9314955  Pustejovsky         This is the first year of
              a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA  Human Language Technology  initiative
              involving cooperation  between researchers at Brandeis University and at Apple
              Computer.   The research involves the building of a generative lexical engine 
              at the core which aids in the determination of word sense  following lexical
              properties considered composable in a  given  phrasal context.  The project
              instantiates a lexical semantic  segment of a substantial fragment of English
              by constructing such  core lexical engine with the following components: a
              semantic  typing system, relational structures for all categories, and 
              generative mechanisms enabling  extension and identification of  word sense in
              context.  The project is complementary to other  initiatives  to develop
              linguistic infrastructure resources on a  large scale, such as COMLEX and
              WordNet.  The project develops  mechanisms that carry out the specialized
              lexical inferences that  result, through composition of lexical types, in word
              sense  determination.         Abstract      IRI-9314969  $224,660 - 12 mos. 
              Sleator, D. and J. Lafferty   Carnegie Mellon University      Grammatical
              Trigrams: A New Approach to Statistical Language Modeling   __________        
              This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA Human Language
              Technology   initiative involving cooperation between researchers from Carnegie
              Mellon University and  International Business Machines.  This project intends
              takes advantage of the simplicity of the  classical statistical trigram model
              of language while augmenting it with the syntactic and semantic  aspects which
              constrain the use of the new grammatical trigram model to advantage over the
              purely  stochastic model.  The concepts of  probabilistic link grammars are
              used in this research,  incorporating trigrams into a unified framework for
              modeling long-distance grammatical dependencies  in computationally efficient
              ways.   The methods proposed are expected to have greater predictive  power
              over current methods from the point of view of entropy measurements,  and to
              integrate finite-  state automata models and new statistical estimation
              algorithms with modern powerful machines  resulting in improved speech
              recognition, translation, and understanding systems.        Abstract     
              IRI-9314961  $274,761 - 12 mos.  Thomason, R. H., and J. R. Hobbs  University
              of Pittsburgh      Integrated Techniques for Generation and Interpretation  
              __________         This is the first year of a continuing award in the NSF/ARPA
              Human Language Technology   initiative involving cooperation between the
              University of Pittsburgh and the Stanford Research  Institute.  This project
              involves research on integrating the intentional and informational perspectives
               in architectures for interpr etation and generation of interactive discourse. 
              Particular problems  investigated include the recognition by the listener of
              the speaker s plan, a formalization of the notion  of  conversational record, 
              discourse structure from a computational point of view, and analysis of 
              implicatures involving quantity and similar phenomena involving interactions
              between the processes of  generation and interpretation.  Bases for the
              research are the use of abductive inference in finite-state  approximation
              methods and in knowledge-based systems, accommodation processes in interactive 
              discourse, generation of coherent text, use of defeasible reasoning in plan
              recognition, and utterance  planning to achieve communicative goals.           
              Abstract      IRI-9314992  $250,000 - 12 mos.  Young, S. R. and J. G. Carbonell
               Carnegie Mellon University      Multitext Fusion, Tracking and Trend Detection
                __________         This is the first year of a continuing award in the
              NSF/ARPA Human Language Technology   initiative involving cooperation between
              Carnegie Mellon University and the SRA Corporation.  This  project involves the
              investigation of methodologies for the extraction of information from text and
              its  summarization in structured data records for subsequent automatic
              processing.  The approach includes  merging, fusing and consolidating multiple
              texts that address the same topic at one or more points in  time and use of the
              results in the augmentation of existing knowledge bases, as well as in the 
              detection of potential trends in the data.  The basic issues investigated
              involve metrics to assess  information consistency and redundancy, the
              probabilistic unification of multiple co-referential texts,  methods for
              unifying representations of texts describing events that evolve over time, and
              constrained  structural induction for predicting trends.  The project uses
              pre-extracted repres
