Title       : Analytical Study of Phase-Sensitive Solitary Wave Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9804814

Award Number: 9804814
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76571              (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith R. Miller miller@math.georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804814
Miller

This study concerns the behavior of solitary-wave (pulse)
              solutions to 
certain nonintegrable Nonlinear Schrodinger-type partial
              differential 
equations that have drawn attention from physicists and
              engineers in 
recent years, particularly in nonlinear optics applications. The
              study will 
focus mainly on systems that model pulse propagation in parametric
              
waveguides made of materials with quadratic nonlinearity. These 
equations
              share the property that their solutions show highly phase-
sensitive behavior
              (for example in collision outcomes). One part of the 
study will investigate
              the existence and stability of travelling waves for 
certain systems, using
              variational techniques and detailed eigenvalue 
analysis of linearized
              operators. A second part of the study will involve 
the development of
              ordinary differential equations as models for phase-
sensitive pulse behavior,
              including collisions between two quadratic 
pulses.

The equations to be
              studied arise in fiber optics; their solutions model light 
pulses travelling
              down a fiber. They are of interest to optical scientists and 
engineers
              because they model light pulses that are unusually narrow and 
require
              unusually low energies to produce; the hope is that many such 
pulses could be
              packed closely together to increase the speed of data 
transmission through
              optical fibers. This study will address fundamental 
properties of these
              pulses by identifying factors important for predicting 
their stability (when
              a pulse is affected by noise and interactions with the 
fiber and other
              pulses, to what extent does it retain the pulse shape 
necessary to transmit
              information?) and their behavior in collisions (when 
two pulses meet each
              other head-on).

