Title       : Late Pleistocene Prehistory of the Hatay, Turkey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9804722

Award Number: 9804722
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81504              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Kuhn skuhn@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Steven Kuhn and Mary Stiner will
              conduct two field seasons of research at three archaeological sites located in
              the Hatay region of Turkey. Because of its position near the Syrian border, the
              sites are situated in an important transition zone at the edge of the Middle
              East. Work by prior excavators, as well as preliminary research at these sites
              by Kuhn and Stiner indicates that all three contain long sequences of Upper
              Paleolithic material and that the earliest levels likely exceed 40,000 years in
              age. This makes them of great anthropological significance. In Europe at
              approximately 40,000 years ago an important biological and cultural change took
              place when anatomically modern humans succeeded Neanderthal peoples and an
              Upper Paleolithic technology characterized by a different  more function
              specific stone tool technology, bone tools and art replaced a more general
              technological adaptation. In Europe, where archaeological data are abundant, it
              is fairly clear that replacement rather than in situ development took place.
              However the point of origin for the Upper Paleolithic industries is unknown and
              the underlying process which led to their emergence is not understood.
              Anatomically modern humans are present in the Near East prior to their
              appearance in Europe and paleoanthropologists have thus focused their attention
              on this area. It is this fact together with the early dates and presence of
              bone tools which make the Hatay sites so interesting. Because stratigraphic
              data indicate that they document long periods of time, it is possible to
              consider them from the perspective of development as well or origins.  The
              research team will conduct preliminary stratigraphic excavations. They will
              collect and analyze both the lithic and faunal remains and collect samples for
              radiometric dating. On this basis a longer term project is planned.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
