Title       : Topics in Formal Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9804833

Award Number: 9804833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127944             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian M. Anderson anderson@math.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Fels  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal: DMS-9804833  Principal Investigators:  Ian Anderson and
              Mark Fels    Formal differential geometry is the study of localized deformation
               invariants defined on the solution space of a given differential  relation. 
              These deformation invariants arise as cohomology classes in  various invariant
              variational bicomplexes defined on the jet spaces of  the given differential
              relation.  The objectives of this research  proposal are to develop new methods
              for the computation of these  localized deformation invariants, to study the
              properties of these  invariants through the use of jet bundle techniques, and
              to develop  new applications of formal geometry in global analysis, integrable 
              systems and mathematical physics.  Three avenues of research are  proposed. 
              The first project will explore the relationships between  the variational
              bicomplex for two differential equations which are  related by one of the
              various integration or reduction methods, some  of which date back to Lie and
              Vessiot.  The second project is based  upon two new extensions of the inverse
              problem of the calculus of  variations.  One extension is directed towards the
              existence and  classification of Hamiltonian structures; the other extension
              seeks to  characterize integral invariants arising in global analysis such as 
              the Kazdan-Warner integrals which obstruct the solution to the  prescribed
              curvature problem.  The third project is motivated by the  role that the
              variational bicomplex plays in the general theory of  characteristic classes
              and seeks to generalize this role to general  pseudo-group actions on fiber
              bundles using the method of moving  frames and differential invariant theory.  
               The prevalent theme of the proposed work is symmetry.  By the symmetry  of an
              object one means the group of motions in space which leave the  object
              unchanged.  The symmetry of a cube includes discrete rotations  by 90 degrees
              about each one of its 3 axis.  The symmetry group of a  sphere includes the
              continuous rotations t hrough any angle about any  axis through the center of
              the sphere.  In problems in applied  mathematics, differential geometry and
              mathematical physics, one is  interested in the symmetries which leave the
              governing (differential)  equations unchanged.  Such symmetries are extremely
              important in  studying both the analytical and qualitative features of the
              governing  equations.  Indeed, almost all known exact solutions of important 
              non-linear equations (such as the Einstein, Yang-Mills, or harmonic  map
              equations) have a high degree of symmetry and can be obtained by  symmetry
              methods.  Nevertheless, there are many theoretical and  practical issues yet to
              be studied.  In particular, theoretical  techniques which have previously been
              computationally inaccessible can  now be investigated using powerful symbolic
              mathematics computer  programs.
