Title       : Hunter-herder Transitions and later Stone Age Ceramics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9804693

Award Number: 9804693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81558              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Garth Sampson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Until approximately 2,000 years ago South Africa was inhabited solely by `San`
              (`Bushman`) foragers who lacked pottery and domestic livestock and subsisted
              solely by hunting and gathering. This picture changed with the appearance of
              both livestock and ceramics, introduced by other Bushman/Hottentot groups. In
              the parts of South Africa such as the Karoo these two groups and lifestyles
              interacted for almost a thousand years until the appearance of the Boers in the
              1700s. The goal of Dr. Sampson's research is to understand the interactions
              between hunter-gatherers and pastoralists over this extended period of time. 
              The work focuses on culture contact and adaptation and sets these processes
              within a shifting environmental context. How do peoples with originally
              distinct lifestyles interact with each other. To what extend do they divide
              space in a mutually exclusive way? What cultural elements such as pottery are
              shared? To what extent are interactions fashioned in mutually beneficial ways?
              Does competition for limited space lead to antagonistic relations? As
              environment changes, either as a result of overgrazing or climate change how do
              these factors shift through time? These are the central issues which Dr.
              Sampson's project addresses.  With prior NSF support Dr. Sampson and his
              colleagues have conducted extensive archaeological survey and excavation in the
              Upper Zeekoe Valley, a 5,000 km. square region in South Africa. All surface
              sites have been mapped and stratified caves have been excavated. With this
              enormous data base it is possible to examine spatial relations between
              hunter-gatherers and herders and to analyze changes in site distribution over
              time. During the current NSF project, Dr. Sampson will expand this work. He
              will obtain a large series of radiocarbon dates to fix the sequence more
              precisely in time. Analysis of fossil pollen will provide insight into
              fluctuating environmental conditions. A detailed study of ceramics will shed
              light on patterns of production and exchange. Trace element analysis of both
              pottery and clay sources will reveal the extent of local production and provide
              information on broader regional interaction. The work will provide an
              unprecedented and detailed picture of a cultural interaction which extended
              over a millennium.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
