Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for
               FY 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9804265

Award Number: 9804265
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fritzi S. Grevstad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1163      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN BIOSCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1163,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      DBI-9804265  Fritzi Grevstad    This action funds an NSF
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in  Biosciences Related to the Environment for
              1998.  This  fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain 
              additional scientific training beyond the doctoral degree  and to pursue
              innovative and imaginative research into the  fundamental mechanisms underlying
              the interactions between  organisms and their environment at the molecular,
              cellular,  organismal, population, community and/or ecosystem level in  any
              area of biology supported by the Directorate for  Biological Sciences of the
              National Science Foundation.    Each fellowship supports a research and
              training plan to be  carried out in a sponsoring laboratory.  The research and 
              training plan for this fellowship is entitled interactions  among herbivores
              introduced for the biological control of  weeds.  The research is concerned
              with how interactions  among herbivores influence their spatial distributions, 
              abundance, and impacts on plant populations. Interactions  representing 3
              feeding guilds are being studied among four  insect species which were recently
              introduced into North  America for the biocontrol of purple loosestrife
              (Lythrum  salicaria). At the scales of both the individual plant and a  patch
              of plants, residency by one species is being studied  on  the effects of the
              rate of colonization, survivorship,  and impact of an additional species. Of
              particular interest  is whether prior occupancy confers a competitive
              advantage,  a phenomenon that has been little studied in the field.  Records of
              past and current weed control projects maintained  by the Oregon Department of
              Agriculture are also being  analyzed. The data set contains yearly updates on
              the status  of 59 biocontrol agents introduced against 29 target weeds  across
              36 Oregon counties.  The research has important  implications for biocontrol
              introductions, biological  invasions, and herbivore interactions in general.
