Title       : Australian Cranial Traits: Function, Development, and ModernHuman Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9804861

Award Number: 9804861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan C. Anton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The relationship between Homo erectus and Homo sapiens is critical to
              understanding the origin of modern humans.  Two schools of thought exist, one
              that sees regional evolution of Homo sapiens from local populations of H.
              erectus throughout the Old World, and another that sees H. sapiens originating
              in Africa and ultimately replacing local H. erectus populations.  Both schools
              use cranial characters to examine the degree of continuity in a geographic
              region but differ on their interpretations of the significance of these
              characters.  Both agree that the best case for such continuity can be made in
              Australasia.  This study uses comparative human anatomy to explicitly test
              whether the characters used to link Indonesian H. erectus and Australian modern
              humans are likely to be good indicators of genetic relatedness.   The
              hypotheses to be tested are: 1) are the linking features functionally
              associated with a robust masticatory (chewing) pattern in modern Australians,
              2) are features of the neurocranium (braincase) structural consequences of
              growth universal to long-headed individuals but not necessarily of genetic
              valence, and 3) are cranial keels structurally similar across taxa.  These
              hypotheses are tested using 15 geographically diverse modern human samples,
              metric and nonmetric traits, and Computed Tomography.   Answers to each of
              these three questions are critical to evaluating whether the linking features
              are likely to reflect genetic relatedness or some other shared environmental or
              developmental condition.  Without explicit evaluation of the sources of these
              features, the simple enumeration of features in modern and fossil samples is
              not phylogenetically interpretable.                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
