Title       : Geochemical and Physical Aquifer Heterogeneity: Correlation with Sedimentary
               Facies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2002      
File        : a9804980

Award Number: 9804980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1999      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238740             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richelle M. Allen-King allenkng@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A 9804980
Allen-King
 
The goal of the proposed project is to test the
              hypothesis: geochemical and physical properties of sedimentary aquifers are
              correlated to facies.  A consequence of the hypothesis is that property
              heterogeneity must be related to the distribution of facies.  If this
              hypothesis is correct, facies mapping can provide quantitative information
              about the spatial structure of physical and chemical transport properties of
              sedimentary aquifers.  Additionally, a facies-based approach will yield insight
              into relations between permeability and reactivity.
The proposed project seeks
              to test the hypothesis at one site - the Borden sites.  The representative
              geochemical and physical aquifer properties selected for quantification are the
              sorption coefficient (Kd) for a model hydrophobic organic chemical (HOC), which
              provides a measure of reactivity, and the permeability (k).  The specific
              objectives of the proposed project are to determine:
 
1.    the significance
              of facies in explaining the variance (. i.e. heterogeneity) of k and HOC
              KD;

2.    the spatial properties of, and spatial coffelation between, k and
              HOC KD;

3.   Relationships between these two properties and fundamental
              sediment properties of each
      facies;

4.   the accuracy of a mapped
              facies distribution in predicting the distributions of k and Kd.

A major
              contribution of this work is that the geology of the system - the basic
              materials which make up sediments and the processes which transport and deposit
              them - provides the framework for understanding chemical property
              heterogeneity.  This project will produce quantitative information on the basic
              relationships between sedimentary facies and geochemical and physical
              hydrologic properties.  It is one part of a larger sequence of studies designed
              to assess the variability of chemical properties of sedimentary aquifers.  We
              anticipate that the results will transform the way that hydrogeochemical
              property heterogeneity is conceptualized for sedimentary aquifers.

 

 d. 
