Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for
               FY 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9804183

Award Number: 9804183
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Creagh W. Breuner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1163      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN BIOSCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1163,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      DBI-9804183  Creagh W. Breuner    This action funds an NSF
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in  Biosciences Related to the Environment for
              1998.  This  fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain 
              additional scientific training beyond the doctoral degree  and to pursue
              innovative and imaginative research into the  fundamental mechanisms underlying
              the interactions between  organisms and their environment at the molecular,
              cellular,  organismal, population, community and/or ecosystem level in  any
              area of biology supported by the Directorate for  Biological Sciences of the
              National Science Foundation.    Each fellowship supports a research and
              training plan to be  carried out in a sponsoring laboratory.  The research and 
              training plan for this fellowship is entitled  characterization of multiple
              mechanisms for glucocorticoid  action in the stress response pathway in a
              sparrow.  Survival and reproduction in the wild depend upon an  animal's
              ability to perceive events in the environment and  to adjust physiology and
              behavior appropriately.  Unpredictable events rapidly increase levels of
              circulating  glucocorticoids, eliciting physiological and behavioral  responses
              and serving to avoid chronic stress.  There is  evidence for three
              glucocorticoid receptors in the avian  brain: two intracellular and one
              membrane.  These receptors  should have distinctly different temporal responses
              to  glucocorticoids and therefore different roles in the  regulation of the
              stress response.  This series of  experiments characterizes and localizes these
              receptors in  the avian brain and elucidates the pathway from a perceived 
              stressor to behavioral changes in a free-living, seasonal  vertebrate, Gambel's
              white-crowned sparrow (Zonotrichia  leucophrys gambelii).
