Title       : Parity Violation in Hydrogen and Deuterium and Related Spin Physics Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9804343

Award Number: 9804343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $645000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Finn finn@physics.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger D. Carlini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Armstrong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Keith A. Griffioen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The William and Mary Electroweak Spin Physics Group  proposes to undertake
              a program of electromagnetic and weak  current studies that probe the flavor
              content of hadrons and  hadronic matter.  The primary focus of the effort will
              be  measurements of the parity violating asymmetry in elastic  electron
              scattering from the nucleon using a polarized  electron beam at the Thomas
              Jefferson National Accelerator  Facility (Jefferson Laboratory).  The
              experiments will  explore the strange quark sea contributions to the nucleon 
              ground state (Jab Experiments E91-010, Finn & Souder, et  al., and E91-017,
              Beck, et al.).  The strength of the  strange-quark sea has important
              consequences for nucleon  models and for interpretation of deep inelastic spin-
               structure function results.  The HAPPEX (Hall A Proton  Parity Experiment) and
              GO experiments have received the  highest scientific priority at the
              laboratory.  The  importance of the proposed work is recognized as well in the 
              long-range plan for nuclear science prepared by NSAC.  The  group also intends
              to develop and be a part of possible  extensions to the HAPPEX and GO programs.
                    Preliminary studies of helicity-dependent beam  fluctuations indicate
              that the Jefferson Laboratory beam is  of exceptional quality and suitable for
              parity violation  measurements.  The first HAPPEX production run for is 
              scheduled for 1998.  W&M are responsible for optic studies,  Monte Carlo
              simulations, and for the design, fabrication,  and installation of the
              detectors needed for this  experiment.  These detectors are being assembled and
              tested  in our detector laboratory by graduate and undergraduate  students
              associated with the group.  We have also entered  into a Memorandum of
              Understanding with Jefferson  Laboratory, the University of Maryland, Carnegie
              Mellon  University, Norfolk State University, and the GO  Collaboration to work
              on the GO detector package.  Commissioning of the GO spectrometer is expected
              to begin in  2000.       There is a large educational component to this effort.
               Six graduate students (two supported by Jefferson  Laboratory) are presently
              working on group related  activities at Jefferson Laboratory.  We also
              anticipate that  several undergraduates will participate in senior thesis and 
              summer REU projects.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
