Title       : Scale and Hierarchy among Architectural Centers in the Mixtequille,
               South-Central Veracruz, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a9804738

Award Number: 9804738
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153492             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara L. Stark BLSTARK@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Barbara Stark and her colleagues
              will conduct two field seasons of archaeological survey and analysis in the
              Western Papaloapan basin in Central Veracruz, Mexico. During past fieldwork in
              a 62 sq. km. area Dr. Stark mapped 17 formal complexes of building remains as
              well as a total of 1900 features.  On the basis of associated ceramic remains
              these have been dated to the Classic period (300-900 AD) and are associated
              with the Mixtequilla civilization. Dr. Stark now wishes to set them into a
              broader geographic context and reconstruct the functional relationships among
              them. To accomplish this goal she will conduct a large scale surface survey of
              surrounding regions to locate additional structures and complexes. Surface
              materials including pottery and stone artifacts will be collected and analyzed.
              On this basis it will be possible to date individual occurrences, determine the
              degree of interaction among them and gain insight into the range of
              manufacturing and subsistence activities which took place. Based on relative
              size and associated remains it will also be possible to determine the extent to
              which individual features were incorporated into a centralized hierarchical
              political structure.  Although archaeologists know a great deal about the Mayan
              civilization, this is only one of many cultures which flourished in prehistoric
              Middle America. Scientists wish to understand the range of variation in
              political, economic and social organization which characterizes these complex
              entities and the Mixtequilla civilization provides an excellent source of data.
              Although the number of habitation groups is surprisingly high in the relatively
              small region surveyed, it is not clear how they fit (or don't fit) together.
              Were they closely integrated into a single hierarchical system or did
              individual units function with relative autonomy, in contrast to the Classic
              lowland Mayan case? Dr. Stark's study will provide valuable insight. It will
              produce data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in training both US
              and Mexican students.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
