Title       : Novel Applications of Scattering Probes to the Nanostructure and Thermodynamics
               of Polymeric Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  2000     
File        : a9804327

Award Number: 9804327
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanat K. Kumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9804327  Kumar    The primary focus of this work is to establish the molecular 
              bases for the miscibility of model polymer blends in the bulk and  near
              surfaces.  These issues are interesting and relevant since  polymers used in
              practice are frequently blended to tune  properties and the phase state of the
              resulting mixture plays a  critical role in this context.  The consequences of
              phase  separation in a thin film on the nanostructure of flexible  confining
              boundaries, such as the air surface, will also be  studied in this work.  This
              is practically important since the  roughness of the air-polymer interface
              crucially affects the  gloss of a coating film.  The primary tools to be
              employed in  this work are relatively novel scattering probes  including small 
              angle neutron scattering applied to ultrathin films and wide  angle x-ray
              scattering  and computer simulations.  These methods,  in combination with
              standard statistical mechanics, will be used  to incisively establish the
              connection between the local  structure of the molecules, local packing 
              obtained from wide  angle scattering  and the macroscopic thermodynamics  small
              angle  scattering  for the bulk and the confined systems.  The approach 
              outlined above is in contrast to most past work, which have  treated the bulk
              and surface behavior as two separate problems.  Consequently, very little
              molecular based understanding of these  interrelated situations exists at this
              time.  It is this void  that the proposed work will fill.  %%%  The proposed
              work, which will utilize novel experimental and  theoretical tools in an
              integrated fashion, will aid in the  efficient design of polymeric materials
              with desired properties  for use in practical applications, ranging from the
              ubiquitous   e.g., packaging  to "high-tech"  e.g., lubricants for hard  discs,
              adhesives .  ***
