Title       : Ferromagnetism in Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  2000   
File        : a9804313

Award Number: 9804313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Heiman heiman@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9804313  Heiman  The aim of this research is to investigate the synthesis of 
              semiconductors that are ferromagnetic the overall goal is to  discover new
              device materials useful in the information age. The  project addresses the
              synthesis and properties of high-Curie-  temperature, ferromagnetic GaAs doped
              with Mn, which has the  potential to exhibit strong magnetic as well as
              electrical and  optical behavior. Magnetic semiconductors such as the europium 
              chalcogenides are good magnets but have poor electrical  properties and limited
              optical properties, while dilute magnetic  semiconductors such as
              manganese-doped II-VI materials show  better electrical and optical properties
              but weak magnetism. Thin  films and quantum wells of Gal-xMnxAs/Ga1-yAlyAs will
              be grown by  MBE. It is known that Mn2+ substituting for Ga3+ in GaAs leads to 
              deep acceptor states. When the hole concentration is above the  Mott criterion
              (~2x1019 cm-2) a metallic state is produced. It is  believed that a strong p-d
              exchange between the magnetic Mn2+  ions and holes generates ferromagnetism. A
              key issue is how to  control the number of holes in the material. The hole 
              concentration, and ultimately the Curie temperature, depend on  the degree of
              compensation of the holes by unknown donor-like  states. Proper control of the
              manganese and hole concentration is  expected to lead to increased Curie
              temperatures. Further  investigations will address the self-assembly of MnAs
              quantum  dots, and the feasibility of building multilayer structures for  giant
              magnetoresistance materials.    %%%  The project addresses basic research
              issues in a topical area of  materials science having high technological
              relevance. The  research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
               fundamental level to important aspects of  electronic/photonic/magnetic
              devices. The basic knowledge and  understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute  to improving the performance of advanced devices by
              providing a  fundamental understan ding and a basis for designing and producing
               improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important  feature of the
              program is the integration of research and  education through the training of
              students in a fundamentally and  technologically significant area.
