Title       : Educational Software Components of Tomorrow: A Testbed for Suitable Development
               of Reusable, Interoperable Object for Middle School Mathematics Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2001    
File        : a9804930

Award Number: 9804930
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1995982            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy D. Pea   (Principal Investigator current)
              James J. Kaput  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy Roschelle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher DiGiano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 8888,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9804930  Pea    Most NSF-funded educational technology projects have created a
              single software program for a specific subject matter goal.  These projects
              have yielded a valuable base of knowledge about the appropriate use of
              technology in science and math education.  Yet they typically do not already
              address scale-up or sustainability.  Thus, too few products of this research
              are widely available in the software marketplace or have been integrated with
              new curricula to meet the challenges of systemic reform.  In this project we
              focus not on a single software need but on the broader problem of how software
              innovations can accumulate, integrate, and scale up to meet the needs of
              systemic reform of K-12 mathematics and science education.    The Educational
              Software Components of Tomorrow (ESCOT) project addresses this problem by
              leveraging an emerging convergence of powerful forces: interactive media,
              networked communities, and component software technologies.  Together, these
              forces have the potential to reshape the infrastructure for educational
              software development, resulting in a new network economy that will be designed
              to meet national needs for educational software with greater efficiency,
              capacity for innovation and growth, and competitive drive toward quality.  Our
              hypothesis is that the confluence of these forces could provide an
              infrastructure for sustainable development of software for K-12 systemic
              reform.    ESCOT will pursue four research objectives:  (a) form an
              experimental testbed-a distributed network of teachers, researchers, and
              developers using a shared collection of software resources-to investigate this
              hypothesis; (b) develop a mapping between the technology needs of
              standards-based reform efforts and feasible software modules; (c) identify ways
              of using the Internet to catalyze distributed, self-organizing integration
              teams; and (d) analyze mechanisms and design patterns for achieving
              interoperability among educational software components.  Paralleling the
              initial NSF cur riculum development strategy, the ESCOT testbed begin with
              existing standards-based middle school mathematics curricula and implementation
              efforts, with the aim of building knowledge and exemplars that inform policy
              and practice more broadly across K-12 mathematics and science.  In forming and
              studying the ESCOT testbed, SRI International will team with Swarthmore
              College, the University of Massachusetts-Dartmouth, the University of
              Colorado-Boulder and coordinate with the five NSF-supported middle school
              mathematics curriculum projects and affiliated implementation center at the
              University of Missouri.  ***
