Title       : Upper Cretaceous Vertebrate Fauna at Dzharakuduk, Kyzylkum Desert, Uzbekistan:
               Biostratigraphy, Biogeography, and Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1998       
File        : a9804771

Award Number: 9804771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169988             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. David Archibald darchibald@sunstroke.sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans-Dieter Sues  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5915,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804771
Archibald

Main objectives of this proposed work are: 1) to continue
              extensive collecting at Dzharakuduk (Late Cretaceous, Turonian? - Campanian),
              Kyzylkum Desert, Uzbekistan, 2) to place these important collection in a global
              biostratigraphic, paleoecologic, and biogeographic context, 3) and to continue
              the description and phylogenetic analyses of extensive collections already
              recovered.
Field studies at Dzharakuduk, central Kyzylkum Desert, Uzbekistan
              were begun in the late 1970's by the late Russian paleontologist Lev A. Nessov
              and students, continued by the Nessov and the PI in 1994, and by a crew of 11
              persons including the PI and co-Pi in 1997.  These studies, and the
              publications that are beginning to result from them, demonstrate that this area
              is the taxonomically richest (over 130+ species have been reported) and
              arguably one of the most important Late Cretaceous vertebrate faunas in all of
              Eurasia.  The slightly younger sites (Late Cretaceous, Campanian) in the
              world-famous Gobi Desert produce more complete material, but the more
              fragmentary material from Dzharakuduk is often exquisite, preserving
              considerable anatomical detail or even whole cranial and limb elements that are
              almost unknown from Late Cretaceous sites in North America.  The extensive
              surface collecting that had been conducted in the past at Dzharakuduk was also
              done in 1997, but key producing intervals were flagged and intensively dry
              screened in the last three days of the field season.  Almost as many specimens
              of vertebrates (e.g., mammals) were recovered in two and one-half days of
              screening and sorting (10 mammals recovered) compared all of the previous three
              weeks of surface colecting (15 mammals recovered).  Thus, extensive dry
              screening at certain Dzharakuduk sites will be of key importance during the
              next three field seasons.
The Dzharakuduk escarpment includes about 200 meters
              of sediment.  Nessov argued that the vertebrate-bearing sites at Dzharakuduk
              were a combination of fluvial and brackish-water environments, underlain and
              overlain by marine rocks.  The underlying rocks were argued to be Turonian in
              age, while those above in the escarpment were thought to be uppermost
              Cretaceous and Paleogene.  The discover during our reconnaissance in 1994 of an
              ammonite (later identified as Santonian in age) at the top of the escarpment
              demonstrated that no Paleogene sediments were exposed there.  During our more
              extended work in 1997 it was shown that the Dzharakuduk sites are all fluvial
              in origin and are bracketed by a series of peneplanation events of long, but
              undetermined age.  The underlying sediments are definitely marginal marine, but
              establishing an age remains elusive.  The overlying sediments range from
              marginal marine to fully marine, and have yielded a very rich fauna of marine
              invertebrates (80+ species) near the top of the exposure.  A slightly lower
              invertebrate fauna also yielded thousands of shark teeth (12-15 species).  Both
              faunas require detailed study, but are suggestive of an age as old as Santonian
              to as young as early Campanian.  This very preliminary analysis suggesests the
              earlier assessment of a Coniacian age for the continental vertebrate sites at
              Dzharakuduk may be correct, or a slightly younger Santonian age is possible. 
              Samples of sediments yielding various microfossils were made, but we await
              funding for preparation and study of these as well as the macroinvertebrates. 
              The fluvial sites representing low coastal plains at Dzharakuduk are very
              paleoecologically similar to Late Cretaceous sites in North America, but are
              very unlike those in the Gobi, which are much more upland, dry, and aeolian
              dominated.  The abundance of fishes including sharks, amphibians, and aquatic
              turtles at both Dzharakuduk and in the Late Cretaceous of North America stronly
              suggest this paleoecological similarity, but more thorough comparisons will
              only be possible if funds are secred to permit complete sorting, curation, and
              faunal analyses.
In addition to faunal analysis and paleoecological
              interpretations of the vertebrates and invertebrates , a very important
              component of this proposed work is phylogenetic analysis of selected taxa.  A
              variety of shorter papers and larger, mostly synoptic catalogies have appeared
              (mostly) in Russian by Nessov and his students on various aspects of the
              vertebrate fauna, but larger, more detailed studies have begun on various
              vertebrate taxa.  The first monographic treatment of vertebrates from
              Dzharakuduk including a phylogenetic analysis was recently published by Nessov,
              the PI, and Kielan-Jaworowska (1997).  This a monographic study of the
              alpha-level taxonomy of "zhelestids" as well as a phylogenetic analysis of
              these placental mammals showing their relationships to their sister taxon
              Ungulata (a variety of extict taxa plus the extant ungulates, sub-ungulates,
              and whales), which do not appear until near the K/T boundary some 20 million
              years after the Dzharakuduk "zhelestids".  Based on these "zhelestids" from
              Dzharakuduk the PI was able to name and describe a new superordinal taxon of
              mammals, the Ungulatomorpha.  The proposed grant will permit the recovery and
              study of other vertebrates from Dzharakuduk that will surely be of equal
              interest for phylogenetic studies.
 
