Title       : Geochemical Evolution of the Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9804891

Award Number: 9804891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $465000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Hart shart@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804891
Hart
This accomplishment-based renewal has, as its overarching goals,
              the understanding of the placement, genesis, evolution and lithologic nature of
              the several known heterogeneous mantle domains, and the dynamics of melting and
              melt extraction from these mantle domains. Two of these domains have yet to be
              adequately characterized for their osmium isotopic composition. In order to
              address this, osmium isotope studies will be conducted on ocean island basalts
              (Pitcairn and Christmas Islands) thought to be derived from the EM1 mantle
              domain and on refractory chromites in abyssal peridotites (MORB domain) from
              all of the major spreading ridge systems of the world. Several of Earth's
              mantle domains are thought to be a result of lithospheric recycling, yet the
              lithologic expression and melting dynamics of this material are not understood.
              These issues will be explored via two avenues. Ion microprobe studies of the Pb
              isotope composition and trace element signatures of mineral (phenocryst) melt
              inclusions from various ocean island basalts will shed light on the melting
              lithologies and melt transport networks involved. The second approach will
              utilize Th and Ra isotope data in conjunction with melt inclusion studies for a
              series of historic lavas from the Galapagos Islands. The apparent derivation of
              a number of these islands by a wide range in degree of melting from a single
              mantle source will allow constraints to be placed on issues of batch versus
              fractional melting, percolative versus focused melt transport, continuous melt
              re-equilibration versus escape in high velocity conduits, and homogenous source
              lithology versus small-scale (veined) heterogeneities.

