Title       : Measuring System Dynamics for the Direct Assessment of Software Security
               Violation Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9804075

Award Number: 9804075
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Munson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Oman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jim Alves-Foss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah Frincke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-6111

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9804075  This project will focus on the detection in real time of system 
              misuse.  This will be achieved through the dynamic measurement of  software
              systems.  This technique has been quite successful in  the dynamic
              determination of software reliability. Through a  shift in perspective the
              variation of the behavior that  determines system reliability also provides a
              convenient vehicle  for the detection of security violations.  The research
              effort  will center around three distinct software system attributes: 
              granularity, scalability, and the operating milieu of the target  software
              system. Thus, initial project phase will concentrate on  the instrumentation
              and measurement of O/S kernel level program  activity. The next project phase
              will center on the dynamic  determination of specific application (user)
              profiles. The third  project phase will shift the measurement focus to
              network-wide  software applications. This new metaphor for secure systems will 
              focus on the functionality that the system is executing and the  impact that
              the functionality has on program modularity, as  opposed to the existing view
              of the system's software as a  monolithic system being stimulated by an
              aggressive and hostile  user.  A system will be measured as it executes its
              many  functionalities, profile will be established for normal activity,  and
              subtle shifts in the profiles that represent the execution of  security breach
              functionalities will be identified and  modeled.***
