Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for
               FY 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9804135

Award Number: 9804135
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian J. Enquist   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1163      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN BIOSCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1163,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      DBI-9804135  Brian J. Enquist    This action funds an NSF
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in  Biosciences Related to the Environment for
              1998.  This  fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain 
              additional scientific training beyond the doctoral degree  and to pursue
              innovative and imaginative research into the  fundamental mechanisms underlying
              the interactions between  organisms and their environment at the molecular,
              cellular,  organismal, population, community and/or ecosystem level in  any
              area of biology supported by the Directorate for  Biological Sciences of the
              National Science Foundation.    Each fellowship supports a research and
              training plan to be  carried out in a sponsoring laboratory.  The research and 
              training plan for this fellowship is entitled Allometry as a  fundamental
              mechanism linking evolutionary and ecological  pattern in vascular plants. 
              Traditionally, the role of  plant size has not been as important to the study
              of botany  as it has been in animal research. In animal studies,  organism size
              (or allometry) has been shown to influence  nearly all aspects of organismal
              biology and diversity.  Interestingly, allometric relationships have been shown
              to  be described by a simple mathematical relationship described  by an
              exponent that is a quarter-power. The fact that these  quarter-power
              allometries describe nearly all aspects of  biology (anatomy, physiology,
              ecology of populations, life-  histories) strongly suggests that one or a few
              critical  mechanisms might link biological organization and process.  Recently,
              I have proposed a general model for the origin of  biological allometries. The
              model is based on the  transportation of resources through vascular networks. 
              Perhaps its biggest insight is that although plant and  animals differ,
              allometrically they share numerous  relationships. The underlying assumption of
              this work is  that allometry offers a window by which one can critically 
              investigate fundamental mechanisms influencing pla nt (and  animal) structure,
              function, and evolution. This proposal  will explore the specific predictions
              of the model in  vascular plants by using various empirical measurements of 
              vascular anatomy and physiology, tied with computer  simulation and
              mathematical modeling. Specifically this work  will test the role of vascular
              systems in dictating plant  architecture, evolution, and constraining
              ecological  patterns in local ecological communities.
