Title       : Novel Studies of Topological Order and Pinning Effects in Colloidal Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2000        
File        : a9804083

Award Number: 9804083
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238815             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xinsheng Sean Ling xsling@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9804083  Ling
                 This  experimental research project focuses on topological  order  and 
              pinning  effects  in  colloidal  crystals.  Three  classical  problems are
              addressed: 1) commensurate and incommensurate phases  and  phase transitions,
              2) stability of topological order  of  an  elastic  lattice in a random pinning
              potential, 3) effects  of  a  Peierls-Nabarro  potential  on  edge 
              dislocations  and   melting  kinetics. These problems are encountered in
              surface science, self-  assembled  nanostructure  materials,  low  dimensional 
               electron  systems,  disordered superconductors, micromechanics  of  solids, 
              and  fundamental  studies  of  statistical  mechanics.  Colloidal  suspensions 
              are  the  media for the present  study.  Experiments  employ  digital  video
              microscopy, in combination  with  advanced  optical tweezers technology, to
              study the statics and dynamics of  colloidal  particles confined between two
              glass  slides.  On  the  glass  slides,  a mesoscopic structure which acts as 
              a  quenched  periodic  or random pinning potential for the colloidal particles 
              will  be  made using lithographic techniques. An optical  tweezer  will  be 
              used  to study the elastic and plastic responses  of  a  colloidal  crystal  to
              a local distortion. The proposed  research  will  benefit the undergraduate
              physics program, and will  expose  students  to advanced microfabrication
              technology, optics,  image  analysis  and condensed matter physics. This
              research program  is  interdisciplinary  in nature and involves students,  who 
              receive  excellent  training  in  preparation  for  careers  in  industry, 
              government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This  experimental research project
              focuses on  basic  mechanical  properties  of two-dimensionsal elastic
              crystals. Two-dimensional  crystals are ordered arrays, with some similarity to
              an array  of  marbles  on a Chinese checker board, or a bedspring. The sort  of
               question is what happens t o the overall array if one or a few  of  the 
              objects are pushed; does the array smoothly distort or  does  it  come  apart.
              A related question is the response  if,  in  the  presence  of  a  uniform
              external force, a few locations  of  the  lattice are pinned down. Does the
              array continue to move, does it  stop  (pinned), or does it break up. The
              experiments in this work  actually  will  be done on colloidal crystals, which 
              are  weakly  bound  ordered arrays of molecules. These crystals are relatively 
              easy  to  deal  with  experimentally because  the  intermolecular  forces  are 
              weak  and  the molecules are relatively  large.  The  results  on such a model
              system are expected to be applicable  to  many other situations. In the present
              work on colloidal crystals,  three  classical  problems  are addressed:  1) 
              commensurate  and  incommensurate  phases  and phase transitions,  2) 
              stability  of  topological  order  of an elastic lattice  in  a  random 
              pinning  potential,  3)  effects of a Peierls-Nabarro  potential  on  edge 
              dislocations and melting kinetics. These problems are encountered  in  surface
              science, self-assembled nanostructure materials,  low  dimensional   electron  
              systems,   disordered   superconductors,  micromechanics of solids, and
              fundamental studies of  statistical  mechanics.  Colloidal suspensions are the
              media for  the  present  study.   Experiments   employ  digital   video  
              microscopy,   in  combination with advanced optical tweezers technology,  to 
              study  the  statics and dynamics of colloidal particles confined between  two 
              glass  slides.  On the glass slides, a mesoscopic  structure  which acts as a
              quenched periodic or random pinning potential for  the   colloidal   particles 
              will  be  made  using   lithographic  techniques. An optical tweezer will be
              used to study the  elastic  and   plastic  responses  of  a  colloidal  crystal
               to  a  local  distortion.  The proposed research will benefit the
              undergraduate  physics   program,   and   will  expose  stude nts   to  
              advanced  microfabrication technology, optics, image analysis and condensed 
              matter  physics.  This  research program is interdisciplinary  in  nature  and
              involves students, who receive excellent training  in  preparation  for careers
              in industry, government laboratories  or  academia.  ***
