Title       : Three-Dimensional Instabilities and Transition to Vortex Breakdown in Swirling
               Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  2000   
File        : a9804745

Award Number: 9804745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael W. Plesniak                     
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zvi Rusak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal Number:  CTS 9804745    Principal Investigator:  Rusak   
              This is a grant to continue the  study of abrupt changes in the flow structure
              observed in swirling flows, known as vortex breakdown.  The main objective of
              the research is to construct a physical understanding and consistent
              mathematical description of the manner in which small and large-amplitude
              three-dimensional disturbances evolve in the flow. It is intended that  the
              mechanisms that provoke instabilities and the critical conditions leading to
              the various types of breakdown will be determined.  It is hoped that the study
              may lead to techniques to control these phenomena for variety of applications
              in mechanical and aeronautical engineering technologies.    The program will
              build on the methodology developed during a theoretical study  of the
              three-dimensional dynamics of swirling flows through pipes and in swirling jets
              that was completed under previous NSF support.  During this effort, the
              framework of research for the study of axisymmetric vortex flows will be
              extended to the general case of three-dimensional instabilities.  The proposed
              theoretical approach will combine classical techniques of asymptotic analysis
              with modern mathematical tools from functional and global analysis, theory of
              dynamical systems. and theory of nonlinear  partial differential equations.  
              The study will also be guided by experimental investigations that are currently
              being carried out at the Technion, as a collaborative effort between the
              principal investigator and Dr. J. Cohen, supported by a grant from the
              U.S.-Israel Binational Science Foundation.  Laser Doppler Anemometry (LDA) and
              Particle Imaging Velocimetry (PIV) measurements of the velocity fields and flow
              visualization techniques are used to study the flow dynamics.  The theoretical
              and numerical studies will model the experimental conditions and the analytical
              predictions will be correlated with the measured data as well as acting as a
              guide for the experiments.  2      1
