Title       : Atmospheric Explorations: Weather and Climate Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9804107

Award Number: 9804107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $609542             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Jasperson jaspers@augsburg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Venne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Shipley Newlin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Augsburg College
	      731 21st Avenue South
	      Minneapolis, MN  554541338    612/330-1000

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9804107  Jasperson    The Center for Atmospheric and Space Sciences (CASS) at
              Augsburg College, in collaboration with the Science Museum of Minnesota, is
              developing three exhibit clusters on important weather and climate systems that
              affect our everyday lives.  Each cluster will consist of a micro-computer-based
              exhibit that runs a mathematical model of the weather system, a supporting
              three-dimensional display that encapsulates the entire system, a physical
              interactive exhibit that teaches critical physical concepts, and a graphical
              environment that reinforces connections to visitors' personal knowledge and
              interests.   The three weather systems that constitute the content of the
              exhibit will be selected from the following four options:  mid-latitude
              cyclones and the weather they cause, the cycle of ice ages over the past
              million years, global warming and greenhouse gases, and physical features on
              the earth that have profound effects on local climates.  These exhibit clusters
              will build on the previous interactive exhibit components developed by Augsburg
              College:  Seasons, Winds, and Clouds.     All three exhibit and program
              clusters will be designed so they can be placed in science and natural history
              museums nationwide.  The computer models will be designed to run on common,
              inexpensive microcomputers and will be disseminated to museums, libraries,
              other public sites, and schools.       The project content and educational
              design will be developed by the PI, William Jasperson, a Senior Research
              Scientist at CASS, working with two of his fellow Senior Research Scientists,
              David Venne and Anthony Hansen, and with Geanine Gregoire from the Department
              of Education at Augsburg College.  J. Shipley Newlin and James Roe, will be
              responsible for exhibit design and development at the science museum.
