Title       : Conference on Structure and Function of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases, October
               10-15, 1998 near Strasbourg, France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9804921

Award Number: 9804921
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karin M. Musier-Forsyth musier@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9804921  Musier-Forsyth  This award is for partial support for a Conference on 
              Structure and Function of Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases.  Aminoacyl-tRNA
              synthetases are key enzymes in protein  biosynthesis. They act as  interpreters
              of the genetic code by relating amino acids to  specific trinucleotides through
              the aminoacylation of their  cognate tRNAs. These enzymes are divided into two
              entirely  distinct families on the basis of the architectural  organization of
              their catalytic cores and thus are  exceptional models for the evolution of
              protein  structure/function relationships. The synthetase field is a  rapidly
              progressing research area.  Researchers are using  diverse, multidisciplinary
              approaches to understand  structure-function relationships from a variety of 
              perspectives, including fundamental enzymology, RNA-protein  interactions, and
              even evolutionary biology. In a short  period of  time high resolution crystal
              structures should be  available for all 20 synthetases. The proposed conference
               will offer a well-balanced scientific program, which will  emphasize
              traditional topics such as synthetase structural  diversity, mechanisms,
              editing, tRNA recognition, and tRNAs  and synthetases in translation, as well
              as newer directions  in the field such as synthetase evolution, drug design, 
              alternate functions, and artificial aminoacylation  systems.     Nucleic acids
              are biological molecules that encode all of  the information necessary for
              living organisms to function  and survive. Ribonucleic acid (RNA)  is
              chemically very  similar to deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA), the storage molecule 
              for the genetic code. In living cells, RNA is almost always  found complexed
              with proteins. Unambiguous interpretation of  the genetic code requires
              specific recognition of each of  the more than 60 cellular transfer RNA (tRNA)
              molecules  by a class of proteins known as aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases.  In
              comparison to our  knowledge of DNA-protein interactions, our understanding of 
              RNA-protein interactions is s till quite limited. Due to the  high degree of
              specificity between tRNAs and aminoacyl-tRNA  synthetases, these molecules are
              excellent targets for  studying the principles of protein-RNA recognition. The 
              proposed meeting will be organized to allow a high level of  participation of
              younger  scientists, including students and postdoctorals. The  meeting format
              will also provide an ideal framework for  informal exchanges between younger
              scientists and more  senior leaders in the field, and ensure that young 
              scientists have the most rewarding experience possible.
