Title       : Study of Existing High Temperature Superconductors and Search for New Ones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9804325

Award Number: 9804325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul C. W. Chu CWChu@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9804325  Chu 
                This  experimental research project focuses on  high  temperature 
              superconductivity.  One aspect is the empirical  search  for  new 
              superconductors. A second aspect deals with issues and mechanisms  operative  
              in   the   cuprate   family   of   high   temperature  superconductors. Topics
              under investigation include the  role  of  the  charge reservoir block; the
              Fermi-liquid or non Fermi-liquid  behavior  in  the  overdoped regime; the 
              possibility  of  higher  transition   temperatures;  the  possibilities   of  
              non-cuprate  materials with high transition temperature; and the formation and 
              stability  of  such compounds. Synthesis techniques include  high  pressure,  
              rapid   quench  from  vapor,  solid-state   reaction,  wet-chemistry,  and 
              arc-melting. Physical  properties  including  structural, transport and
              magnetic are determined at ambient  and  high    pressures;   other  
              properties   are    determined    in  collaborations.  This  research program
              is  interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves one or more graduate students,
              who  receive  excellent  training  in  preparation  for  careers  in  industry,
               government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This  experimental research project
              focuses on  high  temperature  superconductivity.  Much of this research deals 
              with  the  oxide  superconductors  containing copper oxide planes such  as 
              Yttrium  Barium   Copper  Oxide,  YBaCuO7,  which  has  a  superconducting 
              transition temperature of 92 Kelvin. One aspect is the  empirical  search for
              new superconductors. A second aspect deals with issues  and   mechanisms 
              operative  in  the  cuprate  family   of   high  temperature  superconductors.
              Topics under investigation  include  the  role of the charge reservoir block;
              the Fermi-liquid or  non  Fermi-liquid behavior in the overdoped regime; the
              possibility of  higher  transition temperatures; the possibilities of
              non-cuprate  materials with high transiti on temperature; and the formation and
               stability  of  such compounds. Synthesis techniques include  high  pressure,  
              rapid   quench  from  vapor,  solid-state   reaction,  wet-chemistry,  and 
              arc-melting. Physical  properties  including  structural, transport and
              magnetic are determined at ambient  and  high    pressures;   other  
              properties   are    determined    in  collaborations.  This research could lead
              to new  superconductors  with  possibility  of applications in improved 
              technologies  for  electric  power generation, electric power transmission,
              electric  motors   and  transmissions,  energy  storage,  and  electronics; 
              including  analog  to  digital converters,  high  speed  computer  circuits, 
              and  cellular telephone base stations.  This  research  program  is
              interdisciplinary in nature and involves one or  more  graduate  students, who
              receive excellent training in preparation  for careers in industry, government
              laboratories or academia.  ***
