Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for
               FY 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1998    
File        : a9804234

Award Number: 9804234
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1998   
Expires     : October 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhiyong Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1163      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN BIOSCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1163,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      DBI-9804234  Zhiyong  Wang    This action funds an NSF
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in  Biosciences Related to the Environment for
              1998.  This  fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain 
              additional scientific training beyond the doctoral degree  and to pursue
              innovative and imaginative research into the  fundamental mechanisms underlying
              the interactions between  organisms and their environment at the molecular,
              cellular,  organismal, population, community and/or ecosystem level in  any
              area of biology supported by the Directorate for  Biological Sciences of the
              National Science Foundation.    Each fellowship supports a research and
              training plan to be  carried out with a sponsoring scientist.  The research and
               training plan for this fellowship is entitled genetic and  molecular analysis
              of brassinosteroid regulation of plant  development by light.  Many
              developmental processes of  plants are regulated by the environmental light
              conditions;  and this light regulation involves the phytohormone 
              brassinosteroids (BR). Genes mediating the BR response are  being isolated as
              those that, when activated or mutated, can  complement the developmental
              defects caused by insufficient  synthesis of BR, such as in the det2 mutant. A
              putative  receptor of BR (BRI1) is a membrane bound receptor kinase.  Proteins
              that interact with or are phosphorylated by the  BRI1 kinase are likely to
              mediate the transduction of BR  signals.  These proteins are being isolated
              using the yeast  two-hybrid or phosphorylation cloning methods. Effects of 
              light treatment on the modification and activity of BRI1  protein are being
              analyzed to determine how BR mediates  light regulation of plant development.
