Title       : CONF: 1998 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on Gametogenesis; Cold
               Spring Harbor, New York, October 1-5, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9804927

Award Number: 9804927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Germ cells constitute a unique tissue in multicellular animals responsible for
              protecting the genome and transmitting it to the next generation. Their
              distinctive biological properties have only begun to be understood at the
              molecular level in recent years due to technical advances in molecular biology
              and genetics. Research has just reached a point where general principles and
              mechanisms uniting invertebrate and vertebrate gametogenesis are beginning to
              emerge.

This meeting aims to provide a forum to bring together researchers
              utilizing phylogenetically diverse vertebrate and invertebrate organisms to
              rapidly advance aspects of germ cell development. By holding the meeting at
              Cold Spring Harbor the PI expects to attract 250-400 participants from around
              the world. Participation by young faculty and postdoctoral scientists working
              on gametogenesis will be strongly encouraged.

Six topics (seven sessions)
              were chosen for detailed discussion (Germ plasm, germ cell migration and
              proliferation, meiosis, germline-soma interactions, follicle patterning, and
              gamete morphogenesis). All of them address subjects whose significance extends
              beyond the particular details of a given organism. For each session, a small
              core of leading scientists has been invited, but most participants will be
              chosen based on the submitted abstracts with the assistance of the session
              chair. Each speaker will make a 10-15 minute presentation of their recent
              progress followed by discussion. This format ensures that the meeting will
              provide a forum for junior scientists and that the most recent and important
              research will be featured and discussed. It should also facilitate interactions
              among participants using different systems.
