Title       : Pluri-Potential Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9804755

Award Number: 9804755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75499              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evgeny A. Poletsky eapolets@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9804755  Principal Investigator: Evgeny A. Poletsky    Abstract:
              The first part of this project is devoted to developing methods for
              construction of plurisubharmonic functions using envelopes of functionals on
              analytic disks. It became known recently that the theory of such methods can be
              reduced to the study of disk envelopes of functions on domains in certain
              infinite-dimensional spaces. Indeed, the complete theory requires solving the
              classical Lelong problems in an infinite-dimensional setting. The possibility
              of using flexible methods in the construction of plurisubharmonic functions
              will allow Poletsky to make advances in the theory of boundary values of such
              functions, where even the correct definition of "boundary values" remains an
              open question. In particular, Poletsky intends to put forward a natural
              definition of these values and to establish that every plurisubharmonic
              function can be decomposed into the sum of a maximal solution to the Dirichlet
              problem with the same boundary values as the given function and a potential
              with zero boundary values. He will then study separately the two pieces of this
              decomposition.     The main tool in the differential calculus invented by Isaac
              Newton is the derivative of a function, a concept that furnishes a deeper and
              more precise understanding of the function's behavior than was possible before
              Newton's time. One will know a function even better if one looks at the
              derivative of the derivative, the derivative of that second derivative, and so
              on through derivatives of arbitrary orders. Not all functions, however, are
              amenable to the computation of these higher order derivatives. Those which do
              are called "analytic functions," and they are precisely the functions that are
              most frequently encountered in the applications of calculus to other scientific
              disciplines. The development of calculus after Newton ushered in two
              significant expansions of his original framework: the investigation of analytic
              functions of more than one variable  and the study of analytic functions in
              which both the variables and the values are complex numbers. Functions fitting
              the latter description constitute a large and fascinating class of functions
              that are extremely "sensitive": a small change in the function in one place can
              somehow ripple through the function to change it everywhere. Such behavior is
              an enormous obstacle in the study of these functions. To overcome this
              difficulty, one seeks to decompose analytic functions into "soft" and "rigid"
              parts and to investigate these parts separately. The main objects of study in
              this project are the so-called "plurisubharmonic functions," which are the
              "soft" parts of analytic functions of several complex variables. The goal is to
              understand these functions better, with the hope that in the long run the
              knowledge gained will translate into a better understanding of the many aspects
              of everyday experience in which analytic functions play important, but usually
              unseen, roles.
