Title       : Volcano: Lost City Pompii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a9804615

Award Number: 9804615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1753450            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula S. Apsell paula apsell@wgbh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susanne B. Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WGBH Educational Fdn
	      125 Western Avenue
	      Boston, MA  02134    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9804615  Apsell     The large format film unit at NOVA/WGBH Boston, in
              association with the Liberty Science Center, is producing a 40-minute large
              format film about the science of volcanology.   Volcano:  Lost City of Pompeii
              will tell the story of a diverse group of scientists working together, each in
              his or her specific field, to understand better how Vesuvius can reasonably be
              expected to behave - today and in the years to come.   Following the scientific
              teams, the film will impart a basic understanding of magma flow and plate
              tectonics, the geological building blocks out of which volcanoes emerge.  The
              film will blend geology with archaeology to tell an ongoing detective story - a
              present-day scientific investigation that integrates state of the art
              techniques and technology with ancient evidence derived from buildings,
              victims' remains, and vivid eyewitness accounts that go back nearly 2,000 years
              to the eruption of Vesuvius in 79 A.D.   The range of scientific disciplines
              involved in the film includes:  geochemistry, geology, geophysics, remote
              sensing, plate tectonics, seismology, archaeology, and volcanology.  The film
              will be available with both captioning for the hearing impaired and visual
              description for visually impaired members of the audience.     The film will be
              supported by an extensive educational outreach plan that includes:    * Pompeii
              Earth Science Exploration, a program targeting underserved and disadvantaged
              youth at 100 Boys & Girls Clubs nationwide,  * Pompeii Museum Toolkit, a
              blueprint enabling museums to integrate existing exhibitry with use of the film
              and including models for outreach initiatives built around the film,  * Pompeii
              Activity Guide, an activity guide for us with upper elementary and middle
              school youth in both informal and form science education settings, and  *
              Pompeii Idea Handbook, a booklet for museums that shares successful outreach
              programs implemented by museums showing the film during the first year.    
              Paula Apsell, Executive Producer of N OVA and Director of the WGBH Science
              Unit, will be the PI.  The Co-Executive Producer will be Susanne Simpson who
              previously produced such large format films as Storm Chasers and To the Limit. 
              The Key Scientific Advisor will be Richard Fisher of the University of
              California, Santa Barbara.  Others on the advisory committee include Lucia
              Civetta, Director of Osservatorio Vesuvio; Diane Favro, Assoc. Prof. in the
              School of Arts and Architecture at UCLA; Grant Heiken, President of the Earth
              and Environmental Science Division of Los Alamos National Laboratory and
              President of the International Society of volcanology; Dan Miller, Chief of the
              U.S. Geological Survey's Disaster Assistance Program; Haraldur Sigurdsson,
              Professor in the Graduate School of Oceanography at the University of Rhode
              Island; and Barbara Tewksbury, Professor of Geology at Hamilton College and
              past president of the National Association of Geoscience Teachers.  Emyln
              Koster, President and CEO of the Liberty Science Center, will act as key
              education advisor.
