Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biosciences Related to the Environment for
               FY 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9804198

Award Number: 9804198
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle C. Mack   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 1163      POSTDOC RSCH FELLOW IN BIOSCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1163,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract      DBI-9804198  Michelle C. Mack    This action funds an NSF
              Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in  Biosciences Related to the Environment for
              1998.  This  fellowship provides an opportunity for the Fellow to gain 
              additional scientific training beyond the doctoral degree  and to pursue
              innovative and imaginative research into the  fundamental mechanisms underlying
              the interactions between  organisms and their environment at the molecular,
              cellular,  organismal, population, community and/or ecosystem level in  any
              area of biology supported by the Directorate for  Biological Sciences of the
              National Science Foundation.    Each fellowship supports a research and
              training plan to be  carried out in a sponsoring laboratory.  The research and 
              training plan for this fellowship is entitled effects of  mosses on thermal and
              chemical controls of decomposition in  the boreal forest.  Most studies that
              relate plant  functional groups to ecosystem processes focus on direct 
              effects, such as the effects of litter quality on  decomposition or nitrogen
              mineralization rates. Plant  functional groups can also affect ecosystem
              processes  indirectly through effects on microclimate. Effects of plant 
              species on soil temperature may be particularly important in  the high latitude
              systems that contain a large portion of  global terrestrial carbon stores,
              where below-ground  ecosystem processes such as decomposition and nutrient 
              dynamics are often temperature-limited. In boreal forests,  mosses can comprise
              up to 100% cover of the forest floor.  This research hypothesizes that mosses
              are strong thermal  regulators in boreal forest ecosystems and thus exert 
              dominating control over ecosystem carbon storage. The goals  of the research
              are to quantify important moss traits for  ecosystem energy fluxes;
              differentiate between moss thermal  and chemical effects on decomposition, and
              link effects to  nutrient cycling and carbon storage; and use models to test 
              the role of mosses in ecosystem change following distu rbance  and climatic
              change.
