Title       : RUI - 2D Magic-Angle Spinning NMR: A New Way to Probe the Local Structure of
               Quasicrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  2000   
File        : a9804094

Award Number: 9804094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Natalie L. Adolphi nadolphi@knox.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew F. McDowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Knox College
	      2 E South St
	      Galesburg, IL  61401    309/341-7000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9804094Adolphi    This  is  a  new  proposal  from   an  undergraduate 
              institution  prepared  by  two  PIs who equally co-share a  tenured  assistant 
              professor position in the Physics Department of Knox College,  in  Galesburg,
              Illinois.  The research is focused on the study of the  structure  of 
              quasi-crystals by means  of  magic-angle  spinning  (MAS)  NMR.  Diffraction
              studies of quasi-crystals show that  the  patterns are very sharp, which
              indicates some sort of long  range  order.   These  quasi-crystals  possess 
              five-fold  symmetry,   a  symmetry which is predicted not to exist for a
              periodic structure  according  to classical group theoretical arguments.  
              Discovered  in  1984,  these quasi-crystals pose new problems for  the  solid 
              state  physicist who now has to expand to notion  of  a  periodic  lattice 
              structure to allow for a quasi-perodicity.  The research  described   in  this
              proposal focuses on the TiZrNi metal  system  which  will  be  studied by 2D
              MAS NMR.   The  proposed  work  is  outside the realm of investigations of well
              established problems.  It  is  therefore high-risk research which has the 
              potential  of  good  scientific  payoff. Besides the two co-PIs  the  work 
              will  involve the participation of undergraduate students.  %%%  This  is  a 
              new  proposal  from   an  undergraduate  institution  prepared  by  two  PIs
              who equally co-share a  tenured  assistant  professor position in the Physics
              Department of Knox College,  in  Galesburg, Illinois.  The research is focused
              on the study of the  structure  of  quasi-crystals by means  of  magic-angle 
              spinning  (MAS)  NMR.  Diffraction studies of quasi-crystals show that  the 
              patterns are very sharp, which indicates some sort of long  range  order.  
              These  quasi-crystals  possess  five-fold  symmetry,   a  symmetry which is
              predicted not to exist for a periodic structure  according  to classical group
              theoretical arguments.   Discovered  in  1984,  these quasi-crystals pose new
              problems for  the  solid  state  phy sicist who now has to expand to notion  of
               a  periodic  lattice  structure to allow for a quasi-perodicity.  The research
               described   in  this proposal focuses on the TiZrNi metal  system  which  will
               be  studied by 2D MAS NMR.   The  proposed  work  is  outside the realm of
              investigations of well established problems.  It  is  therefore high-risk
              research which has the  potential  of  good  scientific  payoff. Besides the
              two co-PIs  the  work  will  involve the participation of undergraduate
              students.  ***
