Title       : Taphonomy and Chronology of Rancho La Brea: A Critical Foundation for Future
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1998     
File        : a9804742

Award Number: 9804742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Blaire Van Valkenburgh bvanval@biology.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lillian Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804742
Van Valkenburgh

The Rancho La Brea tar pits of Los Angeles,
              California are undoubtedly one of the world's most spectacular fossil deposits.
               A true lagerstatten, they have yielded over four millioon late Pleistocene
              plant and animal fossils that represnet nearly 600 species.  Although permeated
              with asphalt, the vertebrate skeletal material is little altered from its
              original state.  Ranging in age from 40,000 to 4,000 years before present, the
              fossils span a time of significant climatic and faunal change in North America.
               Nevertheless relatively few time-transgressive analyses of biotic change have
              been done at Rancho La Brea.  This is largely due to a lack of basic
              information on its taphonomy and chronology.  Without an understanding of the
              biases that affected preservation, and without confidence in the age of the
              fossils, it is very difficult to use the collection for paleoecological and
              evollutionary studies.  The research proposed here will begin to rectify this
              problem by a thorough taphonomic analysisi and intense radiometric dating of a
              subset of the preserved material.  Three conditions favor the research at this
              time.  First, improvements in radiocarbon dating physics and chemistry over the
              last 15 years allow dramatically smaller samples to be dated with far better
              accuracy and precision.  Second, the science of taphonohy has advanced
              significantly and there now exists a large body of published methodologies and
              case studies that from a framework for the research.  Third, a modern
              excavation at Rancho La Brea has produced 47,000 specimens collected with
              detailed 3-dimensional and lithologic data for the first time, all entered into
              a database and available for study.

The accepted mode of accumulation of
              Rancho La Brea vertebrates is entrapment in shallow seeps of sticky asphalt. 
              However, both fluvial action and trampling have also been suggested to play
              significant roles.  In addition, it has been argued that carnivores were likely
              attracted to the site by trapped, dying, and dead herbivores.  It is unclear
              how long carcasses remained exposed and how often entrapment events occurred. 
              To better understand the taphonomic history of the tar pits, a detailed
              examination of the mammal material preserved in Pit 91, the modern excavation,
              is proposed.  All bones of mammal material preserved in Pit 91, the modern
              excavation, is proposed.  All bones of mammal species larger than 5kg will be
              examined by trained observers for evidence of carnivore modification, trampling
              marks, weathering, abrasion, insect damage, and rodent gnaw marks.  Skeletal
              part representation data will be collected for each taxon and examined to
              document biases in preservation.  The data gatehred on bone modification and
              representation will be used to produce the first quantitative analysis of the
              taphonomic processes that affected the deposits.  A second major question that
              will be addressed is that of temporal mixing within the deposits.  Because of
              the semi-fluid nature of the exposed asphalt, it has been suggested that bones
              move verticlly after deposition, thus destroying any stratigraphy.  To examine
              this issue, an intense molecular level AMS 14C dating of Pit 91 bones will be
              undertaken.  Multiple bones will be dated from the sme stratigraphic level as
              well as throughout the depth of the deposit to determine the extent of temporal
              mixing within a bone concentration.  The primary significance of the proposed
              taphonomic and chronological research is that it will lay the necessary
              groundwork for future research on the spectacular Rancho La Brea collections.
