Title       : Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on the Molecular Genetics of Bacteria &
               Phages, Cold Spring Harbor, N.Y., August 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9804934

Award Number: 9804934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The Molecular Genetics of Bacteria and Phages Conference, traditionally held at
              Cold Spring Harbor and now being held alternate years at the University of
              Wisconsin in Madison and at the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, is a central
              forum for the presentation of new results in prokaryotic molecular genetics. 
              On the order of 200-400 participants attend, representing laboratories
              throughout the world, and most present either short talks or posters.  Its
              breadth makes it an important focus for the exchange of information in this era
              of scientific specialization.  Topics covered include fundamental work on
              bacterial replication, recombination repair, transposition, transcription,
              control of gene expression, translation, signaling, heat shock, protein folding
              and secretion, cell development and division, and pathogenesis.
For many
              graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, this is the first large meeting at
              which they have an opportunity to speak.  Due to its highly interactive nature,
              the meeting provides an important opportunity for these young scientists to
              meet and talk to the senior scientists they know from the literature.  Support
              is provided to allow the attendance of graduate students who might otherwise
              not be able to afford the costs of the conference.

