Title       : Graduate Student Participant Assistance for Penrose Conference, Ivrea Zone,
               Italy, July, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9804883

Award Number: 9804883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Lambert                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy Rushmer trushmer@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804883                                                                         
                                                                                       
              Rushmer                                                                        
                                                                                             
                       A Penrose conference entitled "Processes of Crustal Differentiation: 
              Crust-Mantle Interactions, Melting and Granitic Migration Through The Crust" is
              being held in Verbania, northern Italy this July.  Tracy Rushmer (University of
              Vermont), George Bergantz (University of Washington) and Michael Brown
              (University of Maryland) are convening the meeting.   They are organizing the
              conference with the underlying premise that large-scale lithospheric processes
              trigger major growth episodes of continental crustal growth.  By utilizing
              recent work from across a range of disciplines they hope to ultimately provide
              an up-to-date assessment of their understanding of these processes.  The Ivrea
              Zone, which is a very well exposed, well-studied section of mid to lowermost
              continental crust and upper mantle, is located near Verbania and will be used
              as a template in which to focus on important aspects of continental growth and
              evolution.  These include such topics as the chemistry and dynamics of partial
              melting in the lowermost crust and upper mantle (including "crust-mantle
              interactions" during active periods of crustal growth), segregation of melt
              from the lowermost crust, and migration and transfer of magma upwards through
              the crust.  The key speakers at this conference will all address these main
              processes, but from the viewpoint of different expertise and methodologies. 
              Field trips in the Ivrea Zone compose half of the meeting, as they not only
              provide direct observation of the different levels in the crust but many
              opportunities for discussion.    In this proposal, the P.I.s request funds for
              graduate student travel assistance to this Penrose conference.  Participation
              of young scientists is vital to the success of the meeting and to their own
              professional development.  By attending the conference, graduate students will
              have many opportunities in which to meet geoscientists researching the same
              field of interest, but with different expertises.  It also allows them to
              interact with the  more mature scientists and to have a chance to participate
              in several different field trips in a superb geologic setting.  And, as most of
              the Penrose conference will be discussion-oriented, it is hoped that the
              students will find new confidence in expressing their views as a result.  The
              budget is drawn up so that significant partial support can be provided to
              approximately 10-11 participating students.  It is hoped that the home
              institution will also be able to contribute to the students' participation
              costs.
