Title       : ODDSIMS, A New Method of Age Dating Hydrated Obsidian by Secondary Ion Mass
               Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2000     
File        : a9804350

Award Number: 9804350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228452             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee R. Riciputi i79@ornl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
              David R. Cole  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James Elam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence M. Anovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Lee Riciputi and his colleagues
              will conduct a three year study to refine the technique of obsidian hydration
              dating. Obsidian, also known as `volcanic glass`, was prized by prehistoric
              peoples because its homogeneous glass-like structure allows it to be flaked
              with relative ease and a high degree of control. The sharp edges thus produced
              functioned as knives and other tools. Obsidian was traded widely and has been
              recovered in many archaeological sites in Middle and South America, Africa and
              other parts of the Old World. The process of flaking produces fresh external
              faces and over time these `hydrate` as they absorb water from the atmosphere
              and soil. The hydration rim visible on the surface thickens over time and this
              age dependence provides the basis for an absolute dating technique. Scientists
              can section an obsidian flake, measure the thickness of the rim and then
              attempt to convert this to a date. Although the technique has been used for
              many years and holds great potential, the results are often unsatisfactory.
              Hydration rate appears to be temperature and moisture dependent. It may also be
              affected by the trace element composition of the obsidian itself. Scientists
              also disagree on how to model diffusion rates over time.  Dr. Riciputi and his
              colleagues have developed a new approach to obsidian hydration analysis. Rather
              than use an optical microscope to determine hydration depth, they will employ a
              more precise secondary ion mass spectrometry technique. They will also address
              the issue of hydration modeling through a series of controlled experiments in
              which obsidian from a single source is exposed to environments which vary in
              temperature and humidity. To apply the results in a real world context, the
              investigators will analyze Middle American obsidian artifacts whose age has
              been determined through association with radiocarbon dated materials. These
              specimens will vary in age as well as the temperature and humidity of their
              depositional environment. This research is important because, if successful, it
              will provide archaeologists with a robust dating tool capable of application in
              many parts of the world.                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
