Title       : Systemic Reform, Mathematics and Science Education, and Equity In New Jersey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9804925

Award Number: 9804925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernice T. Anderson                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $934738             (Estimated)
Investigator: William Firestone wilfires@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory Camilli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9804925  Firestone    The Center for Educational Policy Analysis in New Jersey
              (CEPA-NJ) proposes to explore the effects the effects of New Jersey's systemic
              reform on both the quality and equity of mathematics and science instruction. 
              Information collected here will inform efforts to implement systemic reform
              strategies throughout the nation but will be especially useful to policy makers
              and professional developers within the state.    The project will address four
              questions:    1. As standards are implemented in New Jersey, what kinds of
              changes in math and science teaching do teachers report?  2. What factors help
              explain the observed changes in instruction?  3. How do changes in instruction
              affect student outcomes?  4. Are the effects of state assessment on math and
              science teaching different in schools serving middle class, majority children,
              and those serving poor, minority children?    The study will be based on a
              sample of 300 4th grade teachers, stratified to include high, medium, and low
              income schools with a fourth group selected to have received extensive
              professional development from the New Jersey SSI program.  The sample will be
              designed to be representative of the state.  Data will be collected at two
              points of time in order to track change.  Fourth grade teachers will be chosen
              because that is the year where elementary students take the state's new
              Elementary School Performance Assessment (ESPA), the major manifestation of
              systemic reform in New Jersey elementary grades.  Information on teachers'
              instructional practice will come from teacher interview student questionnaires
              reporting on teachers, and portfolios of teachers' assignments.  In addition to
              teacher interviews, data on elements of systemic reform will come from
              interviews of principals and central office curriculum specialists.    A
              variety of quantitative and qualitative analyses will be conducted that will
              permit us to explore typical mathematics and science teaching in the state,
              changes in teaching practice in re sponse to systemic reform over time, the
              difference in both teaching practice and policies affecting teaching between
              rich and poor districts, how different factors actually influence teaching, and
              the effects of teaching on student outcomes.    An aggressive effort will be
              made to disseminate findings within the state.  These will include the
              publication of two newsletters, reporting findings in the press and other
              publications geared to educators, and presentations at a variety of  fora for
              educators, the public, and policy makers.  In addition, findings will be
              disseminated nationally through academic publications, paper presentations at
              conferences, and other sources.
