Title       : Periodically and Random Driven Dynamics in Nonlinear Optical Fibers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  2000       
File        : a9804602

Award Number: 9804602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142450             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Kath kath@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dispersion management is the technique of concatenating two or 
more optical
              fibers with different dispersion parameters to form a system 
with
              periodically varying dispersion.  This technique makes it is 
possible to have
              both high local and low average dispersion in 
the system.  The high local
              dispersion reduces four-wave mixing 
(an effect that distorts signals and
              produces intersymbol 
interference in transmissions), while the low average
              dispersion 
reduces the net cumulative effects of dispersion over long
              
optical fiber spans.  Overall, therefore, dispersion management 
reduces
              effects which are detrimental to the performance of 
optical-fiber based
              communication systems, thus allowing transmission 
capacity to be increased. 
              In mathematical terms, what must be 
studied are nonlinear wave equations with
              rapidly varying 
coefficients. The theory of these equations is currently not
              well 
understood and will be advanced with support from this award. 

The
              theme of this research is the development of new mathematical 
techniques with
              which to model the propagation of optical pulses 
in nonlinear optical fibers.
               It is important to properly 
understand the dynamics of such pulses in
              optical communication 
and information processing systems so that new
              techniques can be 
devised to increase their overall capacity.  In particular,
              new 
mathematical methods for dealing with dispersion management
will be
              investigated, in order to predict and improve the performance 
of such
              systems.


