Title       : Tools for Image and Video Transmission over Heterogeneous Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1998      
File        : a9804959

Award Number: 9804959
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Ortega ortega@sipi.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Most current digital video systems merely replace existing  modes of analog
              video delivery with their more efficient  digital counterparts. However, as
              packet-based networks,  such as the Internet, start to be an essential
              component of  the communications infrastructure and general purpose  computers
              become the predominant communication terminal,  there is a need to provide a
              new set of algorithms for video  compression and processing, which are
              optimized for an endto-  end software processing environment. The challenge is
              then  to find efficient ways of embedding video data on a  fundamentally
              asynchronous transmission/processing  infrastructure. To address this challenge
              this project  concentrates on two main areas: (i) computation/bandwidth 
              scalable coding and (ii) robust asynchronous video  transmission algorithms.
              The Internet is a heterogeneous  network, both in terms of its components
              (hosts, routers)  and in terms of available bandwidth and processing speed. 
              Thus bandwidth/computation scalable algorithms are desirable  to enable less
              complex encoding/decoding at the expense of a  reduction in video quality. This
              project is developing a  design methodology for variable complexity, input
              dependent  coding/decoding algorithms where the goal is optimizing  average
              (instead of "worst-case") complexity performance,  robust asynchronous video
              transmission algorithms are also  being developed, as motivated by the limited
              transmission  reliability offered by the Internet. Video is sensitive not  only
              to losses of information (e.g. packets being dropped  due to congestion) but
              also to excessive delay. This work  concentrates on new compression techniques
              for asynchronous  video transmission where each video unit (a part of a frame) 
              has a ``lifetime'' during which it is useful, and which can  span more than a
              single frame time interval. This area  includes novel work in both rate control
              and image domain  error correction/detection techniques.
