Title       : Control Problems of Systems of Strongly Coupled Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9804056

Award Number: 9804056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244672             (Estimated)
Investigator: Irena Lasiecka il2v@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Triggiani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804056
Lasiecka

The present proposal aims at investigating mathematical
              aspects, as well 
as control and optimization properties, of models of
              interactive systems, 
which are described by strongly coupled partial
              differential equations, and 
which are subject to boundary and point control
              action. These are both the 
mathematically most challenging and the physically
              most relevant cases. 
The systems chosen are complex and realistic enough to
              serve as 
benchmark problems for the technological applications described
              below. 
Specific issues to be examined for the entire structure, and/or a
              component 
thereof, include: (1) well-posedness and regularity of solutions;
              (2) exact 
controllability in the oscillatory case for systems such as shells;
              (3) 
uniform stability of the structure solutions as well as, in the
              non-linear 
case, a corresponding study of the asymptotic behavior; (4)
              optimal 
control theory and min-max game theory with non-definite quadratic
              cost, 
as well as robust stabilization. While in recent years these problems
              have 
reached a considerable level of maturity for single classes of dynamics
              - 
diffusive and oscillatory - their study to strongly coupled systems with
              
components of both diffusive and/or oscillatory type is just at its
              infancy.

Control, optimization and stability problems for dynamical systems
              have 
long played a well-recognized and critical role on a broad range of
              diverse 
applications. In recent years, the emerging technology of smart
              materials 
and structures has brought forth to the front of scientific
              investigation the 
pressing need to control, optimize and stabilize
              "interactive structures", 
whose components' dynamical behavior is governed by
              partial differential 
equations. Recent civilian and military research has
              convincingly 
demonstrated smart materials/structures to be a laboratory
              reality. These 
new structural concepts actively damp noise and vibration,
              suppress flutter 
at the trailing edges of airfoils, suppress the airborne or
              water borne 
acoustic signatures of ground vehicles, aircraft, and submarines,
              and 
reduce the stressful noise levels within them. A realistic problem of
              keen, 
present interest to both the civilian and military industry is the
              problem of 
reducing, or eliminating, the unwanted noise field in a three
              dimensional 
cabin with curved walls, modeled by shells, by means of smart
              materials 
such as piezo-electric patches or memory alloys bonded to, or
              embedded 
in, an elastic wall. When wired with an appropriate voltage
              (control), the 
resulting bending moment generated by the elastic wall is
              expected to 
produce acoustic waves that counter the unwanted noise, thus
              leading to 
their elimination.

