Title       : DragonflyTV - A New National Television Series for Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a9804617

Award Number: 9804617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499020             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Hudson rhudson@tpt.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phyllis Marcuccio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Twin Cities Public TV
	      172 East Fourth Street
	      St. Paul, MN  551011400    651/229-1372

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9804617  Hudson    Twin Cities Public Television (KCTA) is producing and
              evaluating a pilot for a new science series for children ages 8-12 to be
              produced in conjunction with Miami University of Ohio and the National Science
              Teachers Association (NSTA).  Called Dragonfly, the pilot will be based on the
              children's magazine of the same name and will consist of segments presented by
              children that document their own science investigations and presentations by
              professional scientists of work in related fields.   Each program will include
              two or more presentations by children, one or two presentations by scientists,
              a science challenge to be resolved within the show, one or two hands-on
              activities to engage viewers at home, and a presentation of children's artwork
              or poem in which they express their impressions of science and nature.  The
              series would be coordinated with the Dragonfly magazine and with a parallel
              program, Dragonfly Quest, an Internet and youth-based activity pilot endeavor
              funded under another grant.    The Executive Producer would be Richard Hudson,
              who has previously served as Executive Producer for Newton's Apple, a series
              also produced by KCTA.   Chris Myers, of Miami University and creator of the
              magazine, will have primary responsibility for the science content, and Phyllis
              Marcuccio at the NSTA will be responsible for the coordination between the
              television project and the magazine, which is published by NSTA.   The
              producers will work with an advisory committee that includes Gerald Wheeler,
              Lawrence Lowery, Joan McShane, Hardy Eshbaugh, Shawn Carlson, Kenneth Phillips,
              Milton Chen, James Steinbach, and Cheryl Gotthelf.
