Title       : Nanostructural Studies of Carbon, Bismuth and Other Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9804734

Award Number: 9804734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mildred S. Dresselhaus millie@mgm.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene F. Dresselhaus  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9804734  Dresselhaus    The goal of this project is to provide increased
              understanding of  novel materials and structures through the study of new
              phenomena  only found in nano-structured materials and new properties of 
              specific nano-structured materials not found in their bulk or  crystalline
              forms. Phenomena specific to nano-structural  materials that will be
              investigated include the quantum  confinement induced
              semimetal-to-semiconductor transition in  quantum wires, and phenomena
              associated with the one-dimensional  electronic density of states of carbon
              nanotubes. Special  nanostructural properties of specific materials, such as
              bismuth,  carbon nanotubes, MoS2, and unique forms of carbon, will be 
              investigated. A systematic study will be made of the electronic  structure of
              bismuth nanowires as a function of wire diameter,  crystalline orientation,
              temperature and magnetic field, with  particular attention to the
              semimetal-to-semiconductor transition  in small diameter (less than 100 nm)
              bismuth wires. A variety of  nano-transport and optical techniques will be used
              to measure the  properties of bismuth nanowires prepared by filling the pores
              of  anodic alumina under pressure, and structurally characterizing  the
              nano-wires by x-ray diffraction, TEM, and SEM techniques.  Optical studies will
              also be undertaken to study the electronic  structure of this 1-D system. A
              systematic study of the first and  second-order resonant Raman spectra of
              carbon nanotubes will be  carried out in an effort to gain more quantitative
              information of  the 1-D electronic structure of carbon nanotubes, and their 
              phonon dispersion relations. Experimental and theoretical studies  of the
              relation between microstructure/nanostructure and the  properties of novel
              carbon materials obtained by the heat  treatment of poly-para-phenylene (PPP)
              will be carried out to  explain why this system has such a high affinity for
              lithium,  with particular reference to the application of this material for 
              use in lithium ion batt eries.  %%%  This research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge  at a fundamental level to important aspects of
              nanostructured  materials. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from
              the  research is expected to contribute to improving the performance  and
              stability of advanced materials by providing a fundamental  understanding and a
              basis for designing and producing improved  materials, and materials
              combinations from nanostructure building  blocks.  An important feature of the
              program is the integration  of research and education through the training of
              students in  fundamental materials science and related technological areas. 
              ***
