Title       : Prediction of Unsaturated Hydraulic Properties with Neural Network Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9804902

Award Number: 9804902
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151984             (Estimated)
Investigator: F J. Leij   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. T. Van Genuchten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804902
Leij

The unsaturated soil hydraulic properties determine the rate
              with which water and dissolved chemicals move through soils and rocks whose
              pore space is partially filled with water.  Current methods to measure
              unsaturated hydraulic properties are generally viewed as impractical to meet
              the data requirements for most simulation studies.  As a consequence, the
              empirical approach of using pedotransfer functions (PTFs) has become popular to
              indirectly estimate hydraulic properties or parameters from such basic soil
              properties as soil texture, bulk density, organic matter content, and clay
              mineralogy.  Mathematical expressions for PTFs are typically derived by linear
              regression  of subjectively selected basic soil properties and unsaturated
              hydraulic data.  Relatively little attention has been paid to a systematic
              derivation and evaluation of pedotransfer functions because of a conspicuous
              lack of comprehensive databases and the myriad of soil attributes and
              experimental methods.

Neural network models have tremendous potential to
              derive PTFs to predict unsaturated hydraulic parameters in an hierarchical
              manner by making optimal use of soil attributes and other information that is
              available.  These models are high-performance black-box models that have proven
              to be very useful for exploring input data and to assess the maximum obtainable
              accuracy of the predicted output.  Only recently have neural network models
              been applied to estimate soil water retention.  Calibration of the network can
              be done in conjunction with the bootstrap method to determine probability
              density functions of predicted hydraulic parameters.  Errors in predicted
              hydraulic properties, as well as in results of flow and contaminant transport
              models that use these properties, can hence be quantified.  Furthermore, the
              correlation between hydraulic output parameters can be obtained.  This feature,
              in addition to the versatility of handling input data, makes neural network
              models attractive to identify relevant information in large heterogeneous sets
              of hydraulic and other soil data.  Specific objectives of this research are (1)
              to develop PTFs with neural network analysis for a hierarchical input
              structures, and (2) to estimate the uncertainty in hydraulic properties
              predicted with PTFs.  The anticipated results of the research would go a long
              way to provide scientists and practitioners with estimates of unsaturated
              hydraulic functions needed for computer models and geographical information
              systems dealing with groundwater pollution, soil remediation, climate change,
              remote sensing and agricultural production.

