Title       : Os Isotopic Variations in Obducted Metalliferous Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9804864

Award Number: 9804864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175448             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory E. Ravizza   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804864
Ravizza

Funds are requested to investigate the major element, trace
              element and Os isotopic chemistry of obducted metalliferous sediments
              associated with (1) the Troodos ophiolite in Cyprus, (2) the Semail ophiolite
              in Oman, and (3) the Franciscan melange in California.  The principal objective
              of this study is to determine whether these deposits can be used to reconstruct
              past variations in the Os isotopic composition of seawater.  More broadly
              construed, this work is the first step toward the long-term goal of creating a
              seawater Os isotope record which spans Phanerozoic time, and can be compared to
              the marine Sr isotope curve.

Successful efforts using metalliferous
              sediments recovered from the modern ocean basin to reconstruct the cenozoic
              marine Os isotope record provide the impetus for this study.  In order to
              extend the marine Os isotope record back in time beyond the Cenozoic to include
              the Mesozoic and Paleozoic, ancient marine sediments now exposed in outcrop
              must be utilized.  However, no systematic effort has yet been made to determine
              which lithologies might be suitable for this purpose, and what criteria could
              be used to establish that these deposits, in fact, preserve a record of past
              variations in the Os isotopic.

The hypothesis which underlies this research
              program is that obducted sediment samples which have major and trace element
              compositions which closely resemble analogous modern sediments, already shown
              to record the Os isotopic composition of seawater, are likely to be reliable
              records of past variations in the Os isotopic composition of seawater. 
              Therefore the focus of this study is on metalliferous sediments, specifically
              those sediments which are the product of fall-out from buoyant hydrothermal
              plumes proximal to spreading ridges. In the proposal the existing data which
              demonstrate the integrity of metalliferous sediments and pelagic clays as
              recorders of seawater Os isotope variations are reviewed.  Preliminary data are
              presented from supra-ophiolite sediments in Cyprus, which show that these
              obducted deposits preserve depositional trace element signatures, and are
              likely to yield meaningful data constraining the Os isotopic composition of
              mid-Cretaceous seawater (Turonian to Campanian).  This idea will be tested
              empirically by examining coeval deposits from several sections in Cyprus and
              analogous samples from Oman, in order to determine whether different
              sedimentary sections yield the same pattern of temporal variation in Os
              isotopic composition.  A similar investigation of bedded cherts from the
              Monterey formation will be conducted in order to evaluate whether these Early
              Jurassic deposits, which have been subjected to more extensive diagenesis and
              tectonism, might also provide a record of past variations in the Os isotopic
              composition of seawater.

This work will have important implications for
              interpretation of the marine Sr and Os isotope records, which in turn influence
              models linking geochemical cycles to Phanerozoic climate.  The Phanerozoic Sr
              isotope record has been cited as evidence supporting the hypothesis that
              orogenesis causes cooling by increased uptake of atmospheric carbon dioxide by
              silicate weathering reactions.  The general trend toward "more continent-like"
              isotopic compositions in the Cenozoic marine Os record supports this
              interpretation, but detailed investigation of the past and present marine Sr
              cycle do not.  Ultimately, determining whether maxima and minima in the marine
              Sr and Os records are roughly coincident throughout the Phanerozoic will
              provide an empirical means assessing whether these marine isotopic records are
              useful proxies for reconstruction the geologic history of silicate
              weathering.

