Title       : Human Prey Choice during the Middle and Upper Paleolithic in Southwestern France
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  1998       
File        : a9804692

Award Number: 9804692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54484              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald K. Grayson grayson@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Donald Grayson will analyze
              archaeological fauna recovered from the site of Grotte VXI, la rock shelter
              which overlooks the Ceou River in Southwestern France. Ongoing excavation at
              the site has revealed a stratified series of cultural remains: the most recent
              dates to the Magdalenian, ca. 13,000 years ago while the lowest Mousterian
              levels are possibly over 100,000 years in age. The bottom of the deposits has
              not yet been reached. The sequence is significant because it includes the
              boundary which marks the appearance of biologically modern Homo sapiens in
              Europe. While Neanderthals, the bearers of Mousterian culture, fall within the
              modern human species, they are physically enough distinct to be accorded
              subspecific status;  both biologically and  in the stone tool assemblages
              produced they are clearly separated from their later Upper Paleolithic
              counterparts. Archaeological evidence indicates that modern humans replaced
              Neanderthals in Europe ca. 40,000 years ago and scientists wish to gain insight
              into this process. Neanderthals existed in Ice Age Europe for well over a
              hundred thousand years and were therefore well adapted to this environment. In
              their attempt to understand this transition researchers analyze archaeological
              remains of both groups to gain insight into cultural practices and Dr.
              Grayson's work falls into this tradition. He will study the faunal remains from
              the Mousterian and multiple Upper Paleolithic traditions represented at Grotte
              XVI and on this basis reconstruct subsistence practices. Most, although not
              all, faunal from the site represent food remains - the result of human hunting
              and scavenging. In particular Dr. Grayson will examine the question of diet
              breadth since it reflects underlying aspects of hunter gatherer strategy. A
              study of this type is complicated by the fact that multiple factors, including
              sample size and differential bone preservation, affect observed patterns and it
              is difficult to tease out a clear human signal. Dr. Grayson has developed
              techniques to do this.  This research addresses an important anthropological
              question and should shed light on the process which led to the emergence of
              biologically and behaviorally modern humans. It will provide data of interest
              to many archaeologists. The analytic techniques developed by Dr. Grayson should
              have wide utility in a number of archaeological situations.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
