Title       : The Mathematics of Rigid Body Dynamics with Contact and 
Friction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2000  
File        : a9804316

Award Number: 9804316
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Stewart dstewart@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9804316
Stewart

Rigid body dynamics with impact and friction is a subject
              which is of vital 
importance for many applications (robotics, manufacturing,
              biodynamics, 
virtual reality) yet there has been curiously little development
              of the 
underlying theory both for computation and analysis. The principal
              
difficulties arise due to impulsive forces (giving discontinuous velocity
              
functions) and the discontinuities due to Coulomb's friction law. Notable
              
developments in the theory of rigid body dynamics can be found in the 
work
              of J.-J. Moreau and M.D.P. Monteiro-Marques, who use
time-stepping methods for
              discretization and measure differential 
inclusions for the continuous-time
              problem.  These methods are notable in 
that they directly incorporate the
              effects of discontinuities and impacts 
directly, without needing to handle
              them separately from other effects.  
Taking their work as a starting point,
              this project will advance the theory 
and practice of rigid body dynamics by
              developing new complementarity 
formulations of time-stepping methods,
              extending the theory of measure 
differential inclusions for the
              continuous-time problem, and providing new 
convergence results based on weak*
              convergence of measures.

Everyday life is full of examples of impact and
              friction. Walking, for 
instance, involves impact at every step, and friction
              to prevent from 
slipping.  Yet what people do naturally, is very difficult
              for a machine to 
do.  It is difficult even to simulate walking, or even to
              simulate machines 
that try to walk. Manufacturing processes involve many
              parts coming into 
contact, touching and sliding, yet simulating these basic
              processes has not 
been done well.  There are several reasons for this: the
              computational 
models of these processes have been inadequate, and there has
              been little 
or no theoretical basis for evaluating the computational models. 
              The 
purpose of this grant is to improve both the computational models and to
              
develop the theoretical basis for rigid body dynamics.  The result of this
              
will be better simulation software, able to properly simulate the dynamics
              
of robots, manufacturing machinery, and (perhaps) the way people walk. 
              
This software will become vital manufacturing infrastructure for the 21st
              
century.

