Title       : A Theoretical Study on the Governing Laws for Fluid Transport in Rough Fractures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2000       
File        : a9804789

Award Number: 9804789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shemin Ge ges@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9804789
Ge

Natural rock fractures exist at all scales in the earth's upper
              crust.  They play a major role in groundwater movement, solute transport, and
              waste isolation in geologic media.  Characterizing fluid flow and mass
              transport in fractured rocks depends on our knowledge of how fluid transports
              through individual fractures.  Yet fluid flow in fractures bounded by two rough
              surfaces is complex.  Important questions on the validity of the cubic law and
              the Reynolds equation for rough fractures have been studied by many.  The
              general conclusions are that the cubic law can only provide a qualitative
              description of flow rate, the Reynolds equation is not valid for rough
              fractures and effects of aperture and tortuosity need to be included in better
              governing flow laws.  The primary goals of this research are (1) to
              systematically explore and quantify the effects of fracture roughness,
              tortuosity, and the formation of flow channeling on governing flow laws, and
              (2) to develop a better governing flow law for rough fractures by understanding
              the fluid transport mechanisms. Specifically, I will attempt to achieve the
              following objectives: (1) develop a rational method to characterize fracture
              geometry of natural rocks, (2) investigate the formation of channelized flow
              paths in generated and profiled fractures, (3) examine the conditions under
              which the modified Reynolds equation is valid, (4) identify the transitional
              flow regime from Darcian to non-Darcian flow, and (5) construct a better
              governing law that captures the dominant features of fluid transport in rough
              fractures.  I will employ an array of theoretical approaches and utilize the
              existing lab experimental data to achieve these objectives.  The Reynolds
              equation, the modified Reynolds equation including geometric variables of local
              aperture and tortuosity, and the Navier-Stokes equations will be solved
              numerically to simulate fluid flow in rough fractures.  The Lattice Boltzmann
              method will be used for simulating both linear and non-linear fluid transport
              in fractures with complex geometries.  The proposed research represents a
              comprehensive theoretical attempt to examine the governing laws for fluid
              transport in rough rock fractures. 

