Title       : Cultural Influences on Emotion in Indonesia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9804611

Award Number: 9804611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1999       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179937             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl G. Heider heiderk@garnet.cla.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines cultural influences on emotion behavior among the
              Minangkabau of West Sumatra, Indonesia. Two basic questions are addressed: (1)
              What constitutes a satisfactory description of Minangkabau emotions? (2) How is
              emotion part of everyday life within this cultural context? Although general
              family resemblances in emotions exist across cultures, there are few if any
              precise equivalences. For example, most cultures know emotions that are similar
              to Western conceptions of anger emotions. However, different cultures put
              different spins on the basic aspects of emotion behavior, and the anger
              emotions in English (which include such emotions as 'fury' and 'annoyance')
              differ from the 'marah' emotions in Indonesian or the 'berang' emotions in
              Minangkabau. Such differences exist in many details, including (a) cause, (b)
              how these causes are appraised, (c) self-regulatory rules about showing or not
              showing anger, and (d) use of facial expressions, felt bodily sensations, and
              other behavior. In the past decade or more, many researchers (especially in
              North America and Europe) have made great progress in developing understandings
              of each of these aspects of emotion. However, this work has tended to produce
              universal statements through theoretical formulations that have been fairly
              basic. The present research with Minangkabau is aimed at discovering the
              culture-specific elements in these aspects of emotion. Several research
              methodologies will be used, including focus groups, schoolroom observations,
              and individual interviews. In addition to scholarship on Minangkabau and
              Indonesian cultures, the research will deepen our understanding of emotions in
              all cultures, and provide a way of thinking about emotions
              cross-culturally.


