Title       : THE TALLGRASS PRAIRIE OF THE FLINT HILLS OF KANSAS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2000    
File        : a9804328

Award Number: 9804328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Valentine H. Kass                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383780             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Hartnett dchart@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan K. Knapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Blair  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Altman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aimee G. Larrabee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9804328  Hartnett    Kansas State University is producing a two-hour television
              documentary on the Tallgrass Prairie of the Flint Hills of Kansas, the last
              remnant of what was once the largest biome in North America.  This area has
              survived only because its rocky soil was too much of a match for the farmer's
              plow.  New scientific research is now beginning to ascertain just how valuable
              grasslands are to humankind:  their salutary role in global climatology and how
              they provide laboratories for study of soils, species interactions,
              biodiversity, and ecological processes.  A significant amount of this research
              as been conducted for more than twenty years at the Konza Prairie Research
              Natural Area, the longest continuous Long-Term Ecological Research site of the
              National Science Foundation.  The scientific data that have been compiled at
              Konza will form the backbone of the film's content as it examines:  the
              geological and human history of the Tallgrass Prairie, especially the
              displacement of the bison and the introduction of European cattle and row crop
              farming; the contemporary culture and economy of the Flint Hills regions which
              the prairie has formed; and the ecological impact of various approaches to
              range management, as well as various scientific and social aspects of the
              debate over how to glean as much value as possible from the grasslands while
              preserving them for future generations.     The PI for the project will be
              David Hartnett, Professor of Biology and Director of Konza Prairie Research
              Natural Area.  The film will be co-produced by Aimee Larrabee, an independent
              filmmaker who has co-produced several award-winning documentaries with the BBC,
              and John Altman, an independent filmmaker who has produced for PBS, A&E, Bravo,
              and the Discovery Channel.   The 19 member advisory committee will be lead by
              Dr. Hartnett and by Alan Knapp, Project Director of the Konza Prairie Research
              Natural Area LTER program and Professor Biology at Kansas State University, and
              John Blair, Associate Professor  of Biology at Kansas State University and
              nationally recognized leader in the field of soil ecology and grassland
              nutrient dynamics.
