Title       : Acquisition of a New Automatic X-ray Powder Diffractometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9804769

Award Number: 9804769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62112              (Estimated)
Investigator: Reto Giere giere@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard O. Sack  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven J. Fritz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan M. Harbor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth D. Ridgway  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804769  Giere    This grant provides partial support for the costs of acquiring
              a  new computer-controlled X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrometer for  the
              Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at Purdue  University.  Support
              for this grant is shared between the Earth  Sciences Instrumentation and
              Facilities Program (EAR/IF) and  Purdue University (50%).  The new XRD will
              replace an old and  obsolete XRD and will be installed in the fully climate- 
              controlled X-ray laboratory in the Civil Engineering Building at  Purdue
              University.  Several faculty members and their research  groups will be using
              the new equipment in studies on a wide range  of topics:  Dr. R. Giere for
              mineralogical and petrologic  investigations of various metamorphic rocks,
              characterization of  crystalline waste forms for municipal and high-level
              nuclear  waste, and for research projects in experimental petrology;  Dr.  S.J.
              Fritz for determination of clay minerals and other phases in  soils and
              weathering horizons, and for examination of  precipitates produced during
              leaching of coal piles;  Dr. K.D.  Ridgway for characterization of shales,
              volcanic ashes and tuffs,  and other fine-grained rocks in sedimentary basins; 
              Dr. R.O.  Sack for identification and characterization of starting  materials
              and run products consumed or produced during petrologic  experiments;  and Dr.
              J.M. Harbor for provenance studies of fine-  grained glacial deposits, and in
              environmental studies, for  mineralogical identification of non-point source
              pollutants.  The  new X-ray diffractometer will also be utilized for teaching 
              purposes.  The Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences  provides a
              research-intensive learning environment, where  undergraduate students are
              required to learn various types of  analytical methods, including X-ray
              diffraction, during their  course work.  ***
