Title       : Symposium: Forest Canopies 1998: Global Perspectives; Sarasota, FL; November
               4-8, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9804472

Award Number: 9804472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Penelope L. Firth                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret D. Lowman mlowman@selby.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Marie Selby Botan Gardens
	      811 South Palm Ave
	      Sarasota, FL  342367726    813/955-7553

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9804472  Lowman      This project will sponsor an international symposium
              entitled "Forest Canopies 1998: Global Perspectives" at the Marie Selby
              Botanical Gardens in Sarasota, Florida.  Forest canopies serve as a critical
              interface between the earth's surface and atmosphere. regulating global climate
              as well as biogeochemical and hydrological cycles.  They are important centers
              of global biodiversity and provide food, medicines, building materials and
              other products for many cultures.  They are also important to indigenous people
              who have lived in association with forests for many generations.  High rates of
              deforestation have made studies of forest canopies an urgent priority for
              Science.    In 1994, the first conference of forest canopy biologists,
              educators, and conservationists was held at Selby Botanical Gardens.  More than
              200 scientists from 26 countries convened to discuss the importance of
              establishing protocols for canopy research, and also to share preliminary
              results.  At this time, canopy biology was in its infant stages.  Four years
              later, canopy biology has grown into a comprehensive field of research, but is
              lagging in some countries.  The major goals of the second symposium are
              twofold:  1. to invite scientists from developing countries ( and countries
              where canopy science has not yet been initiated) to participate and share
              information;  2. to discuss how scientists can interface with policy-makers and
              forest managers to implement sound conservation practices for forests and their
              canopies.    The symposium will feature several public talks, keynote speakers,
              and ten sessions with canopy themes.  Special pre-conference workshops will be
              held to share field methods for canopy access, and invite regional school
              students and teachers to interact with scientists.  In addition, discussion
              sessions and poster displays will be scheduled throughout the four days, as
              well as post-conference field trips.  The talks will be published in a volume
              and summaries of each session and/or discu ssion will be published in the
              Gardens' journal, Selbyana.  Participants will formulate guidelines for future
              canopy research in developing countries and regions that have not previously
              had such initiatives, and explore ways for scientists to become more directly
              involved in policy making with reference to forest conservation.
