Title       : Hybrid Semiconductor-Superconductor Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2002      
File        : a9804023

Award Number: 9804023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio E. Mendez emilio.mendez@stonybrook.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9804023  Mendez    This interdisciplinary experimental research project is
              concerned  with   physical   effects   in  unusual   hybrid   semiconductor- 
              superconductor  electronic device structures. Two  topics  to  be  studied  are
              (a) shot noise of the supercurrent in quantum  point  contacts,  and  (b) 
              tunneling-controlled  transistor  action  in  Josephson  heterostructures.
              Topic  (a)  addresses  the  ultimate  limits   of  noise in point contacts, and
              interest as  structures  are  reduced in size; topic (b) opens the possibility
              for  highly  sensitive   superconducting  devices.   The   research   furthers 
              knowledge   on   issues   of  compatibility   in   semiconductor- 
              superconductor  lithographically patterned devices.  This  highly 
              interdisciplinary  research  will involve  graduate  student  and  postdoctoral
               researchers  who will  receive  excellent  training  beneficial  to  their
              future careers in industry,  government  or  academia.  %%%  This
              interdisciplinary experimental research project is concerned  with unusual
              electron junction devices, which in some ways  resemble the transistors which
              are present in computer chips and  many other semiconductor electronic
              devices.The devices of  interest here are unusual in that they combine
              semiconductor  device methods with superconducting elements, and in some cases 
              they may be termed "superconducting transistors" . A  superconductor has the
              property that it passes an electrical  current without generating any heat. One
              of the problems with  present day semiconductor electronics is that the heat
              generated  is so great as to require fans and even air conditioners to take  it
              away. Hypothetical superconducting computer chips would avoid  this problem,
              and for this reason could be made smaller with  larger numbers of devices per
              chip. The research in the  experimental project explores two types of devices
              which combine  semiconducting and superconducting elements. The res ults of
              this  study will add to basic understanding which could be of future  benefit
              in microelectronics technology and in the production of  improved sensors for
              magnetic field, electrical current, and  related quantities. The research also
              furthers knowledge on  issues of compatibility in semiconductor-superconductor 
              lithographically patterned devices. This highly interdisciplinary  research
              will involve graduate student and postdoctoral  researchers who will receive
              excellent training beneficial to  their future careers in industry, government
              or academia.  ***
