Title       : Localized Structures and Complex Dynamics in Pattern Forming Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9804673

Award Number: 9804673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hermann Riecke h-riecke@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804673
Riecke

The general goal of this project is to contribute to the
              understanding of 
spatio-temporal structures that arise spontaneously in many
              driven 
dissipative systems. Mathematically, these systems represent dynamical
              
systems with many degrees of freedom. The PI will focus on waves in
              
two-dimensional systems with axial anisotropy. The immediate motivation 
is
              given by recent experiments by G. Ahlers et al. on electroconvection in
              
nematic liquid crystals, where three interesting regimes have been
              
observed: 1) extended waves exhibiting spatio-temporally chaotic 
dynamics,
              2) waves localized into narrow, long patches (`worms'), and 3) 
temporally
              irregular, spatially localized bursting of the wave amplitude. 
These
              phenomena are found immediately above onset at small amplitudes 
of the waves.
              They therefore afford an excellent opportunity to develop 
and test
              mathematical ideas that will be relevant quite generally in weakly 
nonlinear
              theories of dissipative structures. Furthermore, due to the 
anisotropy this
              two-dimensional system can be described systematically 
by
              Ginzburg-Landau-type equations. No recourse to phenomenological 
equations of
              the Swift-Hohenberg-type is needed. The main part of the 
project is devoted
              to the worms. They cannot be described by the 
Ginzburg-Landau equations
              derived by straightforward asymptotic 
analysis. The analysis has to be
              extended to include certain additional 
modes that are strictly speaking not
              on the center manifold but become 
relevant already very close to threshold.
              The main questions to be 
addressed are: the localization mechanism of the
              worms and suitable one-
dimensional reductions (standing- and traveling-wave
              pulses), the stability 
of long worms, and the nucleation of worms from small
              noise. The project 
will demonstrate how in cases like the one described here
              the qualitative 
and quantitative relevance of the weakly nonlinear theory can
              be 
drastically increased by including a single additional mode. This aspect
              
carries over to a wide range of other systems. On a more specific level, the
              
advection of a slow mode will be important in other wave systems as well.
              
At the same time, for the electroconvection system detailed qualitative and
              
quantitative comparisons with ongoing experiments will be achieved 
through
              close cooperation with the experimentalists.

In wide range of systems
              spatial structures appear spontaneously. These 
patterns can be
              time-independent or may have the form of traveling or 
standing waves. Just a
              few examples are animal coat markings, waves on 
the surface of vibrated
              fluids, cloud streets, waves in chemical reactions 
and in nerve conduction.
              If the properties of a system are the same over its 
whole extent one would
              usually expect that the patterns also cover the 
whole system. However, in
              quite a number of cases a spontaneous 
localization of the pattern in patches
              or even single wave crests has been 
observed. In repeated runs of the same
              experiment the patches occur in 
randomly varying locations. This indicates
              that their localization is not due 
to special properties of the system at
              that location. Such localized waves 
have been observed, e.g., in vibrated
              granular material, fluid convection in 
mixtures, and in nematic liquid
              crystals. The funded research will 
contribute to the understanding of the
              causes that lead to localization 
focussing on the `worms' observed in liquid
              crystals. It will elucidate the 
mechanism in detail and investigate the
              chaotic bursting of such structures 
and how they are generated (nucleated)
              from weak noise that is due to the 
thermal motion in the fluid. Using
              advanced mathematical methods, the 
research will bring out the central
              features that are relevant more generally 
in other systems as well.

