Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RUI: Evaluation of Controls on Carbonate Platform
               Evolution and Architecture Through Comparative Platform Analysis: Nanpanjiang
               Basin, South China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9804835

Award Number: 9804835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55930              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Lehrmann lehrmann@uwosh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Oshkosh
	      800 Algoma Boulevard
	      Oshkosh, WI  549013551    414/424-1234

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804835
Lehrmann

Understanding the mechanisms that control longevity,
              architecture, and sequence variability of carbonate platforms is of fundamental
              importance in scientific studies of carbonate platforms as recorders of ancient
              environments and in hydrocarbon exploration and exploitation.  However,
              interpretations of internal facies architecture and sequence-stratigraphic
              correlation's of carbonate platforms are commonly based on an assumption:
              fluctuations in sea level are the essential controlling mechanism.

We
              propose a collaborative project between Universities of Kansas and
              Wisconsin-Oshkosh to evaluate the roles of both regional and local variables
              including sea-level changes, subsidence, tectonic activity, siliciclastics
              influx, excess nutrient flux, and carbonate production rates on platform
              architecture.  Evaluation of these controls will be accomplished through a
              comparative analysis of coeval Triassic platforms of various scales,
              architectures and settings distributed over an area of 650 km2 within the
              Nanpanjiang Basin of south China.  We have chosen the Nanpanjiang Basin because
              we know of no other area that allows outcrop study of as great a diversity of
              platform scales and morphologies, including both landward attached platforms
              and isolated platforms.

We will determine sequence-stratigraphic
              architecture from mapping outcrops that expose continuous two-dimensional
              transects through the platforms.  Comparison of synchronous intervals will aid
              in separating regional and local controls.  We will use detailed
              biostratigraphy and magnetic-reversal stratigraphy to ensure that synchronous
              events are evaluated in the separation and interpretation of controlling
              mechanisms.  With this stratigraphic and age data we will construct subsidence
              histories to isolate local variations so we can examine possible causes for
              synchronous differences in the stratigraphy between platforms or along strike
              within platforms.  For example, for coeval intervals with similar subsidence
              and eustatic histories we will use facies analysis to evaluate the impact of
              variables such as influx of siliciclastics or excess nutrients on interruptions
              or termination of carbonate platform growth and to evaluate the impact of
              basin-filling siliciclastics on progradation geometries.  The end product will
              be a series of depositional models that illustrate actual architectural
              variability in carbonate platforms and a quantitative understanding of the
              mechanisms that control variability.

