Title       : New Methods for the Theory of Localization and Directed Wave Propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  2002     
File        : a9804983

Award Number: 9804983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harsh Mathur hxm7@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9804983  Mathur  Disorder effects in dirty electronic systems are often 
              essentially nonperturbative.  Although some nonperturbative  results are known,
              many important questions remain.  This  theoretical research will identify some
              of these unanswered  questions and the associated methods to study them.    The
              first part of the research will focus on the directed  wave model.  From one
              point of view it may be interpreted as  a model of electrons moving in a noisy
              lattice (one with  time dependent randomness).  Efforts to statistically 
              characterize the motion of a wave packet in such a medium  have been made for
              over twenty years.  Current efforts focus  on a complete statistical
              characterization of the wave  packet.  Solutions to this problem are proposed
              in this  research which exploit a mapping, discovered by the PI, of  the
              appropriate Fokker-Planck equation onto an exotic  ferromagnetic model.  This
              model can be analyzed by adapting  Dyson's beautuful analysis of spin-waves in
              an ordinary  ferromagnet.  A detailed solution is desirable because of  the
              intrinsic interest in the directed wave model and its  varied applications and
              because it is similar to several  important models of noisy dynamics in
              statistical mechanics.    The directed wave model also describes transport in a
               quantum Hall multilayer.  A special version of the directed  wave model
              coincides with a model that gives a very  successful account of stress
              propagation in granular  materials.  Recent work on rare-earth metallic
              ferromagnets  also provides motivation to study directed waves with  correlated
              noise.  Issues related to these systems will be  studied.    The second part of
              the research will focus on problems of  static disorder.  Here the questions to
              be studied include  the statistics of the conductance in the mesoscopic limit, 
              delocalization transitions in one-dimension, dirty quantum  wires, and
              localization and delocalizations in higher  dimensions.  Many of these problems
              have long resisted  attempts at analys is.  The approach used will be to 
              reinterpret one space dimension as time thereby transforming  a model with
              static disorder to one with noise.  %%%  Disorder effects in dirty electronic
              systems are often  essentially nonperturbative, e.g., not amenable to simple 
              linear techniques.  Although some nonperturbative results  are known, many
              important questions remain.  This  theoretical research will identify some of
              these unanswered  questions and the associated methods to study them.  The 
              research is comprised of two parts.  In the first, the  equations which model
              the propagation of an electron in a  noisy medium will be transformed to an
              analogous model of  magnetism.  This model can then be solved in a relatively 
              straightforward way.  Applications to a variety of other  physical systems will
              be studied.  The second part of the  research will study the motion of
              electrons in materials for  which the disorder is static.  Besides yielding a 
              fundamental understanding of the underlying physics, the  results of this
              research should also have applications in  nanoelectronics.  ***
