Title       : Non-Stationary Signal Analysis Motivated by the Auditory System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9804050

Award Number: 9804050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228602             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramdas Kumaresan kumar@ele.uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The auditory systems of humans and animals represent and  process time-varying
              signals and make inferences on them.  The acoustic energy from various sound
              sources impinges on  our ears from different directions and the inner ears and 
              the brain, together, seem to effortlessly separate them into  independent
              recognizable streams. What kind of signal  processing underlies this
              phenomenon? Is it possible to  emulate this kind of processing in a computer
              and thereby  improve machine-based speech recognition systems? This  project
              constitutes a collaborative effort between auditory  scientists and signal
              processing engineers to advance the  state of the art in non-stationary signal
              analysis.  Many of the existing non-stationary signal analysis methods  such as
              time-frequency analyses are computationally complex  and are not amenable to
              automatic feature extraction. On the  other hand, various model-based signal
              analysis methods  require detailed knowledge of the underlying signal 
              generation mechanisms which is often not available. Taking  cues from the
              initial stages of auditory processing, the  investigators are developing an
              approach and associated  signal processing algorithms for analyzing composite 
              signals. Their approach to signal analysis is based on  viewing signals as
              products of `elementary signals' rather  than sums of sinusoidal signals as in
              traditional Fourier  analysis. This view of signals is closely related to the 
              theory of analytic functions. Thus, composite signals will  be decomposed into
              component analytic signals which can be  further decomposed into component
              analytic signals and so  on. These signals are amenable to logarithmic
              processing and  lead to a natural way of characterizing a time-varying  signal
              interms of its positive instantaneous frequencies and  log-envelopes. Overall
              the proposed approach is a non  parametric way to characterize modulation
              properties of  signals. This is to be contrasted with the traditional  Fourier
              based methods where the emphasis is on po wer  spectral analysis.
