Title       : Collaboratite Research: Rates of "Terminal" Early Cambrian Sea-Level Change,
               Apparent Polar Wander, and Faunal Turnover in Morocco and Avalon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9804988

Award Number: 9804988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37319              (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel A. Bowring sbowring@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9804988
Bowring

A crucial interval in life history extends from the lowest
              local trilobites in the upper Lower Cambrian through to the appearance of
              Middle Cambrian-aspect trilobites.  Work by E. Landing and S.A. Bowring on this
              eventful interval, with up to ten Lower Cambrian trilobite zones, several Grand
              cycle-scale sedimentary alternations, the Lower--Middle Cambrian boundary
              "Hawke Bay event(s)", and a possible excursion of west Gondwana from tropical
              to high south latitudes, indicates that it lasted about 10 Ma.

We propose to
              quantify rates of late Early--earliest Middle Cambrian sea-level, faunal, and
              paleolatitudinal change in the of siliferous Moroccan sequences of west
              Gondwana.  A Moroccan sea level-- and Early-Middle Cambrian U-Pb time standard
              will be used for correlation into the sequence stratigraphy of the Avalon
              continent.  Terminal Lower Cambrian sections in Morocco: 1) show two,
              third-order sea-level excursions in shale-carbonate alternations; 2) contain
              volcanic ashes, some of which have zircons datable with an error of ? 1 Ma or
              less: and 3) include facies suitable for paleomagnetic work and paleogeographic
              reconstruction.  This project will refine the Lower Cambrian trilobite and
              small shelly fossil biostratigraphy, depositional history, and
              microstratigraphy of the upper Igoudine--Issafen Formations, a sequence, which
              above the Igoudine carbonates shows a back-stepping of shale-carbonate
              macroscale cycles into the inner detrital belt. S.A. Bowring will collect and
              date volcanic ashes to establish a U-Pb geologic time standard through the
              Moroccan trilobite zonation, date sea-level excursions; and estimate
              accumulation rates of sedimentary rocks.  Geochronologic work will allow
              insights into Early Cambrian faunal turnover rates.  Data on trilobite
              distributions will be used to test for coordinated stasis in biofacies and
              contribute to the understanding of a potentially important process of
              evolutionary paleobiology.  Samples for paleomagnetic analysis will complement
              J.L. Kirschvink's NSF-funded work much lower in the Moroccan Lower Cambrian. 
              Precise Lower Cambrian U-Pb dates coupled with detailed paleomagnetic and
              stratigraphic work will allow determination of rates of paleolatitudinal change
              and permit a direct test of Kirschvinck et alli's hypothesis of a period of
              Early--Middle Cambrian true polar wander.

Lower Cambrian correlations are
              controversial due to provincialism of key faunal groups and diachronous lowest
              local occurrences of some geographically widespread trilobites.  The temporal
              resolution provided by U-Pb geochronology is overtaking that of
              biostratigraphy, and offers the best potential to date sea-level excursions and
              correlate them between Cambrian paleocontinents.  The trilobite-bearing Lower
              Cambrian (Branchian Series) of Avalon has been divided into two depositional
              sequences, which are regarded as epeirogenic in origin but may reflect a
              eustatic component.  Volcanic ashes are numerous in the upper sequence and
              overlying Middle Cambrian.  We will date these ashes and search for lower
              Branchian ashes to improve correlation into the Moroccan terminal Early
              Cambrian faunal sequence and depositional history.

