Title       : Biodiversity: Life in the Balance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  2001   
File        : a9804616

Award Number: 9804616
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1966473            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bayley Silleck BSilleck@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Eisner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Marvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Blue Mountain Film Assoc
	      44 Blue Mountain Church Road
	      Saugerties, NY  12477    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              98-04616  Silleck    ABSTRACT: Blue Mountain Films, in association with the
              American Museum of Natural History, is producing a multi-component project on
              biodiversity that will examine closely the risks we face if the web of life on
              Earth is progressively diminished.  The central component of the project will
              be a large format film that seeks to locate and understand humans' place in,
              and impact upon, the natural order of life on this planet.  The film will be
              based on what appears to be a critical paradox:  while we humans, like all
              living things, have always been dependent upon natural systems for our
              survival, our unique cultural development and technological prowess have
              convinced us that we are somehow "above" nature.  As a corollary theme, the
              Life in the Balance film will examine the urgency of the scientific effort to
              explore and understand ecosystems and the flora and fauna they contain before
              their unique genetic information is lost due to human actions.  In addition,
              the film will convey an appreciation of how science actually is done in the
              field.      The film will be augmented by:      * The Life in the Balance
              Bookshelf of material currently being developed by the new National Center at
              the American Museum of Natural History:    * Biodiversity:  An Action Guide
              aimed at encouraging children and their families to explore together topics and
              issues surrounding biodiversity.  * Teacher's Curriculum-Biodiversity Counts
              designed as a middle school-based activity that encourages students to engage
              in scientific exploration and discover the diversity of species in their own
              neighborhoods.  * Book of Essays designed as a resource book for high school
              students and their teachers.    * Teacher/Educator's Guide consisting of
              hands-on science activities that can be used independently of the film and as
              preparation for viewing and/or following screenings of the film.  * Life in the
              Balance "Interactive" Poster with a four-color acetate overlay of pictures
              which, wen pulled away, reveals a seco nd sheet with science information.  *
              Fun Facts Brochure with biodiversity facts and questions presented in a simple,
              fun fashion, such as quizzes and games.  * Life in the Balance Website feature
              family activities, an extinction conference section, and a bio-bulletin.  *
              Life in the Balance National Training Institute, a 10 day workshop brining
              together teams of science educators from community organizations, schools, and
              science centers and museums.    The PI and producer/director/writer of the film
              will be Bayley Silleck who served in these same roles for the Cosmic Voyage
              film.  The Co-PI and producer will be Jeffrey Marvin.  The principal scientist
              will be Thomas Eisner, Jacob Gould Schurman Professor of Chemical Ecology at
              Cornell University.  This production team will work closely with an advisory
              committee that includes Jane Lubchenco, Peter H. Raven, Edward O. Wilson,
              Andrew Peter Dobson, Myles Gordon, Mary Elizabeth Murray-Wilson, and Lee
              Schmitt.
