Title       : Tardiglacial Human Adaptations in the Cantabrian Cordillera, Spain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a9804730

Award Number: 9804730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107084             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence G. Straus lstraus@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Magdalenian culture marks the apex of the Paleolithic period in European
              prehistory. Covering the time span from ca. 16,000-11,000 years ago, the
              conclusion of the last Ice Age, Magdalenian peoples occupied an area which
              extended from Spain through northern Germany. Famous rock paintings in caves
              such as Lascaux and Altimera were produced by the Magdalenians and carved bone
              and ivory figurines constitute some of the earliest known art mobilier in the
              world. From an anthropological perspective the group is interesting because of
              the broad range of subsistence adaptations displayed. Through analysis of
              within-culture variation, it is possible, one hopes, to discern basic
              organizing principles. The site of Miron is particularly interesting in this
              context because it is situated near the southern end of Magdalenian
              distribution and is in a montaine location. With National Science Foundation
              support Dr. Straus and his collaborators will conduct four seasons of
              archaeological excavation at the site.       Miron is a huge cave dominating
              the intermontaine valley of Ason and is surrounded by high Cordilleran crests
              and summits. Because of it's size, it approximates an open-air site since
              activities conducted within it would have been relatively unconstrained.
              Preliminary excavation has revealed stratified Magdalenian deposits rich in
              lithics as well as faunal remains. Because of its sheltered nature, it provides
              an ideal locus for the study of long-term environmental change through
              sedimentology, geomorphology, micromorphology, palynology, paleobotany and
              paleontology. This range of studies will be conducted by collaborating
              specialists from the Universidad de Cantabria. The site has yielded rock
              engravings stratigraphically datable to the Magdalenian and is likely to
              produce additional artistic remains.        This project is important for
              several reasons. It will shed new light on prehistoric adaptation at a hunting
              and gathering level of technology. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists and assist in training a number of both Spanish and American
              students.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
