Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Assessment and Remediation of Industrial Sources
               of Lead in Cairo's Air
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1998     
File        : a9804829

Award Number: 9804829
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed I. Sultan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil C. Sturchio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Global Environmental Techn
	      2716 Copperfield Drive
	      Naperville, IL  60565    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 5944,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9804829  Sultan    Description: This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Mohamed Sultan, President, Global Environmental Technologies,
              Inc. in Naperville, IL, Dr. Neil Sturchio of the Environmental Research
              Division at Argonne National Laboratory, and Dr. Mahmoud Fouad, Professor of
              Mechanical Engineering at Cairo University, and Dr.  in Egypt.  The research
              will target the lead content in the air in the city of Cairo with the purpose
              of assessing its level, testing remedial procedures to reduce it, and assessing
              the results of several procedures..  Specifically the scientists plan to study
              point sources such as lead smelters to assess the dispersion from these sources
              and how they contribute to the ambient air using experimental and dispersion
              models using a K-e based turbulence approach; then pilot-scale testing of one
              or more filtration devices, along with the post-remedial measurements of the
              particulate lead concentrations along the emitted plume will be carried out.   
               Scope:  The US scientists are an experienced researchers in the area of
              environmental sciences and technology.  They have participated with the
              Egyptian collaborator in a major project in Egypt to develop a Center for
              Environmental hazard Mitigation (CEHM) at Cairo University.  The CEHM is a
              national undertaking, with support from the Egyptian and US governments, which
              has extensive facilities for the type of research proposed here.  The Egyptian
              collaborator has extensive experience in fluid dynamics and in energy systems. 
               the problem to be addressed is a major problem in Cairo and in many of the
              world's largest cities in the developing countries.  Successful results could
              be applied in other situations.  This proposal meets INT objective of
              supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  The project
              was generated as a result of a workshop on environmentally clean technologies
              that was organized, in 1996, by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and
              the Egyptian Government.  EPA was  involved in the evaluation of the project
              and in recommending its support.  This project is being supported under the
              US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered by the US Department of State, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              cooperative activities.  ***
