Title       : Chemistry of the Metalorganic Chemical Vapor Deposition of InGaP/GaAs
               Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9804719

Award Number: 9804719
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223042             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Hicks rhicks@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9804719  Hicks    The objective of this University/Industry collaborative
              GOALI  project is to identify fundamental MOCVD process chemistry  crucial to
              greater understanding and subsequent development of a  robust manufacturing
              technology capable of producing  "defect-free" compound semiconductor layers
              with sharp interfaces  and precise dopant profiles. Research will be undertaken
              to  determine the effects of strain and doping on the physics and  chemistry of
              InGaAs/GaAs and InGaP/GaAs (001) surfaces. In  addition, alternative precursors
              will be studied for  low-temperature growth and doping of these materials.
              Surface  structures produced by MOCVD will be characterized in situ by 
              infrared, x-ray photoemission and thermal desorption  spectroscopies, and by
              scanning tunneling microscopy. Bulk  properties of films will be characterized
              by triple-axis x-ray  diffraction, electron microscopy, and Hall analysis. New 
              deposition processes that are developed will be further examined  and tested
              for fabrication of heterojunction bipolar transistors  (HBTs). The epitaxial
              layers will be processed into devices by  industry partner, Rockwell, and then
              tested to compare their  performance relative to commercial HBT products. The
              project is  co-supported by the DMR Electronic Materials and Solid State 
              Chemistry Programs, the Office of Naval Research, and the MPS  OMA(Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities).  %%%  The project addresses basic research
              issues in a topical area of  materials science having high potential
              technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at  a fundamental level to new aspects of electronic/photonic 
              devices.  Experimental tools are now available to allow atomic  level
              observation of elementary surface processes which when  better understood allow
              advances in fundamental science and  technology. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the  research is expected to contribute to improving
              the performance  and stability of advance d devices and circuits by providing a
               fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing  improved
              materials, and materials combinations.  An important  feature of the program is
              the integration of research and  education through the training of students in
              a fundamentally and  technologically significant area. Students and
              postdoctoral  scholars working on this project will obtain valuable experience 
              processing and testing devices at the facilities of industrial  partners.  ***
