Title       : Renormalization of Critical Circle Maps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9804606

Award Number: 9804606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30658              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Yampolsky yampol@math.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves the renormalization theory of critical circle mappings. 
              This theory has developed in parallel with the renormalization theory of
              unimodal maps, which has enjoyed spectacular progress since Sullivan's
              ground-breaking work in the late 1980's.  The work of Sullivan, McMullen, and
              Lyubich culminated in establishing the global hyperbolicity of the
              renormalization operator, thus providing the mathematical basis for the
              universality phenomena in unimodal dynamics.  Yampolsky will attempt to settle
              the corresponding Hyperbolicity Conjecture in the theory of circle maps, as
              well as investigate matings of quadratic polynomials with Siegel disks.   One
              of the reasons why fractal shapes are so eye catching is their self-similarity:
              when appropriately magnified, the fragments of the fractal resemble the whole.
              It often happens that iterations of this procedure, i.e. consecutive
              enlargements, converge to a certain  limiting ``universal'' shape. Such
              convergence of rescalings or ``renormalizations'' of  a complicated object is a
              fundamental principle of various physical theories, for example, with the
              dynamics of gases and fluids and in quantum mechanics. Particularly simple
              models for renormalization convergence exist in the framework of
              one-dimensional dynamics. For one such model, the Feigenbaum renormalization,
              the phenomenon of convergence has been established recently by rigorous
              mathematical methods. This convergence manifests itself through universal
              properties of the fractal Mandelbrot set and is also experimentally observed in
              hydrodynamics. Yampolsky will investigate this convergence in the other
              one-dimensional model, the renormalization of circle maps. This  problem, which
              was formulated in the late 1970's, has been the object of attention of various
              authors, and several beautiful mathematical theories were built to explain the
              empirically observed convergence of renormalization. Proving the convergence of
              renormalization in this context may contribute to a solid mathematica l
              foundation for the phenomenon of the convergence of renormalization in other
              problems of modern physical science.
