Title       : Enhancing and Assessing Spatial Cognition through Computational Craftwork
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2002   
File        : a0125363

Award Number: 0125363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregg E. Solomon                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Eisenberg duck@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              When professional mathematicians and scientists discuss the nature and
origins
              of their own creativity, they often mention the central role
played by visual
              and spatial thinking. But despite the apparent importance
of visual/spatial
              cognition in mathematics and science education, there is
still relatively
              little research aimed at understanding, enhancing, and
assessing spatial
              reasoning in math and science students. Even more, there
are few efforts that
              seek to blend novel computational media with the
sorts of spatially and
              mathematically rich hands-on crafting activities
that influenced and motivated
              earlier generations of scientists. We
believe that progress can be made on
              both these fronts--on both basic
cognitive research and pedagogical
              development--by an effort at
integration. That is: by designing playful,
              creative, and technologically
sophisticated educational materials for
              exercising and enhancing spatial
cognition, we can use those materials as the
              means to explore and
understand fundamental issues in spatial cognition as
              well.

In the course of this project, then, we plan to:

* Characterize the
              nature of spatial expertise in the understanding of
three-dimensional forms,
              while creating flexible assessment techniques to
measure development of that
              expertise;

* Devise a practical spatial curriculum of materials designed to
              enhance
and exercise spatial cognition. This curriculum will be based on
              a
combination of both hands-on work and creative computational
              papercrafting
activities.

* Extend our current software research
              environments (HyperGami and
JavaGami) to incorporate online spatial advisors
              that assist students in
reflecting upon, understanding, playing with, and
              interpreting
three-dimensional polyhedral forms; and

* Create new software
              to explore both traditional and novel realms of
mathematical papercrafting,
              such as pop-ups, flexagons, anamorphic art,
and surface models. In exploring
              these areas, we seek to expand the
landscape of traditional mathematical
              papercrafts by exploiting the
creative potential of computational media.


