Title       : Collaborative Research: The Children's Research Initiative (CRI): Integrative
               Approaches: Perception-Action Foundations of Early Tool Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2001 
File        : a0125615

Award Number: 0125615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey J. Lockman lockman@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1698,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract


Collaborative Research:  Perception-Action Foundations of Early
              Tool Use

Jeffrey Lockman

How do humans learn to use an object as a tool? 
              According to the theory of action/perception coupling, to use a tool, an
              individual must detect potential relations between objects that allow actions
              with one to produce change in another (for example,  object A can be used to
              strike object B), and establish these relations through action.  To use one
              object to change another in a specific way (perhaps to use A to crack B open)
              requires positioning or aligning the objects appropriately and applying the
              appropriate force. The number of alignments that must be achieved and how
              precisely movements must be modulated influence the difficulty of mastering a
              particular tool.   

Before they begin to use objects as tools (at about
              their first birthday), human infants relate objects and surfaces through
              action, for example, by banging objects together or banging objects on a solid
              surface.  We call these common modes of acting with objects "perception-action
              routines".  Do these routines form the foundation for the appearance over the
              second year of life of tool use?  If so, how are perception-action routines
              harnessed for this new purpose?

A collaborative project will investigate (1)
              how tool use emerges from infants' perception-action routines (2) how tool use
              involves detecting and establishing relations between objects and surfaces (3)
              how skill with a familiar tool is acquired and  (4) how the development of
              skill with hammer tools in young children differs from how capuchin monkeys
              (that spontaneously use objects as hammers) acquire skill in the same contexts.
              Taken together, the results of the proposed experiments will help us better
              understand how tool use develops in children and to what degree tool use
              represents an ability that is uniquely human.

Children between 6 and 24
              months of age will be videotaped acting singly with objects and surfaces that
              vary systematically in properties that affect banging (for example, hardness)
              and in features of handles.  Cross-sectional studies of children's activity
              with unfamiliar objects, and studies of how children at different ages become
              skilled with practice at using hammers in varying conditions (for example, when
              the tool object has a handle vs. when it does not, and when they must be more
              vs. less accurate in where they strike) will also be conducted. These studies
              will be replicated with 8 adult capuchin monkeys.  Capuchins readily use
              hammer-tools, but we do not know to what extent they master multiple relations
              in action as humans do.  

This work will contribute to knowledge of learning
              mechanisms that support development of tool-using skills in humans, of
              age-related changes in learning mechanisms, and of the special qualities of
              humans in this regard.  It contributes to contemporary debates about the
              continuous or discontinuous origins of tool use in human development and human
              evolution, and the role of action in learning.  Additional broader impacts
              include involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in research,
              exposure of the research process to the general public, and the development of
              a new collaborative relationship between investigators at two institutions and
              in complementary areas of behavioral study (developmental and comparative
              psychology).

