Title       : Large Scale Dynamic Simulation And Optimization Tools For Chicago Freight
               Infrastructure And Operations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0125752

Award Number: 0125752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $592376             (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanasios K. Ziliaskopoulos a-z@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jay Franke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Birge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125752	
Ziliaskopoulos			

This award is to Northwestern University to
              support the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners for this award include Northwestern University
              (Lead Institution), University of Illinois-Chicago Circle Urban Transportation
              Center, Chicago Area Transportation Study, City of Chicago, Metropolitan
              Planning Council, Business Leaders for Transportation, Burlington Northern
              Santa Fe Railway Company, Union Pacific Railway Company, Central States
              Trucking Company, and Roadway Express.

Proposed Activities
The objective of
              this effort is to forge an effective partnership among all major stakeholders
              of the intermodal freight industry in Chicago.  Three interdependent research
              programs will be established to create a sustainable effort: (1) development of
              a framework with advanced quantitative decision support tools, to evaluate
              innovations in business process, infrastructure, and technology that streamline
              operations and eliminate unnecessary delays, (2) perform in-depth analyses of
              past, current and future trends of the intermodal freight industry by
              collecting and interpreting data, and (3) promotion of the use of decision
              support tools through educational programs for the partners.  The framework
              with decision support tools includes a dynamic traffic simulation
              assignment/simulation module, a terminal operations module, and a logic module
              to assist in coordinated planning of all operations in the Chicago area.  The
              in-depth analysis of past, current and future trends will include data from
              Illinois DOT, City of Chicago, trucking companies, rail companies, maritime and
              custom data, shippers, and freight industry proprietary data.

Proposed
              Innovation
Modules exist that model each sector of the intermodal
              transportation system, but there has not been an integrated analysis/simulation
              of the integrated transportation system for a city as large as Chicago.  The
              proposed effort will incorporate data and models for each sector and integrate
              them in a mathematical tool for scheduling the movement of freight to minimize
              loss of time and efficiency for the system.

Potential Economic Impact
More
              than 60% of the US container movement go through the Chicago region. 
              Conservative estimates predict a fourfold growth by the year 2020.  This means
              more than 100,000 daily truck movements between rail terminals, all over
              existing streets and roads.  Empty trucks returning to a terminal plus traffic
              delays taken alone will cost millions of dollars in lost revenue.  An
              integrated computer-based scheduling tools to minimize empty trips and
              efficient use of the street grid will save millions.

Potential Societal
              Impact
The impact on the efficiency of movement of freight plus the reduction
              of unnecessary traffic on the street system in the Chicago region will have a
              large impact on the quality of life in the region.  Loss of freight traffic
              because the region has reached gridlock could have a huge negative societal and
              economic impact.

