Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Thinking SMART
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0125765

Award Number: 0125765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2232418            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Stanton jstanton@girls-inc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joe R. Martinez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather Johnston Nicholson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Girls Incorporated
	      120 Wall Street
	      New York, NY  10005    212/509-2000

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Thinking SMART" is a comprehensive five-year program that will encourage young
              women to pursue careers in science, mathematics and technology.  The project
              focuses on girls ages 12-18, and will especially target those who are
              underserved and underrepresented in the sciences, including girls from diverse
              backgrounds and persons with disabilities.  Key elements include four
              science/engineering module options, a two-tiered mentoring component, training,
              resource materials, online activities and an awards program.  The modules
              (Material Girls, Eco Girls, Galactic Girls, Net Girls), focus on engineering,
              ecology, physics and computer science respectively, and will be aligned with
              national standards.  The modules are implemented during the school year and
              include weekly programming, a summer camp and a spring "Women in Science and
              Engineering" conference organized by girls.  Weekly meetings are augmented by
              online activities, in which girls interact with other participants and mentors,
              publish reports and obtain career information.  Additionally, participants who
              complete all four modules are eligible to become paid mentors for younger
              participants.  Five publications will be produced to support the program,
              including manuals for mentors (both adults and youth), module activities, a
              parent guide and a guide for implementation sites on community partnerships. 
              Thinking SMART materials will be developed and piloted tested at eight sites in
              conjunction with Girls, Inc. affiliates in Nashua, NH, Worcester, MA, Oakridge,
              TN and Shelbyville, IN, with input from the Society of Women Engineers. 
              Extensive training will also be provided for pilot programs and future
              dissemination.  Finally the E3 Awards Program will motivate implementation
              sites to create high quality local programs.  It is anticipated that more than
              1,500 Girls, Inc. affiliates will adopt "Thinking SMART."
