Title       : Cold Body Temperature as an Evolutionary Shaping force in the Physiology of
               Antarctic Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0125890

Award Number: 0125890
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $555000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Sidell bsidell@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0125890
Sidell

Notothenioid fishes that dominate the fish fauna surrounding
              Antarctica have been evolving for 10-14 million years at a nearly constant body
              temperature of ~0C throughout their life histories. As a result, this group of
              animals is uniquely suited to studies aimed at understanding and identifying
              features of physiology and biochemistry that result from the process of
              evolution at cold body temperature. This project has three major objectives
              aimed at examining adaptations for life in cold environments: 

1. Identify
              the amino acid substitutions in the fatty acid-binding pocket of fatty acyl CoA
              synthetase (FACS) that explain its substrate specificity. Fatty acids are a
              major fuel of energy metabolism in Antarctic fishes. FACS catalyzes the
              condensation of CoASH and fatty acids to fatty acyl CoA esters, a step required
              for subsequent metabolism of these important compounds. This research may
              permit us to resolve the specific amino acid substitutions that explain both
              substrate specificity and preservation of catalytic rate of notothenioid FACS
              at cold physiological temperatures.

2. Produce a rigorous biochemical and
              biophysical characterization of the intracellular calcium-binding protein,
              parvalbumin, from white axial musculature of Antarctic fishes. Parvalbumin
              plays a pivotal role in facilitating the relaxation phase of fast-contracting
              muscles and is a likely site of strong selective pressure. Preliminary data
              strongly indicate that the protein from Antarctic fishes has been modified to
              ensure function at cold temperature. A suite of physical techniques will be
              used to determine dissociation constants of Antarctic fish parvalbumins for
              calcium and magnesium and unidirectional rate constants of ion-dissociation
              from the protein. Full-length cDNA clones for Antarctic fish parvalbumin(s)
              will permit deduction of primary amino acid sequence These data will yield
              insight into structural elements that permit the protein from notothenioid
              fishes to function at very cold body temperature.

3. Conduct a broad survey
              of the pattern of cardiac myoglobin expression in the Suborder Notothenoidei.
              Previous work has indicated a variable pattern of presence or absence of the
              intracellular oxygen-binding protein, myoglobin (Mb), in hearts of one family
              of Antarctic notothenioid fishes (Channichthyidae; icefishes). Because Mb is of
              physiological value in species that express the protein, the observed pattern
              of interspecific expression has been attributed to unusually low niche
              competition in the Southern Ocean. This leads to the prediction that similar
              loss of cardiac Mb should be observed in other notothenioid taxa. This part of
              the project will survey for the presence and absence of cardiac Mb in as many
              notothenioid species as possible and, if Mb-lacking species are detected, will
              extend analyses to determine the mechanism(s) responsible for loss of its
              expression using molecular biological techniques.

