Title       : Application of High-Precision Earthquake Location to Subduction Zones: Japan and
               New Zealand
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0125164

Award Number: 0125164
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189517             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford H. Thurber thurber@geology.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte A. Rowe  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1576,5921,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The initial focus of this project is the development and refining of seismic
              analysis methods, such as precise waveform cross-correlation and waveform
              similarity clustering, to improve earthquake location and seismic source
              imaging for existing, well-characterized seismic datasets. Along with these
              tools, relative arrival-times and cross-correlation lag information are being
              incorporated into 1D and 3D tomographic algorithms to enhance the robustness of
              velocity models derived from passive seismic data. These developments are then
              used for analysis of large seismic catalogues from Japan and New
              Zealand.

The software development is divided into three principal areas: (1)
              high-precision seismic waveform cross-correlation (WCC) for arrival time
              estimation, (2) robust event clustering and (3) relative arrival-time
              ("double-difference") seismic tomography. Component 1 improves on an existing,
              highly successful WCC method to reduce phase pick inconsistency within
              catalogues by incorporating such innovations as wavelet-based spectral and
              cross-spectral estimation, auto- picking and improved uncertainty analysis.
              Component 2 expands upon event clustering methods by developing a hierarchy of
              clusters based upon waveform similarity measures at different scales. This
              multiple-frequency-band approach provides a framework for rapidly associating
              events into hierarchical clusters to expedite cross-correlation repicking for
              precise location estimates. In the third component of development, relative
              arrival time data including the adjustments obtained from WCC are incorporated
              into 1D and 3D velocity inversion techniques. Recent work using relative
              arrival times ("double difference" location) has demonstrated great potential
              for improved earthquake location by adding these parameters into the location
              equations; capitalizing on relative traveltime information in combination with
              WCC pick refinements may also improve velocity models through reducing the
              existing scatter in hypocenter locations and associated arrival times used in
              the tomographic method. These software tools will be made available, with
              documentation, to the scientific community.

The analysis tools are applied
              to obtain detailed understanding of the seismotectonics of subduction zones and
              their associated seismic hazards. Two regions are being investigated: Japan and
              New Zealand. In Japan, two separate populations of earthquakes within the
              subducting plate define a double seismic zone whose spatially distinct seismic
              source regions indicate variations of stress regimes within the downbending
              plate. Large, damaging, historic earthquakes have been shown to correlate with
              microseismic distributions and slab boundary morphology in the region, but the
              microseismicity is characterized by somewhat diffuse clusters. These clouds of
              hypocenters often lend themselves well to precise relocation methods, which can
              illuminate details of the seismogenic fabric previously obscured by random
              location errors. Refinement of these locations and improved delineation of
              shallow and deep seismic source structures will sharpen the image of the
              subducting slab and better define relationships among the distinct regimes. In
              New Zealand, a region of high shear strain accumulation rate has been
              identified around Wellington. Applying the new analysis tools to earthquakes in
              this region will improve delineation of seismogenic structures, which then
              allows them to be related to crustal faulting and hypothesized locked zones
              along the slab interface. Defining the details of these seismic sources
              facilitates a better understanding of the localized stress regimes and permits
              refinements of models for how the subduction regime influences faulting and
              deformation in the overriding crust. These investigations are being undertaken
              in collaboration with researchers in Japan and New Zealand.
