Title       : High Resolution Chronostratigraphic Constraints on Terminal Paleozoic Crises and
               Recovery in the Circum-Tethys Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0125799

Award Number: 0125799
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285134             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roland Mundil rmundil@bgc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul R. Renne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth Ludwig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Berkeley Geochronology Cen
	      2455 Ridge Road
	      Berkeley, CA  947091211    510/644-9200

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

High Resolution Chronostratigraphic Constraints on Terminal
              Paleozoic Crises and Recovery in the Circum-Tethys Region

Roland Mundil,
              Kenneth R. Ludwig, Paul R. Renne

This research program is intended to
              improve the calibration of late Permian through Triassic biostratigraphic and
              magnetostratigraphic time scales towards an enhanced understanding of the
              terminal Paleozoic environmental and biotic crisis and subsequent Mesozoic
              recovery. Improved time scales are critical to realistic evaluation of the
              causes of, and interrelationships between, the various observed biotic and
              paleoenvironmental anomalies that characterize this transition. Our initial
              radio-isotopic age data (both U/Pb and Ar/Ar) are at variance with recent
              studies, many of which favor a rapid extinction caused by a bolide impact.
              Although an impact at or near the P-T boundary cannot be excluded a priori, a
              more gradual scenario and a causal relation between the massive continental
              basalt volcanism in South China at the end of the Permian and Siberia at the
              Permian-Triassic boundary - possibly in combination with other factors - and
              the biotic crisis must be considered. Despite the dramatic increase in
              available geochronologic data for the Late Permian through Early Triassic
              interval, crucial questions remain unanswered and will be addressed: 1) How
              synchronous are global biostratigraphic correlations across the Permo-Triassic
              boundary, and how precisely can biostratigraphic, geochemical,
              lithostratigraphic, and other records be correlated? 2) What are the temporal
              relations between terrestrial and marine records across the Permo-Triassic
              boundary? 3) What was the rate of the biotic recovery in the Early Triassic? 4)
              Do interlaboratory discrepancies (either physical or by interpretation) between
              high-precision U/Pb zircon ages for the Permo-Triassic boundary undermine the
              inferred extremely rapid chronology of extinction events? Indeed, how reliable
              is U/Pb zircon geochronology as a Phanerozoic time scale method? 

