Title       : Integration of a Gas Chromatograph Mass Spectrometer into the Undergraduate
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0125911

Award Number: 0125911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander Grushow                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41658              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Buttry buttry@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill Robinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward L. Clennan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Corcoran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)

This award is permitting the introduction of GC/MS in an
              incremental fashion into the curriculum as students are using this instrument
              in undergraduate organic chemistry, quantitative analysis, instrumental methods
              of analysis, advanced synthetic laboratories, and undergraduate research.
              Through a careful selection of instrument components, the incremental approach
              is allowing the use of the GC/MS in both large enrollment lower-division and
              lower enrollment upper-division laboratories. Experiments are being adapted
              from the research and the educational literature and implemented into our
              curriculum using an inquiry-based pedagogy. The incremental approach begins
              with the concepts needed to interpret isotopic mass and abundance data, and
              then continues with fragmentation patterns of complex species, techniques
              required for the accurate analysis of complex mixtures, and identifications
              through the use of library software. Finally, a sound introduction to the
              operating principles of GC/MS is providing the foundation for sophisticated
              uses in our upper-division instrumental methods of analysis and advanced
              synthesis courses and in undergraduate research projects. This approach is
              developing the student's comprehension of and appreciation for the power of
              this technique through a variety of experiences. The creative thinking skills
              and problem solving abilities of students are being improved. The installation
              of the GC/MS is a continuation of our overall Laboratory
              Modernization/Technology Integration Effort.
