Title       : Late Quaternary Tectonics and Environmental History in the Kamchatka-
               Komandorsky Region, Russian Far East
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0125787

Award Number: 0125787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $361660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne Bourgeois jbourgeo@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The primary goal of this project is to determine the history of earthquakes,
              tsunamis, and coastal deformation in the northwestern-most Pacific and
              southwestern Bering Sea, since the retreat of glaciers about 10,000 years ago. 
              In order to achieve this history, the project will also contribute to the
              millennial-scale history of large volcanic eruptions on Kamchatka.  Primary
              means for accomplishing these goals are field work, coastal surveying, trench
              excavation, strata description and sampling--as well as radiocarbon dating for
              age control, and analysis of volcanic ash layers and of tsunami deposits. This
              project focuses on the region where the Emperor Seamount chain and the
              Aleutian-Komandorsky islands are colliding with Kamchatka, and where the
              subduction zone ends, with tectonic transition into the Bering Sea.  The
              history of tsunamis and volcanic eruptions in this region has applications to
              the entire North Pacific and Bering Sea region--as a guide for understanding
              tectonic history, as a tool for correlation (for example, in the Aleutians),
              and as an indicator for natural-hazard analysis. Moreover, Kamchatka tsunamis
              affect localities and populations as distant as Hawaii and Chile.  This project
              also will record the history of vegetation changes at selected sites via pollen
              analysis and macrovegetation studies.  In cooperation with archaeologists,
              human-occupation levels will be recorded for potential future exploration, and
              for documenting the relationship between human habitation and geologic events. 
              This project also will provide ages of basal peat horizons, which have
              implications for global carbon budgets and for climate-change models. 
