Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: "Invention at Play"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0125417

Award Number: 0125417
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barry A. Van Deman                      
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1513181            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen Jennings jenningsg@nmah.si.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Smithsonian Institution
	      P. O. Box 37012
	      Washington, DC  200137012    202/275-0840

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Lemelson Center for the Study of Invention in cooperation with the Playful
              Invention and Exploration Network (a consortium of six museums) will develop
              "Invention at Play."  This will be a traveling exhibit in two sizes (3,500 sq.
              ft. & 1,500 sq. ft.) exploring the value of play and its critical role in the
              development of creative human beings.  Audiences will  a) learn how play
              fosters creative talents among children as well as adults;  b) experience their
              own playful and inventive abilities; and  c) understand how children's play
              parallels processes used by innovators in science and technology.  The exhibit
              will be divided into three sections:  1) the "Invention Playhouse" where
              visitors will be offered a variety of creative play activities to help them
              understand how playing builds creative and inventive skills;  2) "Case Study
              Clusters" where visitors will learn about the playful habits of five inventors,
              and  3) "Issues in Invention and Play" where visitors learn about ideas and
              debates among theorists who have linked inventive processes to children's play.
                This exhibit is based on documentation collected by the Lemelson Center since
              1995 from and about inventors of the past and present, and symposia they have
              organized to examine the characteristics of innovative processes.  This
              research has led to new insights into remarkable parallels between children's
              play and the way inventors approach their work.  

A series of complementary
              educational activities and programs will be developed and documented in an
              Educational Manual.  These programs will be aimed at diverse audiences
              including families, parents, teachers and other groups in science and
              children's museums nationwide and will help extend the impact of the exhibit
              theme beyond the exhibit itself.  Teacher workshops will be developed and
              arranged for each venue along with a special teacher's manual that will be
              distributed during exhibit-related school events offering a variety of
              activities on the themes of inventive play, creative model of problem solving,
              and exemplary tales of playful events and habits in the lives of interesting
              American inventors.  RK & Associates have done the front-end audience surveys
              for this project and will do the summative and remedial evaluation work.  The
              exhibit prototyping will be done by the Science Museum of Minnesota exhibit
              contractors.  


