Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: "My Place by the Bay" -- Prepared
               Environments for Early Science Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  2002  
File        : a0125740

Award Number: 0125740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David A. Ucko                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1479751            (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Eberbach ceberbach@badm.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alissa J. Arp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin C. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bay Area Discovery Museum
	      Fort Baker-557 McReynolds Road
	      Sausalito, CA  949652601    415/289-7261

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Bay Area Discovery Museum will expand their "My Place by the Bay" theme with
              new programmatic elements that "reinforce the theme that people, plants and
              animals live together and depend upon each other to survive."  Three new
              activity areas will be developed that focus on science learning:  A) an outdoor
              "Tot Lot" for early science learners;  B) an outdoor "Discovery Cove" focusing
              on place-specific elements of their bayshore site; and  C) an indoor recreated
              "Research Vessel" outfitted with a simulated navigaion station and marine
              biology laboratory.  The learning goals for these three areas are:  1) "The Bay
              environment is home to many living things"; and 2) "I can do science to explore
              and learn about my world".  The "Tot Lot," built into a hill, will be a
              one-half acre, multi-sensory, outdoor, prepared environment for children under
              five to learn about animals living in three distinct Bay habitats:  woodland,
              stream and meadow.  The "Discovery Cove" will be a two-acre area prepared
              environment for children up to age eight.  Learners will be encouraged to see
              the bay as an integrated system that includes animal adaptations, ecological
              relationships and human activity.  The "Research Vessel" is inspired by the R/V
              Questuary and is the place where visitors will use authentic tools to do
              science.  Other features of this project include an integrated system of
              Parenting Messages that includes special signage for parents and a Families Ask
              Guide for families with children ages seven and under that is a joint effort of
              DABM, Golden Gate National Recreation Area and the Golden Gate National Parks
              Association.  They will also develop a series of teacher workshops that will
              link this informal learning space with the needs of formal education.  One
              specific school group with whom they will work is the Junipero Serra, an NSF
              Urban Systemic Intiative site.   


