Title       : Physical-biological control of primary production in Beaufort and Chukchi Sea
               ice: Its contribution to shelf-basin interactions in the western Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0125464

Award Number: 0125464
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2007    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $799899             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rolf Gradinger rgradinger@ims.uaf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hajo Eicken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5219,9150,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125464
Gradinger

This interdisciplinary proposal aims to quantify sea ice
              primary production in the Chukchi and Beaufort seas.  The main working
              hypotheses are that both light and nutrient supply control biomass formation
              within the sea ice.  While irradiance controls the rate of biomass change in
              spring and autumn, nutrient advection dominates during summer as meltwater
              accumulation below the ice impedes nutrient supply and hence limits the total
              biomass accumulation in the ice cover.  To verify these hypotheses the project
              combines field studies, laboratory experimental work and remote sensing
              observations.  This approach is designed to quantify the ice-related
              biogeochemical processes and to supply a regional, seasonally varying estimate
              of carbon accumulation in, and release from, the ice cover.  The shipboard work
              will take place during two spring-summer (May-August) expeditions when
              physical, chemical and biological parameters will be measured at locations
              encompassing the prevalent ice types.  Ice thickness and structure will be
              determined using an indirect measurement technique along transects varying in
              length from hundreds to thousands of meters.  Ice cores will be analyzed to
              determine the vertical distributions of salinity, temperature, stable isotope
              concentrations, algal pigment concentrations and species composition.  Primary
              production will be determined using optical and tracer techniques.  Laboratory
              experimental work will assess the relationships among ice physics, chemistry
              and algal activity and to extrapolate results of the field measurements to
              early spring and late summer when shipboard sampling is more difficult. 
              Integration of remote sensing data will contribute to regional estimates of ice
              algal production and its temporal and spatial variability within the study
              region.  This proposal contributes to the goals of the western Arctic
              Shelf-Basin Interaction program by assessing the regional contribution of
              ice-associated primary production and consequent accumulation and release of
              carbon from the ice to the adjacent water column system.  Results are expected
              to help in understanding and quantifying the ice algal community response to
              climate variations.
