Title       : Cultural Emergence and Health in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0125893

Award Number: 0125893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $603456             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Dye tim_dye@urmc.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy Chin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dye
0125893

The development of the Antarctica has expanded beyond the
              initial population of scientists and military personnel to include other
              support staff (e.g., construction, food service, housekeeping and sanitation
              personnel) without an explicit scientific or military mission. Experts
              speculate that as space populations develop, a similar mix of residents may
              emerge. Such organizational and cultural merging in restricted living
              environments undoubtedly creates new cultural landscapes (ethnoscapes) that can
              influence health and health behavior. In addition, because of the extreme
              environmental conditions in Antarctica, health risks and health care are
              particularly important in this new cultural context. 
The specific aims of
              this project are to 1) model the emergence of cultural stages in isolated
              confined environmental (ICE) ethnoscapes as experienced through work,
              recreation, and daily living in Antarctica, 2) identify those elements of ICE
              ethnoscapes that are specific to an individual season on the ice and those
              elements which are repeated across seasons, 3) relate how the temporal and
              content stages of ICE ethnoscapes interact with risk, behavior, and injury, and
              4) demonstrate the utility of electronic and distance-based assisted
              ethnography in conducting social research in ICE environments of Antarctica.
              These aims will be accomplished with a pre-deployment qualitative phase of
              interviews and focus groups with individuals who have spent at least one season
              in Antarctica within the past three years. The second phase will be on-ice with
              the project team residing in Antarctica for an extended period to conduct
              on-site observation and interviews with Antarctic residents. 
This research
              could contribute to the development of context-sensitive explanatory models of
              culture and injury risk, screening procedures for long term residence in
              isolated confined environments, and the methods of their derivation remotely.
              The study of cultural emergence in Antarctica as an analog to space could prove
              useful in the development of models of health and health behavior in an
              isolated confined environmental (ICE) context.

