Title       : Innovation in Aircraft Manufacturing through System-wide Virtual Reality Models
               and Curriculum Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0125414

Award Number: 0125414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597810             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis A. Siginer siginer@engr.twsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Viswanathan Madhavan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wichita State University
	      1845 Fairmount
	      Wichita, KS  67260    316/689-3456

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125414	
Siginer			

This award is to Wichita State University to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners are Wichita State University (Lead
              Institution), Boeing Aircraft Company, Cessna Aircraft Company, Raytheon
              Aircraft Company, Brittain Machine Inc., Delmia Corporation, Kansas Technology
              Enterprise Corporation, and the Society of Manufacturing Engineers.

Proposed
              Activities
The broad objectives of the project include: foment the use of
              integrated virtual reality models of manufacturing systems by the partners to
              design, improve, and operate the manufacturing systems, and teach the workforce
              (new graduates as well as current industry personnel).  The following
              activities support these objectives: integrate the curricula of the industrial
              engineering and manufacturing engineering programs at Wichita State University
              using the model that ties the courses together and integrates the applicability
              of and interrelation between the knowledge and skills gained, provide the
              students with real-world experience in manufacturing systems, and transfer the
              computer modeling tools to industry. 

Proposed Innovation
The partnership
              will provide industry with computer modeling tools that are more realistic and
              system-based for aircraft manufacturing.  The new curriculum will provide
              students with state-of-the-art real world engineering experience that is closer
              to the needs of the regional aircraft industry.

Potential Economic
              Impact
Wichita is home to major manufacturing facilities of Boeing Aircraft
              Company, Bombardier/Learjet, Cessna Aircraft Company, and Raytheon Aircraft
              Company.  Aviation is responsible for 10% of the earnings in the State of
              Kansas, and manufacturing is responsible for 60% of the income in Wichita. 
              Since aircraft manufacturers face stiff global competition, innovation is
              necessary to maintain economic and technological superiority in the aviation
              manufacturing business.  Having state-of-the-art tools and a workforce educated
              and trained with these tools is absolutely required for survival in this
              industry sector.

Potential Societal Impact
Economic well being and jobs for
              this region are critically dependent upon the aviation industry's maintaining
              its competitive advantage with tools and people trained to use them.

