Title       : Collaborative Research: Suspended Sediment Transport in Karst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2002   
File        : a0125601

Award Number: 0125601
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154641             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura Toran ltoran@nimbus.temple.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Temple University
	      1601 N. Broad Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  191226024    215/204-8691

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0125601
Toran

Although it seems intuitively obvious that karst aquifers will
              carry more sediment than porous media aquifers, because of the large conduits
              and faster velocities, relatively few studies have tried to quantify sediment
              transport in karst.  Understanding sediment transport is important for a number
              of reasons.  First, sediment may enhance transport of contaminants that are
              mobilized by attaching to sediment.  Second, the mobility of sediment also
              reflects the potential mobility of bacteria and viruses, which are of concern
              in evaluating groundwater quality.  And third, the mobility of sediment is a
              measure of velocities and transport pathways in karst, a complex issue
              involving mixing from different reservoirs, which is difficult to quantify. 
              
This research will address how sediment transport varies with seasons and
              different storm events by measuring sediment transport in a set of karst
              aquifers over the course of a year and during several different types of storm
              events.  Storm events will include small and large storms, plus storms with wet
              and dry antecedent conditions.  Three distinct karst aquifers have been
              selected that include a high, medium, and low discharge system.  At each site,
              continuous loggers will be installed to monitor conductance, discharge, and
              turbidity to record seasonal variation and antecedent conditions for storms. 
              In additional, stormwater samplers will automatically trigger to sample during
              the selected storm events.  Samples collected monthly and during storms will be
              analyzed for detailed water chemistry, sediment composition, and sediment size
              distribution.  Efforts will be made to model the transport processes for
              sediment movement within karst aquifers.  The combination of fieldwork and
              modeling to assess the controls on sediment transport will be used to classify
              the different karst systems using the mixing ratios implied by sediment
              transport. 
Unraveling mixing from different reservoirs is important in both
              karst and non-karst systems, and this study will help show how temporal
              heterogeneity (changes between storm events, not just within storm events) can
              provide clues to the internal structure of a system.  This work will
              demonstrate the importance of temporal heterogeneity in hydrologic systems by
              studying an end-member system (karst) and quantifying the types of measurements
              needed to understand system response.

