Title       : Collaborative Research: Late Cenozoic to Recent Fault Slip Distribution in the
               Central Walker Lane Belt, Western Nevada
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2002   
File        : a0125879

Award Number: 0125879
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162961             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Stockli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

This project will support the investigation of the dynamics of a system of
              intraplate faults in the southern part of the central Walker Lane belt, known
              as the Mina deflection, using an integrated approach of field mapping, tectonic
              geomorphology, paleoseismology, thermochronology, and geochronology. Faults
              within the Mina deflection define a regional-scale releasing bend that
              transfers slip from the Eastern California Shear Zone to the Walker Lane Belt.
              The Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane Belt straddle the boundary
              between dominantly east-west extension in the Basin and Range province to the
              east and dominantly NW-shear along the Pacific-North American plate boundary to
              the west. The interaction between extension and transcurrent shear has resulted
              in the development of a complex array of faults that accommodate intraplate
              strain.

The research is motivated in large part by ongoing geodetic
              investigations on the magnitude of present-day strain accumulation and pattern
              of strain distribution across the Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane
              Belt. In light of these geodetic constraints on strain accumulation, it is
              timely to improve our understanding of the spatial and temporal patterns of
              strain release during late Cenozoic to Recent times. The two data sets will
              provide important constraints on geodynamic hypotheses proposed for the
              evolution of the Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane Belt. An
              accurate characterization of the temporal and spatial strain distribution
              within the Eastern California Shear Zone and Walker Lane Belt is crucial for
              understanding tectonic processes over a much broader area of intraplate
              deformation associated with the interaction between the Pacific and North
              American plates.

