Title       : Workshop: A Framework for Integrating Nutritional, Environmental, and
               Neuroscience Contributions to Children's Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 10,  2002   
File        : a0125501

Award Number: 0125501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore D. Wachs wachs@psych.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Betsy Lozoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1358,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Frameworks for Integrating Nutritional, Environmental, and
              Neuroscience Contributions to Children's Development

T. D. Wachs & B.
              Lozoff


	A workshop is planned to focus on the Functional Isolation
              Hypothesis.  This hypothesis can serve as a theoretical framework for
              integrating the linked contributions of nutrition, environment, and
              neuroscience to children's cognitive and socio-emotional development.  The core
              of the hypothesis is the assumption that nutritional deficits simultaneously
              act to adversely influence both central nervous system (CNS) development and
              function, as well as the level of the child's involvement with their
              environment and the nature of parent-child transactions.  Parent-child
              transactions and the child's involvement with their environments, in turn, can
              impact the child's CNS development and functioning.  Within this framework
              developmental outcomes are viewed as the result of the operation of linked
              nutritional, environmental, and CNS influences.  Using the functional isolation
              hypothesis to link nutrition, environment, and neurosciences, a workshop is
              proposed to bring together 15 leading researchers from these 3 domains to
              discuss critical core questions that are central to the integrated study of
              functional isolation at the human level.  The goal is to form research networks
              among nutritional, environmental, and neuroscience researchers that will focus
              on the interdisciplinary study of the nature of functional isolation and its
              consequences for children's development.



