Title       : Refinements and Interpretation of Images of the Antarctic Crust and Upper Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0125848

Award Number: 0125848
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242215             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael H. Ritzwoller michael.ritzwoller@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikolai Shapiro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a seismological study of
              Antarctica. The crust and upper mantle beneath Antarctica remain among the most
              poorly understood regions directly underlying Earth's surface. Seismic surface
              wave dispersion is uniquely suited to providing information about the crust and
              upper mantle beneath Antarctica because surface wave tomography can perform
              well in regions with relatively few receiving stations and remote seismicity.
              There are three principal goals for this research: to continue to refine the
              seismic images of the crust and upper mantle beneath Antarctica and surrounding
              oceans, to improve methods to quantify the quality of these images, and to
              begin to elucidate the nature and cause of some of the more prominent seismic
              velocity anomalies in the uppermost mantle. Prior work was devoted to
              developing and applying the capabilities to estimate and assess seismic models
              at high southern latitudes. This research will continue to advance these
              capabilities, but a larger fraction of the efforts will be devoted to
              understanding the resulting images of the crust and upper mantle underlying the
              Antarctic Plate. The work will be divided into the following five subject
              areas: (1) continued surface wave dispersion measurements and data processing,
              (2) methodological improvements in surface wave tomography, resolution
              analysis, and inversion, (3) experiments to determine whether azimuthal
              anisotropy can be estimated robustly, (4) estimation of a refined model of the
              crust and upper mantle at high southern latitudes, and (5) development and
              application of methods to interpret the new model to gain geophysical insight
              into the temperature, composition, and evolution of the Antarctic
              asthenosphere, lithosphere, and crust. The rapidly growing seismic data sets
              from both global networks and temporary arrays in and around Antarctica promise
              to combine with improvements in surface wave tomography and inversion to
              significantly refine the images of the seismic structure of the crust and upper
              mantle beneath the Antarctic Plate. These refinements will help to provide the
              basis for an improved understanding of the geophysics of the Antarctic
              lithosphere. Structural and tectonic features that are of particular interest
              for further elucidation include: the West Antarctic Rift system with
              implications concerning the separation between East and West Antarctica during
              the Cenozoic, the East Antarctic craton in relation to other cratons in the
              world, the SE Indian Ridge with emphasis on the uppermost mantle near the
              Australian-Antarctic Discordance, the thermal and compositional structure of
              the upper mantle beneath the Antarctic Plate, and the distribution of
              anisotropy (radial and azimuthal) across Antarctica and the southern oceans.
              This research should help to advance broadly our understanding of the Antarctic
              crust and upper mantle.


