Title       : Incorporation of Hands-On Learning Activities into an Innovative General Science
               Optics Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2002  
File        : a0125828

Award Number: 0125828
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69349              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shabbir M. Mian smian@mcdaniel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey D. Marx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vasilis Pagonis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : McDaniel College
	      2 College Hill
	      Westminster, MD  21157    410/857-2222

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13)
The project is completely redesigning the optics course for
              non-science majors, A World of Light and Color, from a traditional lecture
              format into a collaborative, activity-based classroom environment. About 80% of
              the students attending Western Maryland College (WMC) are non- science majors
              and many lack a basic comprehension of the scientific endeavor. During the past
              decade, the physics education research community has demonstrated that
              well-designed, student- centered activities help students achieve a deeper
              understanding of physical concepts, while fostering an appreciation of science.
              To capitalize on these findings, the project is combining the Workshop Physics
              approach with optics activities that have been developed at WMC. Workshop
              Physics, a discovery-based approach pioneered at Dickinson College, has been
              successful in introductory physics courses, and the project is adapting and
              implementing many aspects of this delivery method to meet the needs of General
              Science students. Providing students the opportunity to explore optical
              phenomena in a collaborative, student- centered environment should result in a
              positive learning experience. Students also should appreciate the role
              computers and data analysis play in the scientific process, and
              computer-assisted activities appropriate are being designed specifically for
              non-science majors. A specific objective of the project is to develop and
              disseminate high-quality optics activities for non-science majors nationwide.
              Finally, this project will serve as a prototype for the renovation of the
              entire General Science curriculum at WMC.
