Title       : Ad Hoc Wireless Networks Utilizing Multi-Rate and Power-Save Capabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0125859

Award Number: 0125859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nitin H. Vaidya nhv@crhc.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Wireless communication technology has gained widespread acceptance in recent
              years.  Wireless local area networks have come into greater use, with the
              advent of the IEEE 802.11 standard and availability of several commercial
              products based on this standard.

An ad hoc network can be formed by
              wireless, potentially mobile hosts, without requiring the use of any fixed
              infrastructure, such as base stations.  Such networks have many applications,
              including home networking, personal area networking, sensor networking,
              search-and-rescue missions in remote areas, and other civilian as well as
              military operations.

Modern wireless devices are often designed with the
              capability to transmit at different bit rates using different modulation
              schemes and to operate in a power-save mode to conserve energy.  While such
              wireless devices can be built, there is not adequate research on performance of
              ad hoc networks utilizing such devices.  This project will, therefore, attempt
              to answer two broad questions:

(1)How to design wireless medium access
              control (MAC) protocols that exploit multi-rate and power-save capabilities in
              ad hoc networks?  While there has been some work on such protocols, this
              project is expected to develop new techniques to utilize multi-rate and
              power-save capabilities.

(2) What is the impact of multi-rate and power-save
              capabilities on performance on network layer and transport layer?  The project
              will study the interaction between wireless device capabilities and upper layer
              performance, and develop mechanisms to improve performance of the various
              layers.

