Title       : Geochemical Evolution Of The Mantle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0125917

Award Number: 0125917
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499524             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley R. Hart shart@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hart
EAR-0125917

This grant has as its overarching goals the understanding
              of the placement, genesis, evolution and lithologic nature of the several known
              heterogeneous mantle domains, and the  dynamics of melting and melt extraction
              from these mantle domains. Several paradigm "warps" have been in progress
              during the period of our last renewal. One is the increasing evidence that
              mesoscale mantle heterogeneities (veins, pods, layers) may be important in
              creating some of the isotopic heterogeneity observed in mantle-derived melts.
              This in turn demands a better understanding of melting and melt transport
              processes. The second is the concept that the deepest mantle may be
              convectively isolated from the overlying mantle (with a boundary at circa 1700
              km). This in turn demands a better understanding of the chemical and lithologic
              make-up of mantle plumes, as they may provide our most direct sampling of the
              deep mantle. 
Several of the isotopically-defined mantle domains are thought
              to be a result of lithospheric recycling, and yet we have little understanding
              of the parentage or lithologic expression of this material, or of its melting
              dynamics. We will explore two avenues as a means to confront this problem. The
              first is an in-depth study of the Samoa hotspot (the most extreme EM2 mantle
              plume). The high 87Sr/86Sr (~ 0.7089) of the Samoan plume, and its distinctive
              chemistry, is conventionally ascribed to recycling of ancient lithosphere
              containing a terrigenous sediment component. However, no model has as yet
              satisfactorily accounted for many of the puzzling geochemical characteristics
              of EM2 hotspots (e.g. the coexistence of enriched  87Sr/86Sr, heavy d18O, and
              high 3He/4He). We propose to undertake analytical studies of volcanics from the
              older seamounts west of Samoa, of shield lavas from western Upolu and Savai'i
              (putatively the oldest subaerial volcano in Samoa), and of basalts from two
              younger seamounts east of Samoa. Sample suites from all of these locations are
              in hand. This work will include 40Ar/39Ar dating of these volcanoes, to test
              the age-progression hypothesis, and trace element and isotopic work to
              elucidate the pedigree of the EM2 component in Samoa.
The second avenue is a
              study of the isotopic composition and trace element signatures of melt
              inclusions in phenocrysts from EM1 and EM2 basalts (using in-situ ionprobe and
              laser-ablation ICP/MS techniques). In general, the geochemical diversity
              captured in melt inclusions far exceeds that observed in the erupted host
              lavas. The nature of these melt inclusions, which likely represent
              pre-aggregated melts, will shed significant light on the melting lithologies
              and melt transport networks involved in EM hotspot volcanism. We should be able
              to discriminate between large-scale and small-scale mantle heterogeneities, and
              between mafic and ultramafic lithologies; this should allow a firm test of the
              recycled lithosphere model for EM2 plumes.

