Title       : Collaborative SBI Research: Carbon Cycling in the Chukchi and Beaufort
               Seas-Field and Modeling Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0125082

Award Number: 0125082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1119265            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline M. Grebmeier jgrebmei@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee W. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Western Arctic is profoundly influenced by the northward flux of nutrient
              and
organic-rich, low salinity Pacific Ocean water that enters the basin
              through the Bering Strait and
across the Chukchi shelf and slope. This flow, a
              key component of the global ocean circulation,
transports freshwater from the
              Pacific to the Atlantic via the Arctic Ocean while also sustaining
some of the
              most productive ecosystems in the world, the Bering and Chukchi Seas.
              Net
transport, sea ice cover and sea surface temperatures are well known to
              vary greatly over
seasonal and interannual time scales, but the experimental,
              observational, and modeling bases to
evaluate the response of Arctic
              ecosystems to these changes, and to global change in general, are
largely
              lacking.  This interdisciplinary project will provide the observational and
              theoretical framework
to evaluate carbon fluxes in the Chukchi and Beaufort
              Seas in response to variable environmental
forcing. A main goal of this
              project is to determine the impact of decadal-scale environmental
regime
              shifts in the northern high latitudes on carbon cycling in the western Arctic
              Ocean. Carbon import from the Bering Sea, local production and transformation,
              and export from the Chukchi and Beaufort shelves to the basin will be examined.
              This project will focus on understanding the influence of physical and
              biological processes on fluxes of carbon and other key elements (e.g. N, O, Si)
              in the water column and benthos of the shelves and slope, and subsequent
              exchange with the basin. This project has
been integrated with other research
              programs and related resources in the SBI program. The ultimate goal of this
              study is to obtain a more complete understanding of shelf-basin exchange
              processes and biogeochemical cycles, and to establish benchmarks useful for
              assessing future global change of this sentinel ecosystem.

