Title       : Assessment of Research Doctorate Programs: Methodology Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2001 
File        : a0125255

Award Number: 0125255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Voytuk jvoytuk@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charlotte V. Kuh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Assessment of the quality of doctoral programs and their faculty can be a
              powerful tool to improve doctoral education. For institutions, these
              assessments have been used in decisions to expand, contract, or merge programs.
              Potential graduate students use assessment results as part of the decision
              about where to apply and improved measurement could spur increased attention to
              the graduate student experience. State boards of higher education have used
              quality assessments to reallocate state resources. For administrators, the
              objective of "improving in the ratings" can be used to partially justify hiring
              and other personnel decisions. Scholars use ratings to examine the correlates
              of quality and as a yardstick to help them in designing policies to improve
              graduate education. These uses are consequential for all involved in doctoral
              education and the Conference Board of Associated Research Councils judges that
              a periodic review of the methodology of such assessment is essential given the
              significance of its use.  The Conference Board of Associated Research Councils
              is composed of the American Council on Education, the American Council of
              Learned Societies, the National Research Council, and the Social Science
              Research Council.

The National Research Council proposes to conduct a review
              of the methodology of assessment of research doctoral programs. The outcome of
              this review will be recommendations for the conduct of the next NRC assessment
              of doctoral programs. The methodology of assessing faculty reputation will be
              addressed, as will the construction of direct measures of effectiveness of the
              education of doctoral students. The study will examine the validity of measures
              of scholarly reputation and the extent to which they should be uniform across
              fields, the taxonomy of fields, and whether a broad reputational survey is the
              best way to assess research quality. It will also examine how to design and
              incorporate valid measures of the process of doctoral education and outcomes
              for recent graduates. 

A committee of experts consisting of statisticians,
              survey researchers, representatives of the major disciplines, and university
              administrators, will carry out the review. The committee will be assisted by
              information gathered from topical workshops, panels charged with focusing on
              taxonomy and measurement for each of the disciplines, and universities that
              have volunteered to collect data for prototype measures. The outcome of the
              study will be a report with recommendations designed to shape the next
              assessment of doctoral programs. Provided funding is obtained by summer of
              2001, report completion is expected by February 2003. If the committee
              recommends a new assessment, it will take place in 2003-5 with data collected
              for the 2002-3 academic year. Total estimated cost for the project from July
              2001 through February 2003 (20 months) is estimated to be $1.2 million. We are
              requesting $300,000 from NSF. Other prospective funders include the National
              Institutes of Health, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the Sloan and Mellon
              Foundations. 

