Title       : Does Modern Flat-Subduction Cause Subsidence or Uplift?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2002     
File        : a0125274

Award Number: 0125274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa E. Jordan tej1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The PI proposes to determine the direction and approximate magnitude
              of change in long-wavelength elevation that is the consequence of the modern
              flat subduction system beneath central Chile and western Argentina. The
              specific study area is the Sierras Pampeanas province, a broad region that is
              analogous to the Laramide Rocky Mountain province of North America. In both
              regions basement blocks are uplifted along reverse faults in the foreland of
              the orogenic belt (Andes Mountains in South America and Cordilleran orogen in
              North America). But in the North American ancient example the foreland region
              suffered long-wavelength subsidence due to flat subduction, whereas the Sierras
              Pampeanas area today stands above sea level and above neighboring foreland
              regions with more normal subduction angles. The purpose of this study is to
              test the hypothesis that the Sierras Pampeanas region has risen (at long
              wavelength) during flat subduction.

This project is a study of a continental
              interior whose objective is to constrain the subduction
process. Its utility
              is tectonic, even if its methods are stratigraphic. Flat subduction merits
              focused study because it presents an excellent opportunity to view the
              properties of subducting plates and their interactions with overriding plates
              from a different perspective, which will shed light on "normal"  subduction
              systems as well as flat-slab systems. The nature of contact between a
              subducting slab and an overriding plate is of enormous human importance,
              responsible for the vast majority of the world's seismic budget. But for
              seismological studies and mechanical models of plate interactions to lead to
              fruitful insight and accurate predictions, we must have geological constraints
              on the long-term responses of the overriding plates to the subduction zone
              processes. 

The PI proposes to compare modern long-wavelength topography of
              the Sierras Pampeanas to the
topography when flat subduction began using three
              means of characterizing the middle Miocene
paleo-topography. First, a graduate
              student and the PI will collaborate with Argentine colleagues to determine the
              extent of middle Miocene marine horizons across the Sierras Pampeanas. Such
              units are moderately well constrained near the northern and eastern extremes of
              the region and hypothesized to reach central sectors of the Sierras Pampeanas,
              but that hypothesis needs critical testing. Second, They will use seismic
              reflection data (provided by Repsol-YPF) to construct transects of the relief
              on the basal surface across which the middle Miocene strata onlapped, and then
              the relief on the surface across which the upper Miocene strata were draped.
              One transect will span most of the province from north to south, and a second
              will span the Sierras Pampeanas from west to east. Third, they will take
              advantage of the fact that a peneplain-like low-relief surface pre-dated the
              Miocene deposits and use this as a structural marker in both the ranges and
              basins. They will construct a Digital Elevation Model of current elevations of
              that pre-Miocene surface and remove from it the short-wavelength deformation
              across late Miocene to Recent
faults. Comparison of the long wavelength
              elevation variations of this "partially corrected surface" to the modern
              long-wavelength topography, to the transects of relief underlying the middle
              and upper Miocene strata, and to the marine shoreline will reveal sectors that
              uplifted or that subsided during flat subduction. 

