Title       : Convection of the Mantle Wedge Above Subduction Zones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0125919

Award Number: 0125919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99971              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Gregory Hirth ghirth@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Kelemen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will provide new constraints on the temperature and viscosity
              structure of the wedge in subduction zones by combining petrologic and
              geophysical constraints on the thermal structure of the wedge with experimental
              and observational constraints on wedge viscosity structure in numerical models
              of convection. Petrologic and geophysical constraints indicate that current
              thermal models of subduction zones significantly underestimate the temperature
              in parts of the mantle wedge.

Observations of low seismic velocity and high
              attenuation in localized regions of the wedge indicate the presence of high
              temperatures, aqueous fluids, or melt.  Deformation experiments on olivine
              aggregates indicate that a high water content or high melt fraction can
              significantly reduce viscosity.  Instantaneous dynamic models of subduction
              provide indirect evidence for low viscosity in the wedge.  Agreement between
              model results and observations of topography and geoid improve significantly
              for subduction zone models including an isolated low viscosity region in the
              wedge.

Including a localized region of low viscosity in time-dependent
              models of convection will: (1) lead to a higher mean wedge temperature, a
              hotter wedge-crust boundary and a hotter slab-wedge interface, and (2) modify
              the dynamic coupling between the wedge and the slab.  Hybrid (mixed
              kinematic-dynamic) and dynamic, time-dependent numerical models of convection
              are being used to characterize the dependence of the wedge temperature and flow
              distribution on the magnitude and location of localized low viscosity regions. 
              Combining both numerical methods allows isolation of the behavior of the wedge
              viscosity itself on the flow from the modification of the flow due to changing
              the viscous coupling of the wedge to the slab.  Specifically, the project is
              investigating the model dependence on: asthenosphere viscosity, localized
              regions of low viscosity, age of the overriding plate, slab dip, slab velocity,
              slab age, slab viscosity, fault dip and depth, and nonlinear rheology.  The
              goal is to find models of convection in the wedge that are consistent with both
              petrologic and geophysical data and include a viscosity structure that more
              fully reflects the complex rheologic behavior in this environment.
