Title       : The Significance of Ultrahigh-Pressure Metamorphism in the Tso Morari Complex,
               NW Himalaya
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0125870

Award Number: 0125870
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209623             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kip V. Hodges kvhodges@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel A. Bowring  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently discovered, Eocene ultrahigh-pressure (UHP) metamorphic assemblages in
              the
northwestern Himalayas may indicate the limited subduction of Indian
              continental crust beneath Eurasia during Himalayan-Tibetan orogenesis. At
              present, the tectonic significance of this observation is controversial because
              the distribution of Himalayan UHP metamorphic assemblages has not been mapped
              in detail, because the age of metamorphism is imprecisely known, and because
              the structural relationships among UHP rock packages and their surroundings are
              largely unconstrained. We propose an integrated geochronologic (U-Pb, Sm-Nd,
              and 40 Ar/39 Ar), Nd isotopic, petrologic, and structural study of the most
              recently discovered UHP terrain in the Himalayas: the Tso Morari complex of
              Ladakh, India. Thus far, the UHP-diagnostic mineral coesite has been found at
              Tso Morari only in mafic eclogite that may or may not be of Indian plate
              affinity; an important part of our proposed work will be to determine if UHP
              assemblages occur in lithologies that can be traced unequivocally to a
              provenance in the Indian plate. If so, our aim of establishing high-precision
              dates for UHP metamorphism will determine whether or not continental subduction
              occurred subsequent to the initiation of India-Eurasia collision -
              well-constrained by independent means - or prior to collision in an
              intraoceanic environment, as has been proposed recently. We also intend to
              develop a more comprehensive knowledge of the pressure-temperature- time
              evolution of this UHP terrain over the Eocene-Miocene interval, one of the most
              poorly understood intervals in the history of the orogen. The integration of
              such data with detailed maps and kinematic analysis of major structures should
              result in much better constraints on the processes responsible for the
              exhumation of UHP rocks in the Himalayan-Tibetan system.

