Title       : Strain Accommodation by Fracturing During Folding of Sedimentary Rock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0125935

Award Number: 0125935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134205             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Pollard dpollard@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's propose to investigate the mechanics of fracturing during folding
              because field data indicate this is a significant strain-accommodating
              mechanism of the brittle crust.  Fractures nucleate and propagate as a result
              of stress concentrations, and the stress fields within folds can be constrained
              by understanding the associated fracture evolution in space and time.  Previous
              efforts have argued for simple, symmetric and homogeneous stress-fold
              relationships, and various models of fracture formation in such idealized
              stress fields have been proposed.  These methods have in common that they
              ignore pre-folding structures such as joints, which can perturb the stress
              field within the fold, if they are reactivated.  New fractures then would form
              in a stress field different from that predicted by the simple models.  At the
              Emigrant Gap anticline, a Laramide fold located near Casper, Wyoming, the
              simplified relationships of previous models are not capable of explaining the
              majority of the observed fractures.  The PI's preliminary field observations
              show that two tectonic joint sets existed prior to folding, and that most
              fractures observed on the fold are sub-parallel to these two sets.  Some of the
              older joints show shear offsets, arguing for their reactivation during folding.
               Associated with the reactivation is the formation of new fractures with
              strikes that parallel those of sheared joints rather than the fold axis. 
              Measured fracture intensities for both fracture sets on the fold are
              approximately four times the intensities of the respective joint sets in
              unfolded strata of the same formation.

The PI's will determine the influence
              of pre-folding joints, bedding interfaces, and contrasting constitutive
              properties of the strata on fracture development and strain accommodation
              during folding.  They plan to integrate detailed field observations with
              mechanical modeling of these structures.  Their specific objectives are:
	l)
              Map and document fractures and fold geometry of various sandstone units at the
              Emigrant Gap anticline, including fracture geometries in 3-D, the 3-D shape of
              the folded strata, and evidence for bedding-parallel shearing within the shale
              units.
	2) Design and execute large-strain numerical experiments using the FEM
              code ABAQUS to understand the underlying mechanical process of strain
              accommodation by fracturing during folding as motivated by the field
              observations.
	3) Integrate the insights gained from the field observations
              and numerical analyses to construct a conceptual model to predict fractures in
              similar geologic and tectonic settings.  This model will modify and, in cases
              such as the Emigrant Gap anticline, replace existing models based on symmetric
              fold-fracture relationships.

