Title       : Collaborative Research: Comparative and Quantitative Studies of Protistan
               Molecular Ecology and Physiology in Coastal Antarctic Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2002      
File        : a0125833

Award Number: 0125833
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390033             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca J. Gast rgast@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Dennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Gast
0125833

Phototrophic and heterotrophic protists are ubiquitous in
              extreme cold-water environments where they are central to the production and
              utilization of energy and the cycling of elements. The dominance of protists in
              Antarctic food webs indicates major ecological and biogeochemical roles for
              these unicellular eukaryotes. Understanding the structure and diversity of
              these communities, and the adaptations that allow these assemblages to flourish
              near the lower limit of temperature in the ocean, is of fundamental importance
              to biological oceanography and to understanding the activities and evolution of
              life on our planet. The diversity of protistan assemblages has traditionally
              been studied using microscopy and morphological characterization. Due to the
              tedious nature of this approach and the inherent lack of taxonomic characters
              associated with most small protists, these approaches are inadequate for
              ecological studies of these communities. Molecular methods that utilize gene
              sequences for the identification and quantitation of naturally occurring
              protists offer a solution to this problem. This project will address issues of
              protistan community structure, population abundance, and adaptation to life in
              extreme cold through molecular and physiological studies on assemblages in the
              seawater and ice habitats of the Ross Sea, Antarctica. Research will focus
              primarily on species of phagotrophic protists (protozoa) which are ecologically
              important but for which no information currently exists. The work is designed
              to contribute new understanding concerning the biodiversity of protistan
              assemblages of coastal Antarctica, provide tools for ecological studies of
              these assemblages, and produce benchmark data on the basic physiological
              processes of protistan species in this extreme cold-water environment.
