Title       : The Reactor Lab: Chemical Reactor Simulations for Active Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2002     
File        : a0125076

Award Number: 0125076
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Simoneau                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard K. Herz herz@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Engineering - Chemical (53)
Software simulations enable students to actively
              explore and understand scientific and engineering concepts through
              visualization and an iterative approach to problem solving. Our project will
              add major capabilities to our existing software simulation prototype, The
              Reactor Lab. Existing modules are simulations of chemical reactors, but the
              software framework is discipline-independent. Our first objective was to add a
              "lab construction kit" that has enabled students and faculty to build new
              simulations. The software will be integrated with the Internet to allow
              distribution of modules for use on- and off-line, to allow sharing of new
              modules, and to support communication and collaboration between students and
              faculty. 

The new modules that have been added will complete those needed
              for a first course in chemical reaction engineering. The final objective of our
              work was to establish and evaluate a prototype community of lab builders and
              users. This community will expose faculty and students to the collaborative
              working environments that are an increasingly important result of the Internet.
              The initial impact of this project was to enhance the education of chemical
              engineers and chemists about reactor analysis and design. Additionally our work
              should impact the design of efficient and safe chemical reactors, which is
              important in fields as diverse as pharmaceutical production and semiconductor
              fabrication. Dissemination is being done via annual meetings of the American
              Institute of Chemical Engineers and the American Society for Engineering
              Education. Our software has also been listed with the National Engineering
              Educational Software Database. Articles will be prepared for publication in
              Chemical Engineering Education. Web based data will be collected to evaluate
              the number of hits.

