Title       : Development of Quadrupole Magnetic Field-Flow Fractionation: Application to
               Characterization of Magnetic Colloids and Microparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0125657

Award Number: 0125657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Douglas D. Frey                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290491             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Williams williams@bme.ri.ccf.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Chalmers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Maciej Zborowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cleveland Clinic Fdn
	      9500 Euclid Avenue
	      Cleveland, OH  441950001    216/445-6440

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Development of Quadrupole Magnetic Field-Flow Fractionation: Application to
              Characterization of Magnetic Colloids and Microparticles.


The main
              objective of the proposed work is to develop magnetic field-flow fractionation
              (MgFFF) into a powerful tool for characterizing magnetic colloids in terms of
              their paramagnetic component content.  The various FFF techniques are
              elution-based separation methods in which the degree of retardation of a
              colloidal material depends on the strength of interaction of the colloid
              particles with the applied field.  The quadrupole magnetic field is radially
              symmetrical and lends itself to an annular FFF channel geometry.  Such a
              geometry has already been exploited for biological cell sorting using
              immunospecific magnetic colloid labels.  A novel, helical channel geometry is
              proposed that will have several advantages over a simple annular channel.  It
              has simplified inlet and outlet geometry, it will nullify the effects of
              varying field strength around the annular circumference, and it will have
              increased separation length for a given quadrupole magnet.  Effort is being
              devoted to optimizing the channel geometry and operating conditions.  The
              importance of carrier solution chemistry cannot be underestimated because
              aggregation or chaining of magnetized particles must be avoided. 
              

Quadrupole magnetic FFF offers the unique possibility of characterizing
              colloidal material in terms of its distribution in magnetization.  Other
              techniques yield only a bulk, or mean value for the magnetization. 
              Distribution information would be invaluable to the manufacturers of these
              materials.  The inclusion of a quadrupole electromagnet will broaden the
              applicability of the instrument.  The field strength can  be adjusted to suit
              the magnetic properties of the sample.  Using programmed decay of field
              strength, the instrument will be capable of characterizing magnetically
              polydisperse particulate samples in which magnetization varies widely from
              particle to particle.  The method will be useful for characterizing
              microparticles and colloids.  It will also lend itself to separation of
              proteins by functionalizing the surface of the particles to promote selective
              adsorption.

