Title       : Implementing a Knowledge Management Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0125380

Award Number: 0125380
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599997             (Estimated)
Investigator: David D. Reed ddreed@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Cross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Winwood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wriston M. Crowell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125380	
Reed			

This award is to Michigan Technological University (Lead
              Institution) to support the activity described below for 36 months.  The
              proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
              Solicitation (NSF 0179).

Partners
The partners for this award include
              Michigan Technological University, North Carolina State University, University
              of North Carolina-Chapel Hill, NASA, Michigan Economic Development Corporation,
              Upstate Alliance for Innovation (NY), and North Carolina Technological
              Development Authority.

Proposed Activities
The award will support the
              following activities: (1) coupling technology transfer and sponsored research
              programs in the academic institutions, (2) create an inventory of knowledge
              assets at the academic institutions via an on-line data base, (3) managing and
              sharing knowledge assets among the partners via internal collaborative
              relationships among the partners, and any new partners.

Proposed
              Innovation
When completed the integrated knowledge management infrastructure
              will support university to university as well as university to industry
              knowledge sharing.  The new system will facilitate the recognition and
              management of the full range of academia's knowledge assets with a sharp focus
              on identifying, implementing and managing partnership opportunities.  The
              knowledge management infrastructure will be easily replicated by other academic
              institutions and their partners.  The innovation is the research to identify
              which knowledge an academic institution has that has potential for
              commercialization plus development of the information technology needed to
              inventory and manage it.  Included in this research is the development of
              methodology to identify the knowledge of interest to the various private sector
              partners, both current and future.

Potential Economic Impact
The
              methodologies should be invaluable to academia to recognize the value of its
              intellectual property and to target potential private sector and government
              partners needed for commercialization more effectively.

Potential Societal
              Impact
General economic wellbeing that results from new sustainable businesses
              will be of benefit to the citizens of the affected regions.  The results will
              be easily replicated by other academic institutions and their regions.

