Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH/CRI: Children's Digital Media Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0125731

Award Number: 0125731
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270862             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen A. Wartella wartella@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1698      DEVELOP& LEARNING SCIENCES/CRI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              American children spend many hours with media each day.  Although much of this
              time involves television viewing, an increasing amount involves participation
              with digital interactive entertainment technologies, including the Internet.
              Even television as we know it will soon change dramatically, with digital
              television adding improved clarity of images and the opportunity for
              interactivity.  Knowing how to use these interactive technologies will be a
              necessary skill for an educated workforce in the 21st century and may be a
              gateway to studying science and technology.  Therefore, knowing how children
              use and learn from these digital technologies is an important step in ensuring
              that children will develop these basic skills.  

Although children invest
              their free time heavily in electronic entertainment media, relatively little is
              known about how new interactive media impact children's learning in informal
              learning contexts.  One problem is that the field is interdisciplinary. 
              Researchers examine diverse issues rather than examine specific areas of
              interactive digital media systematically and then consolidate that knowledge
              into a central information base.  Another problem is the rapid change in
              digital technologies, making researchers one step behind the latest
              developments. One outcome of these problems is a poor knowledge base for
              understanding of how new digital entertainment technologies influence
              children's learning.    

Over the next 5 years, this Center will advance
              theory and method in how children learn through digital interactive
              entertainment media.  Using an interdisciplinary team of researchers from the
              fields of psychology, human development, communications, sociology,
              anthropology, and medicine, researchers will explore multiple levels of
              analysis in order to explicate the role that dialogue, in the form of
              interactivity and identity, play in children's learning from entertaining
              interactive digital technologies.  At a macro level, two types of survey will
              be conducted to document patterns of change and similarity over time in
              children's access to, and use of, new and emerging digital platforms.  These
              macro level studies will guide the direction of micro level experimental,
              observational, and ethnographic studies that will examine what interactivity is
              and how and what children learn from online digital experiences.  Parallel
              research activities will examine children at different age groups, providing
              both cross-sectional and longitudinal findings on children's uses of media and
              the impact of media on their development.  

Overall, these research
              activities will expand the knowledge base about: 1) the kinds of digital media
              that are emerging; 2) the kinds of interactive digital media experiences
              children choose to have; 3) the impact of these interactive experiences on
              children's long-term social adjustment and academic achievement; 4) how
              specific kinds of interactions with digital technologies impact children's
              learning; 5) how interacting with each other online influences children's
              learning and identity construction; and 6) how observational and interactive
              experiences are represented in the developing brain. This knowledge base will
              be disseminated in published form in professional journals, through
              presentations at national and international conferences, and via interconnected
              websites to create synergistic activities among the researchers, policy makers,
              child advocacy groups, and creators in the children and digital media
              field.

The Children's Digital Media Centers, based at Georgetown University,
              will also include the University of Texas at Austin, Northwestern University,
              and the University of California Los Angeles.  Centers will include a Steering
              Committee and an Advisory Board of distinguished colleagues. 

