Title       : In Situ Measurements of the Acoustic Properties of Antarctic Krill
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0125629

Award Number: 0125629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dezhang Chu dchu@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0125629
Chu

Antarctic krill is a key species of the Antarctic marine
              ecosystem and it is a species that is subject to
international assessment and
              management. A variety of techniques have been used to estimate their
abundance
              and/or biomass including biological and acoustical estimations. However, the
              total
abundance/biomass estimated from the two approaches do not agree and
              both are subject to considerable
errors. The purpose of this proposal is to
              provide a new approach that can be used to reduce the estimated
errors
              resulting from the acoustic measurements.
It is well known that the acoustic
              technique is far more efficient than the conventional survey
              techniques
involving nets, pumps and trawls in studying the temporal and
              spatial distributions of zooplankton.
However, the accurate interpretations of
              acoustic scattering data require reliable knowledge of the material
acoustic
              properties (sound speed and density contrasts) of live animals. These material
              properties depend
on the spatial and temporal distributions of the
              oceanographic parameters: temperature and pressure, as
well as the animals
              body structure. For fluid-like weakly scattering marine animals, such as krill,
              small
variations in the sound speed can result in substantial variations in
              the measured volume scattering strength.
The lack of the ability in predicting
              and/or measuring the variations of the acoustic properties in situ greatly
              affects and limits our ability to accurately interpret the acoustic data and to
              obtain reliable abundance and/or biomass estimates.  This proposal is intended
              to address this issue by in situ measurement of the material properties of
              Antarctic krill and their spatial and temporal variability. These measurements
              are crucial to the abundance and/or biomass estimates in the Antarctic region.
              To provide in situ measurements of material acoustic properties, we propose to
              use the Acoustic Properties Of zooPlankton (APOP), developed at the Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution, in a cruise conducted in the Antarctic region. The
              APOP system is able to measure the sound speed and density contrasts of marine
              organisms in situ. From this proposed research, we expect to obtain a temporal
              and spatial variation of in situ material properties of Antarctic krill. By
              incorporating in situ material properties of Antarctic krill with acoustic and
              biological survey data, the confidence in estimates of the abundance and/or
              biomass of Antarctic krill is expected to be strengthened greatly.
