Title       : Plant Biology Laboratories and Curriculum that Integrate the Biological Levels
               of Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0125282

Award Number: 0125282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69357              (Estimated)
Investigator: E. William Hamilton hamiltone@wlu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington & Lee Univ
	      
	      Lexington, VA  24450    540/458-8400

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
The Department of Biology at Washington and Lee
              University is expanding and updating its course curriculum in the plant
              sciences. Currently, the department offers three courses related to the plant
              sciences and the material is limited primarily to taxonomy and systematics. A
              general review of photosynthesis is presented in General Biology as well as in
              an upper division botany course. The primary goal of this project is to modify
              the plant portion of the General Biology laboratory course, which uses
              functional but outdated equipment, and to introduce two new courses in plant
              biology. An additional goal is to integrate concepts within courses across
              biological levels of organization and to establish the importance to students
              of understanding that integration. Utilizing plants as the "model system," gaps
              between molecular biology, biochemistry, cellular biology, physiology, and
              organismal biology will be bridged. These goals are being met by adapting
              previously implemented models from Grinnell College (ILI # 9850544) and the
              University of Connecticut (ILI #9796271) into a series of courses: general
              biology, a new plant biology course and into and a new upper level experimental
              plant biology course. Standard methods from all levels of biological
              organization are being utilized, providing exposure to a variety of techniques
              (from molecular to organismal) that enrich the understanding of plant biology
              for a population of biology students with diverse career plans. The equipment
              being acquired (6 plant physiology workstations, two growth chambers, mini
              SDS-PAGE/Western transfer equipment, a portable photosynthesis system, and a
              portable chlorophyll fluorescence system) enable students to obtain organismal,
              physiological and biochemical data in the lab, as well as in the field, and
              will successfully integrate biological levels of organization.


