Title       : Teaching Students to Think as Analytical Chemists by Developing a Laboratory
               Course in Method Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0125835

Award Number: 0125835
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Iraj B. Nejad                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39072              (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Harvey harvey@depauw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DePauw University
	      313 South Locust Street
	      Greencastle, IN  461350037    765/658-4800

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Chemistry (12)
We are using an automated atomic absorption spectrometer, an
              automated HPLC, and equipment for microwave digestions and extractions to
              enhance students learning in analytical chemistry and applying the knowledge
              gained to other chemistry courses in the physical and biological sciences and
              to research projects. We are adapting a number of problem-based laboratories
              from literature such as the environmental monitoring of urban air or trout
              streams and the analysis of a clinical control serum. These lab projects make
              use of "real" samples (serum, air, water) and require students to design,
              optimize, and validate a method(s) to do the work in their project. Two broad
              pedagogical objectives of this project are- to provide instruction in modern
              analytical chemistry through changes to the analytical curriculum and the
              acquisition of modern analytical instrumentation, and to create an educational
              environment in which students solve problems by learning to think as analytical
              chemists. These objectives are accomplished by: (1) creating a 
new curriculum
              that better represents the skills required in analytical chemistry; (2)
              providing students with a problem-based laboratory experience; (3) creating a
              student-centered lab emphasizing cooperative learning; (4) training students in
              the use of modern, automated instrumentation; and (5) linking the analytical
              lab experience to a student's interests. In the Method Development course, an
              upper-level laboratory course required of chemistry majors, the students work
              as part of a research team to design, optimize and validate an analytical
              method for an analyte in a complex, real matrix. Each student assumes
              responsibility for one or more aspects of the group's project. A key feature of
              this project is the use of the "jigsaw" concept in which students from
              different groups, but with similar responsibilities, periodically meet to share
              information and discuss solutions to common problems.

