Title       : Integration of Wireless Technologies into an Undergraduate Networks Exploration
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  2001   
File        : a0125635

Award Number: 0125635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29109              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy K. Smith   (Principal Investigator current)
              Guillermo A. Francia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville State Univ
	      700 North Pelham Road
	      Jacksonville, AL  36265    256/782-5284

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Computer Science (31)

The primary goals of this project are to advance the
              integration of wireless computer networking technologies into the undergraduate
              curriculum, to improve the educational experience, employment possibilities,
              and theoretical depth of undergraduate computer science and information systems
              majors.

In order to achieve this goal, this project has the following
              objectives:
 - Provide undergraduate students with a solid appreciation of the
              fundamentals of wireless technologies through hands-on experience in
              installing, troubleshooting, and administering wireless components.
 - Provide
              experience developing applications that require a strict adherence to minimal
              protocols.
 - Leverage existing sound and proven laboratory experiences
              developed locally and elsewhere to demonstrate wireless technologies.
 -
              Demonstrate to the students applications of networking technologies, wired and
              wireless, in areas other than a traditional office environment.

Using the
              webware developed at Worcester Polytechnic Institute, the client-server systems
              developed by Sam Houston State University, the firewall setup from Trinity
              College, the wireless technologies developed at Illinois State University and
              North Carolina A&T, this project augments an existing exploratory, hands-on
              networking laboratory with wireless technology. These technologies are
              incorporated and explored in the laboratory in a three-pronged approach:
1.
              Closed laboratory sessions utilizing a heterogeneous local area network
              augmented with wireless technologies.
2. Undergraduate research into the
              application of wireless technology in manufacturing environments where wired
              access may not be feasible.
3. Undergraduate development projects emphasizing
              the scarcity of resources, the need for brevity and the implications of
              embedded type applications.

This project utilizes exemplary material adapted
              from outside sources as well as adaptation and integration of materials
              developed from the existing laboratories.
