Title       : Symposium: Beyond Carrier Proteins: Integrative and Evolutionary Roles of
               Hormone-binding Proteins, to be held January 2-6, 2002 in Anaheim, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0125180

Award Number: 0125180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5040               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Kelley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal for this symposium is to advance the recognition of hormone-binding
              proteins (HBPs) as centrally-positioned regulators in endocrine systems, that
              have significant influences both in the integration of cell and physiological
              function as well as in the evolution of endocrine systems.  In this symposium,
              HBPs will be defined as proteins in the extracellular environment (mostly) that
              bind hormones or similar factors, usually with a high affinity, and that
              therefore maintain a central regulatory position between a hormone and its
              ability to transduce its signal through its cell receptor.  The emphasis of the
              symposium will be to look beyond the role of HBPs as 'carrier proteins' and
              instead to bring in the emerging concepts of HBPs as multifunctional regulatory
              proteins that can play dynamic --even predominant-- roles in integrating
              endocrine systems.  Of particular interest will be where HBPs have developed
              regulatory properties beyond that of primary hormone-binding, including those
              that broadcast into other endocrine systems.  With the diverse properties of
              HBPs being increasingly defined, it is also becoming clear that many HBPs have
              interesting evolutionary histories, not only in the development of their
              properties through different taxa, but also in their influences on the
              evolution of the hormone and receptor systems with which they interact.  Such
              data are providing an enhanced understanding, and biological perspective, of
              the roles of HBPs in endocrine systems.
	In this symposium, there will be 13
              plenary lectures by speakers who will serve as "ambassadors" for their
              respective HBP(s) of interest.  The speakers are encouraged to present their
              own work in the context of general and underlying regulatory mechanisms
              ("integrative context") and, where possible, in the context of the evolution of
              the respective endocrine systems ("evolutionary context").  It is expected that
              several of the speakers will also draw connections between different
              HBP/endocrine systems, as well as to diverse physiological systems.  Given the
              involvement of HBP/endocrine systems in the integration and evolution of
              diverse physiological systems, including reproduction, development, neural
              systems, immune systems, and others, this type of symposium will afford an
              opportunity for a wide spectrum of biologists to learn about a forefront area
              in endocrinology with relevance to them.  Twelve speakers will consider more
              specific aspects of certain HBPs, with a thirteenth lecture to be more general
              and given as the first annual Howard A. Bern Lecture in Comparative
              Endocrinology and presented by the namesake himself this year.  On the
              following day, there will be an associated HBP Mini-Symposium at which
              students, postdocs, and others will have an opportunity to participate.  The
              internationally recognized Journal of Endocrinology will publish the symposium
              proceedings.
	To date, general recognition of the importance of HBPs to
              endocrine regulation and to the evolution of endocrine systems has been
              limited, despite increasingly compelling evidence for their central, key roles
              in many systems.  As far as we are aware, there has not yet been a
              broad-reaching symposium of this type, which orients itself on a
              "cross-cutting" theoretical basis.  Particularly unique are the emphases on the
              multifunctional nature of HBPs and on their role in endocrine system evolution.
               

