Title       : Multimedia Based Calculus with e-folios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0125637

Award Number: 0125637
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia R. Wilkinson pbwilk@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mete Kok  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alice Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence A. Sher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Research Foundation
	      555 West 57th Street
	      New York, NY  10019    212/417-8423

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

This proof-of-concept project is developing a
              combination of multimedia-based and traditional educational materials for an
              Introductory Calculus course. It is also extending the current practice of
              student portfolios into electronic portfolios (or e-folios) in Calculus I, and
              for presentation of student mathematics research. Building on the successful
              programs of Multimedia Programming and Design and Calculus Reform, the Computer
              Information System and Mathematics Departments are collaborating to produce
              materials that utilize multimedia presentation methods to develop a set of
              educational materials that integrate multimedia technology for enhancing
              Calculus I. These materials use techniques such as three-dimensional
              visualization, animation, and dynamic problem solving to facilitate students'
              comprehension of complex topics. Activities include product design sessions and
              training workshops to facilitate the creation of educational materials to be
              published on the web. These materials include electronic class notes,
              laboratory manuals, research problem sets instructors' guide and various
              exercises, and assessment tools with links to appropriate sources of
              information and software tools and that enable students to learn through a
              hands-on problem solving approach. This project extends this innovative
              learning model by facilitating the integration of Multimedia technology into
              Student Research Projects. The students are being introduced to Multimedia
              Technology and can author their e-folios and publish their findings on the
              World Wide Web through exposure to the educational material and presentation
              techniques introduced in the classroom. This in turn provides students with
              knowledge and experience in Multimedia and World Wide Web, industries which are
              currently experiencing a tremendous demand for skilled workers.


