Title       : Mechanisms of acoustic stimulation of fluid flow in porous media: Integration of
               laboratory pore-scale studies and theoretical model development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0125214

Award Number: 0125214
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor A. Beresnev beresnev@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Dennis Vigil  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              O125214
Beresnev

Two pervasive practical problems are related to the reduced
              mobility of organic fluids in porous media: the difficulty in removing organic
              contaminants from groundwater and incomplete petroleum recovery from
              reservoirs.  The existing solutions are expensive and often ecologically
              hazardous.  On the other hand, the flow of pore fluids can be significantly
              enhanced by the application of elastic waves.  The sonic stimulation is
              ecologically clean and economical.						

The proliferation of
              sonic-stimulation technologies has been hampered  by  inadequate understanding
              of the mechanisms by which the elastic waves mobilize pore fluids .  A theory
              of sonic stimulation virtually does not exist.  The proposing team at Iowa
              State University aims at gaining insight into quantitative physical mechanisms
              of stimulation and building a mathematical model of key phenomena in
              play.

To study the microscopic mechanisms of fluid-sound interaction, the
              investigators will use the pore-scale flow visualization apparatus developed at
              the Department of Chemical Engineering.  The unit matches the refractive index
              of all phases in a porous cell to make it transparent to light.  A fluorescent
              dye is added to the organic fluid to make it the only one visible when
              illuminated by a laser source; the two-dimensional images are captured by a
              digital camera and then combined in a three-dimensional rendering of the
              system.  The unit allows direct observation of the movement of organic ganglia
              subjected to sonic forcing.  These investigations will be combined with the
              development of a theoretical and numerical model of sonic stimulation at the
              Department of Geological and Atmospheric Sciences.  Among the mechanisms to
              include is the peristaltic motion, the effects of mechanical vibrations on
              capillary forces, coalescence of ganglia, and the boundary-film effects.  The
              theoretical analyses will use the multi-phase continuum approach (Navier-Stokes
              equations) and the Monte-Carlo (pore-network) simulations.

By integrating
              the theory development with the pore-scale investigations, a working model of
              the sonic stimulation will be built.  This model will serve the basis for the
              applications of the new technology to environmental restoration and enhanced
              oil recovery.



