Title       : ChemSense: Investigating Learning and the Impact of Sustained Integration of
               Representational Tools and Chemical Investigations in the Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2002    
File        : a0125726

Award Number: 0125726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Walter C. Ermler                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1158750            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia Schank patricia.schank@sri.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian P. Coppola  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vera Michalchik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anders Rosenquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A multidisciplinary program of research and development that examines the impact
              of the sustained integration of representational tools and chemical
              investigations on chemistry learning and teaching in high schools and colleges
              will be undertaken.  A team of chemists, cognitive scientists, computer
              scientists, and science educators will focus on three critical and interrelated
              issues: chemical understanding, scientific investigations, and discourse and
              representation.  The project will generate new knowledge about the relationship
              between students' understanding of chemical phenomena and their generation and
              use of various representations at the macroscopic (physical, aggregate) and
              microscopic (atomic and molecular) levels and in the context of collaborative
              laboratory investigations.  Additionally it will evolve new knowledge about the
              relationship between teacher activities, scaffolding, and support and students'
              use of representations in collaborative laboratory investigations.   It is
              planned to extend the development of a learning environment, the ChemSense
              Knowledge Building Environment that both supports and benefits from research
              activities.  This environment allows students and teachers/professors to
              collaborate in the sustained investigation of chemical phenomena, collect data,
              build representations of these phenomena, and participate in scaffolded
              discourse to explain these phenomena in terms of underlying chemical entities
              and mechanisms.   The project team will work with chemistry professors and high
              school chemistry teachers to implement this environment for an entire semester
              in a range of college and high school chemistry courses.  These activities and
              assessments will be designed around key dimensions associated with the
              particulate nature of matter and chemical reactions: change in molecular
              geometry, connectivity, aggregation, state, and concentration.  In high school
              classrooms, these dimensions will be employed within fairly standard first-year
              high school chemistry topics: electronegativity and bond formation, solubility,
              gas laws, and chemical reactions.  Undergraduate studies will focus on
              integration of ChemSense into two types of classroom situations: a first-year
              lecture course designed to convey general chemical principles through organic
              chemistry, and a first-year, integrated "studio" course that combines lecture
              and wet-lab experiences.  With appropriate laboratory activities and teacher
              guidance, the extended use of student generated, static and dynamic
              representations of chemical processes, along with instrument generated
              representations of their investigations, should result in deeper discourse and
              understanding that connect physical phenomena with underlying chemical entities
              and mechanisms.



