Title       : Collaborative Research: Experimental Study of the Origin and Nature of High
               Pressure Faulting Relevant to Earthquakes in Subducting Lithosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0125097

Award Number: 0125097
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70914              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yingwei Fei fei@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Silver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,1576,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Fei				
EAR-0125097		


Conventional brittle failure is impossible at
              significant depth within Earth because the combination of pressure and
              temperature ensures that the flow strength of rocks is exceeded before the
              fracture strength.  Nevertheless, earthquakes occur abundantly within
              descending slabs of oceanic lithosphere in subduction zones, in several cases
              to depths as great as 680 km, where they stop abruptly.  Although the mechanism
              by which these earthquakes occur is unknown, their seismic signals ensure that
              they represent sudden failure of rock along a fault.  There are two mechanisms
              presently known that can enable faulting to occur at high pressure.  The first,
              dehydration embrittlement, involves generation of a free fluid phase by
              breakdown of hydrous minerals; the free fluid assists in opening of microcracks
              which is a crucial step leading to shear failure.  So far as is known, this
              mechanism could potentially explain all earthquakes if appropriate hydrous
              phases are present in the mantle and if their stability fields are such that
              they dehydrate under appropriate conditions to yield the observed depth
              distribution. The second, phase-transformation-induced faulting can be
              triggered during the phase transformations of olivine to its denser polymorphs,
              which occur with increasing depth.  This mechanism can potentially explain the
              bimodal depth distribution of earthquakes and their abrupt termination at the
              base of the upper mantle if metastable olivine is preserved in the cold cores
              of subduction zones at transition-zone depths.  However, given current
              understanding of the phase distribution within subducting lithosphere, neither
              mechanism can comfortably explain the occurrence of very large earthquakes at
              depths exceeding 500 km. The investigators will apply their collective
              expertise in high-pressure technology, experimental deformation, and seismology
              to achieve the following: (1) test the hypothesis of reactivation of hydrated
              faults; (2) monitor experiments on dehydration embrittlement and
              transformation-induced faulting by detection and location of acoustic
              emissions; (3) develop improved high-pressure experimental assembly designs for
              in situ synchrotron experiments on shear failure; (4) use faulting experiments
              on both dehydration embrittlement and phase-transformation-induced faulting to
              place new constraints on these two faulting mechanisms. 



