Title       : Experimental Tests of the Effects of Order-Disorder on Stability and Elasticity
               of Minerals at High Pressures and Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0125094

Award Number: 0125094
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232623             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Parise john.parise@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jiuhua Chen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Parise and Chen
EAR-0125094

This proposal plans a focused study on three
              systems of direct relevance to the Earth's lower crust and mantle and for which
              considerable data exist: dolomite, selected oxide spinels such as
              magnesioferrite (MgFe2O4) and qandilite (Mg2TiO4), and orthopyroxene (opx,
              En50Fs50). The goal is to determine the state of order in these materials as a
              function of both temperature and pressure using Rietveld refinement, confirm
              the breakdown curve proposed by Luth from his quench experiments on dolomite,
              and determine the relationship between order (X) and P- and S-wave velocities
              at high PT. It is recognized that quench experiments followed by single crystal
              structure determination can be useful, and that measurements at high pressure
              or high temperature alone are valuable. However, an opportunity exists now to
              couple crystallographic measurements with the estimation of ultrasonic travel
              times at simultaneously maintained high pressure and temperature for the first
              time, and thereby more closely approach measurements directly relevant to the
              Earth's lower crust and upper-mantle. These simultaneous measurements are
              ideally suited to the problem of order-disorder and its effects on stability
              and elasticity. X-Ray diffraction provides a record of X and of the thermal EoS
              while the new set up for ultrasonic work provides simultaneous determinations
              of P and S-wave velocities. The latter measurements are crucial since there is
              no longer a need to change samples to perform separate measurements for P- and
              S-waves; several groups report that while in some materials (orthopyroxene for
              example) P-waves appear unaffected by cation substitution, the S-wave
              velocities do vary. Some technical development will accompany the project and
              it is hoped this will find application in the research of other groups
              interested in simultaneous real-time determination of structure and elasticity,
              and in correlating atomic structure with physical properties.


