Title       : Field-based Quantification of Empirical Relationships Between Pore-pressure
               Change and Seismic Shaking Using Data from the Chi-Chi (Mw = 7.6) Earthquake,
               Taiwan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0125548

Award Number: 0125548
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94681              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Yuen Wang chiyuen@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas S. Dreger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1576,5924,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Alluvial fans over the world are often shaken by large earthquakes that have led
              to some of the worst historical landslides even on very gentle slopes (e.g.,
              the Turnagain Heights landslide, Anchorage, Alaska, in the 1964 Alaskan
              earthquake). However, systematic field evidence for coseismic change in
              pore-pressure in alluvial fans was not available until after the 1999 Chi-Chi,
              Taiwan, earthquake. The 1999 Chi-Chi (Mw=7.6) earthquake in central Taiwan was
              recorded by a dense network of modern seismological, geodetic and hydrologic
              instruments. Widespread coseismic pore-pressure changes, captured for the first
              time by 188 hydrologic wells in a network of 70 hydrologic stations, occurred
              across a large alluvial fan (the Choshui River fan) west of the epicenter of
              the earthquake. Ground-motion on this fan, both during the main-shock and
              during several large (M > 6) aftershocks of the Chi-Chi earthquake was recorded
              by 80 broadband strong-motion accelerometers at high sampling rate, and the
              data was promptly published. A complex, yet systematic, pattern in the
              coseismic change in pore-pressure emerged from the digitized water-level
              records that led to a hypothesis that the coseismic pore-pressure change was
              due to the nonlinear mechanical response of sediments to seismic shaking. The
              hypothesis, however, was based on an empirical relationship from a small number
              of laboratory experiments performed on small samples under applied stresses
              with magnitude and frequency greatly different from that during earthquake
              shaking. The availability of both the ground-motion data and the hydrological
              data from the Chi-Chi earthquake has created a rare opportunity for a
              quantitative field test of the laboratory-based relationship between the
              pore-pressure change in sediments and seismic shaking. This project combines
              both the hydrological data and the seismological data from the Chi-Chi
              earthquake in a search of the empirical relationship between the two data sets
              that would be the first field-based relationship between pore-pressure change
              and seismic shaking, and would greatly facilitate our understanding and
              assessment of liquefaction and landslide potential in alluvial fans during
              earthquakes, and would thus be of great value to the seismic engineering
              community.
