Title       : Geographic Structure of Adelie Penguin Populations: Demography of Population
               Expansion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0125608

Award Number: 0125608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $594477             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Ainley dainley@penguinscience.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nadav Nur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Katie Dugger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Grant Ballard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : H.T. Harvey & Associates
	      3150 Almaden Expressway
	      San Jose, CA  95118    408/448-9450

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Adelie penguin (Pygoscelis adeliae) populations in the Ross Sea region,
              Antarctica have been undergoing change in recent times. Changes in
              environmental conditions have also been noted, particularly changes in the sea
              ice condition, an important variable related to foraging ecology of these
              seabirds. The focus of this renewal project is to investigate the mechanisms
              responsible for geographic structuring, the founding of new colonies, and
              recent population expansion of Adelie penguins. Past research has shown that
              none of the colonies is nesting-space limited, and that sea-ice extent and
              concentration affect diet, foraging effort (and ultimately chick growth and
              survival), and over-winter survival. In addition, large colonies affect the
              foraging patterns of smaller ones within foraging range and, perhaps
              ultimately, the size of those colonies. While quantification of emigration is
              still in progress, its rate and direction appear also to be constrained by sea
              ice conditions, with reasonable concentrations of ice favoring growth of
              smaller colonies, where foraging competition is minimal.  The current research
              will address the demographic mechanism of colony growth (or decline), including
              changes in adult survival, juvenile survival, recruitment age, proportion of
              adults breeding, emigration/immigration, or a combination of these factors. 
              Research will include census work at three colonies on the Ross Sea coast: Cape
              Crozier, Cape Royds and Cape Bird as well as Beaufort Island. The four colonies
              differ in size and demography. The work will involve continuing a seven-year
              census record and includes known-age birds. The research team will use such
              technology as: computerized weighbridges that assess foraging effort and
              success, as well as quantify such difficult problems as band loss;
              time-depth-recorders and satellite transmitters to assess foraging behavior
              with respect to sea ice and overlap among colonies; and archival tags that,
              using celestial cues (time of sunset and sunrise, day length), determine
              migration timing and routes, and location of molting and wintering areas. 
              Information will be related to sea-ice conditions as quantified by satellite
              images. Results will increase an understanding of population regulation and
              patterns of dispersion and the effects of climate change, mediated through
              changes in sea ice condition on populations. 
