Title       : Collaborative Research: Investigation of a Proposed Suture Between East and West
               Gondwana -- An Integrated Field, Geochronologic, and Remote-Sensing Analysis in
               East Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 17,  2002  
File        : a0125957

Award Number: 0125957
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2002        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39880              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Tucker Tucker@zircon.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will investigate the age, structural geometry, and regional extent
              of a proposed geological suture (the Betsimisaraka suture) in East Madagascar,
              approximately 50 km wide and over 700 km long, that welds the continental
              fragments of East and West Gondwana. The suture hypothesis poses a fundamental
              challenge to the current paradigm regarding the configuration of Rodinia and
              its transformation to Gondwana. The objectives of this research are to
              determine the structural vergence, kinematics, and timing of terrane-accretion
              and terminal-suturing events in the critical part of the EAO that have
              important global-scale implications for Neoproterozoic tectonics. Research will
              proceed through an integrated program of geologic mapping and structural
              analysis, together with remote sensing analysis (Landsat TM and SIR C/X radar),
              U-Pb geochronology, geochemical, and radiogenic isotope (Re-Os, Sm-Nd)
              investigations. The structural investigations and sample collections will be
              made along five river transects that traverse the proposed suture. Within the
              proposed suture are meter-and km-scale blocks of peridotite, hartzburgite,
              gabbro, and basalt interpreted as relicts of the former Mozambique Ocean.
              Geochemical and geochronological analysis of these will place constraints on
              their age and origin, and provide an important test of the suture hypothesis.
              Structural investigations and U-Pb dating of rocks within and adjacent to the
              proposed suture will allow us to evaluate other critical elements of the
              hypothesis, and place important constraints on the configuration of continental
              terranes within Gondwana. TM imaging and SIR C/X radar analysis will reveal
              macro-scale kinematic relations and provide a basis for extrapolation of the
              suture to a larger scale. This work will lead to a new understanding of
              kinematics, age and overall structural vergence in the critical, eastern part
              of the EAO where strongly divergent views of its evolution are emerging. The
              research will involve collaboration between professional colleagues in
              Madagascar and the U.S., and allow for the participation and training of
              American and Malagasy students in field- and laboratory-based research.
