Title       : Foraging Behavior and Demography of Pygoscelis Penguins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0125985

Award Number: 0125985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $414351             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wayne Z. Trivelpiece waynezt@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Seabird research conducted at Admiralty Bay, King George Island in the Antarctic
              Peninsula region has documented annual variability in the life history
              parameters of the population biology of three related penguin species: the
              Adelie, the gentoo and the chinstrap (Pygoscelis adeliae, P. papua and P.
              antarctica, respectively). This long-term study has collected twenty-five years
              of data on the three related species, including survival and recruitment,
              population size and breeding success, and diets and foraging ecology. The
              current project will extend the research linking penguin demography and
              foraging ecology to variability in the Antarctic marine ecosystem. A major
              focus of this work will be on the Adelie and gentoo penguin population biology
              data and the distribution and trophic interactions among the three Pygoscelis
              species during the breeding season and the non-breeding, winter period. Recent
              results have provided the first detailed data on the wintering distributions of
              Adelie and chinstrap penguins in the Antarctic Peninsula region, through the
              use of satellite tags and time-depth recorders to examine the post-fledging
              foraging. Specific topics of research include an examination of the size and
              sex composition of krill captured by penguins feeding chicks and krill
              collected concurrently by net hauls in the adjacent marine environment and the
              length-frequency distribution of krill collected from penguin diet samples. The
              over winter survival of penguin breeding adults and the recruitment of young
              (two to four year old) pre-breeding penguins to their natal colony will be
              compared to the extent of sea ice in the winter prior to the breeding season.
              These variables are expected to be positively correlated for the Adelie but
              negatively correlated to the chinstrap penguin.  Detailed studies of the adult
              gentoo penguins, which do not disperse widely from the natal colony, will be
              conducted using satellite tags. The data collected in this study will improve
              an understanding of the structure and function of the Antarctic through
              research on the impact of environmental variation on the structure of upper
              trophic level predators such as the Pygoscelis penguins.

