Title       : Collaborative Research: Emplacement of the Ferrar Mafic Igneous Province: A
               Pilot Study of Intrusive Architecture and Flow Directions in Southern Victoria
               Land
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0125634

Award Number: 0125634
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Marshak smarshak@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan G. Whittington  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study to investigate the Ferrar
              magmatic province toward understanding of the formation of this province and
              its role in the breakup of the Gondwana supercontinent. The dispersal of
              Gondwana represents one of the largest supercontinent breakup events in the
              Phanerozoic. Breakup was associated with the emplacement of a very large
              Jurassic mafic igneous province extending across the Karoo (southern Africa),
              Ferrar (Antarctica), and Tasman (Australia) regions, comprising continental
              flood basalts and extensive intrusive dolerites.

Models linking development
              of the >3,000 km Ferrar province to a mantle plume, a major magma conduit, or
              multiple sources, make testable predictions about magma transport patterns
              within the Ferrar province. This project is a pilot study using several
              different techniques aimed at evaluating these models and providing a greater
              understanding of the emplacement mechanisms, flow directions, and magmatic
              architecture associated with the Ferrar mafic intrusive province in southern
              Victoria Land. Our research tools will include mapping intrusive geometry based
              on structural field studies and geochemical correlation techniques. Magma flow
              directions within the intrusive complex will be evaluated using anisotropy of
              magnetic susceptibility, and mesoscopic and petrofabric flow indicators. These
              results will help resolve outstanding questions concerning the geometry,
              propagation, and flow patterns of magma during emplacement of sills and dikes
              in mafic large igneous provinces. It will also provide a deeper understanding
              of the relationships between mantle plumes, basaltic magmatism and continental
              breakup.

