Title       : Rate of Bouts as a Measure of Response Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2002  
File        : a0125093

Award Number: 0125093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael D. Greenfield                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  2002   
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80436              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Shull rlshull@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	Rate of Bouts as a Measure of Response Strength

	Richard L.
              Shull
	University of North Carolina at Greensboro

	It seems almost
              self-evident that the tendency to engage in an activity should be directly
              related to the size of the reward for the activity (incentive value) and to the
              motivation level. Yet response rate in the laboratory has often turned out to
              be surprisingly insensitive to such factors. For example, response rate is an
              increasing, negatively accelerated function of the rate of its reinforcement
              (well described by a rectangular hyperbolic function). And sometimes response
              rate even decreases as the size of the reward is increased. The proposed
              research is based on the possibility that response rate is insensitive because,
              as typically calculated, it is a mixture of two different kinds of responding,
              a sensitive type and an insensitive type. There is reason to suspect that rate
              of initiating bouts of an activity might be highly sensitive to incentive and
              motivational variables whereas responding within bouts might not be. If so,
              bout-initiation rate should be a better candidate than total (composite)
              response rate for determining the fundamental relation between responding and
              reinforcement. Despite a considerable amount of suggestive evidence, however,
              this possibility has not been adequately developed or evaluated--mainly because
              researchers have been unsure how to determine unambiguously and nonarbitrarily
              when bouts begin and end and thus how to measure bout-initiation rate. Recently
              Shull and his colleagues described and validated a technique for determining
              bout-initiation rate and bout length--based on fits to limbs of log survivor
              plots of interresponse times. Using this technique, the proposed research will
              examine the possibility that the function relating bout-initiation rate to
              reinforcement variables (such as rate of reinforcement) is invariant over
              different response types and over variables that alter response rate by
              changing bout length. The proposed research will also determine if the relation
              between bout-initiation rate and reinforcement rate is approximately linear
              over a wide range. If these possibilities are confirmed, the results would
              favor a surprisingly simple and general principle of response strength due to
              incentive and motivational variables.

