Title       : Collaborative Research: Developing an Integrated Undergraduate GIScience
               Curriculum for Five University of Maine System Campuses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0125807

Award Number: 0125807
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46009              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Szakas szakas@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University Maine Augusta
	      University Heights
	      Augusta, ME  043309421    207/622-7131

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9150,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Geography (88)
The core purpose of this project is to adapt key elements of the
              core curriculum developed by the National Council for Geographic Information
              and Analysis (NCGIA,1997), combining these with materials already used on some
              campuses in the University of Maine system. This is a collaborative project
              designed to benefit five universities that are part of this system: 
The
              University of Southern Maine,
The University of Maine, Fort Kent,
The
              University of Maine, Machias,
The University of Maine, Augusta, and
The
              University of Maine, Farmington. 
The broader purpose of this collaborative
              project is to enhance GIScience education throughout the state of Maine on the
              5 collaborating campuses. On each campus a dedicated laboratory is being
              equipped to support the development of a modern geographical information
              science (GIScience) curriculum, comprised of GIS and GPS technology and related
              educational materials. We are developing and implementing a sequence of two
              GIScience courses for undergraduate students in each of the five universities.
              These are being designed to educate students to a common standard of
              achievement, although there are local variations designed to meet the varied
              needs of the 5 participating campuses. The new curriculum meets a growing need
              for high-quality GIScience education in a variety of fields. We are designing
              the two-course sequences to foster active learning by customizing exercises and
              data sets to the diverse geographic locations and programmatic strengths of
              each campus. Our project is also enhancing and developing the skills of the
              faculty, and integrating advanced technology into a variety of disciplines. Our
              plan is to disseminate our work through our teaching, on-site workshops for our
              faculty colleagues, internet publication, and presentation at professional
              meetings. Project evaluation is being assisted by on-site peer input during
              faculty workshops, and periodic review by a three member advisory panel of
              GIScience scholars and professionals.


