Title       : Seismology of Outer Rise Earthquakes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  2001  
File        : a0125182

Award Number: 0125182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hiroo Kanamori hiroo@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The world's largest and most destructive earthquakes occur on the interface
              between subducting and overriding plates, with interplate coupling playing an
              important role in their seismogenesis. Updip from this interface, the
              outer-rise comprises a broad and gentle upwarping of the oceanic lithosphere
              just before it descends into the trench. Almost 20 years ago, researchers,
              showed a correlation between the occurrence of outer-rise earthquakes and
              interplate thrust events. The improved seismological data and tools currently
              available enable us to develop an updated and enhanced catalog of outer-rise
              seismicity, including mechanisms, depths and spectral characteristics, which
              can be subsequently used to review models and hypotheses concerning these
              outer-rise events and the deformation of subducting plates.
A large number of
              events have occurred since the earlier catalogs were compiled and, the seismic
              data quality, coverage and availability have improved significantly. This
              enables us to better constrain depth, location and focal mechanism through
              detailed waveform modeling. Using our new catalog, our understanding of the
              stress evolution within the trench and outer-rise and the relationship between
              seismic coupling and outer-rise earthquakes can be refined. This work is also a
              first step towards the development of a new generation of geodynamic models,
              improving the constraints on the mechanical properties of the lithosphere and
              the dynamics of the slab where it bends into the subduction zone. Additionally,
              it examines the relationship of these earthquakes to the structure of the
              subducting plates, as evidenced by bathymetric and reflection/refraction
              profiles.
Of particular interest is the spatio-temporal behavior of outer-rise
              seismicity. Although most outer-rise events are tensional, a small number of
              deeper events are compressional. These compressional earthquakes have been
              speculated to either precede an interplate thrust, occur in regions which have
              not experienced an interplate thrust event during the preceding few decades, or
              occur adjacent to an area which has had interplate slip. The bending stresses
              and the pull of the subducting slab are probably large relative to regional
              tectonic stresses or the cyclic stresses associated with seismic coupling.
              However, these stress perturbations may still trigger events in the outer-rise
              and may cause the neutral surface (the zero stress boundary between tensional
              upper plate and compressional lower plate) to shoal significantly. The stress
              changes following interplate events can thus be viewed as perturbations of the
              overall dynamics. From these temporal and spatial relationships, it is clear
              that the state of stress in the outer-rise may change in both time and space in
              response to interplate coupling. The record of seismicity should reflect these
              changes and can therefore shed light on the physical processes at work. 
Of
              greatest importance is the enhancement of our understanding of the physics of
              outer-rise deformation. The results will have further implications for several
              other disciplines. Improved knowledge of the temporal and spatial character of
              outer-rise seismicity is an important first step towards the development of a
              new generation of models of subduction zone dynamics. Since some large
              interplate earthquakes occur close to populated areas or generate tsunamis,
              compressional outer-rise events as stress build-up indicators may be important
              for intermediate term earthquake hazard assessment.
