Title       : The Physics of the Earthquake Source and Radiated Waves: Frequency Dependence,
               Spatial Distribution, and Directivity in Elastodynamic Models of Repeated Fault
               Ruptures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0125871

Award Number: 0125871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109801             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Shaw shaw@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1576,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The main thrust of this work is to seek a deeper understanding of the radiated
              waves emitted by earthquakes. In previous work, the investigator has examined
              how total radiated energy can be sensitive to the source physics, showing
              dfferences for slip versus velocity weakening friction in elastodynamic faults.
               This work was expanded to look at the frequency content and spatial dependence
              of the radiation. A number of important results were obtained, including: (1) A
              new radiating boundary condition allowing a nonuniform prestress, useful for
              repeated ruptures, was developed; (2) Having to assume only a physics of the
              tractions on the fault, the full spectra of radiated waves for events with a
              wide range of sizes were generated; (3) Characterizing the spectral content of
              the radiation, a nonlinear magnitude dependence of a second corner frequency
              was found, and shown to be related to fundamental source parameters; (4) Strong
              directivity effects for large events were exhibited in spectral ratios. With
              renewed support, continued research on this subject is being carried out, with
              a focus on three specifc projects:

The first project involves further
              exploration of magnitude and spatial dependence of directivity effects. Initial
              results have shown striking amplification of acceleration spectra away from the
              epicentral region in large events. Further exploration of these effects
              includes time domain complements of the frequency domain measurements already
              made. This work will further develop a new theoretical tool for exploring an
              issue with potentially large hazard and earthquake engineering
              implications.

The second project involves the extension of measurements made
              in two-dimensional models of radiated energy spectra to three-dimensional
              models. A further generalization of a new radiating boundary condition is being
              developed in two dimensions, both extending it to higher dimensions and to
              continuous loading, allows direct measurements at long times. This allows
              quantitative physical predictions of the magnitude dependence of radiated
              energy spectra.

The third project involves the application of a new
              measurement developed in the models to earthquake data. The measurement takes
              advantage of a natural averaging measure through summing of energy spectra to
              convert to average acceleration spectra. In the models, the period of the peak
              average acceleration spectra was shown to reflect fundamental source
              parameters. Measurements of the magnitude dependence of this quantity in
              earthquakes are being carried out.

