Title       : Using Smart Antennas for Ad Hoc Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0125728

Award Number: 0125728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324365             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh P. Singh singh@cs.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Binkley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Over the past several years two technologies, ad hoc networking and smart
              antenna systems, have developed independently of one another. Smart antenna
              systems have been developed primarily for cellular communication systems while
              ad hoc network technology has been developed for military and disaster relief
              network models. In this research, the researchers plan on utilizing smart
              antenna systems in the context of ad hoc networking.   The researchers believe
              that smart antennas with their ability to dynamically form directed beams will
              allow the capacity of ad hoc networks to dramatically increase.

The approach
              in this research is to exploit direction of arrival information obtained
              at
the antenna level for MAC and routing protocol design and, conversely, use
              routing and MAC layer information to form appropriate beams. This integrated
              approach appears to be ideal in terms of improving the overall system
              performance.  The planned approach will rely on simulations as well as
              modeling. For the simulation,  the researchers propose adding smart antenna
              models into NS-2. In addition, since one of the performance metrics is energy,
              the researchers  plan on incorporating accurate energy models for beamforming
              and direction of arrival algorithms into NS-2. One of the two approaches that
              will be explored for this is a mixed NS-2/DSP (Digital Signal Processor)
              environment in which NS-2 uses external DSPs to run the antenna algorithms and
              the exact measured energy cost is returned to the simulator.

This research
              will have a significant impact on the existing state of the art in ad
              hoc
network design. The researchers believe that as smart antenna systems
              mature, these systems are the right choice for infrastructureless networks.
              This research will develop protocols and answer questions related to
              performance improvements and the energy cost of using smart antennas.  The
              researchers hope that the work will enable other researchers to explore this
              merging of technologies as well.


