Title       : Yeast in the Antarctic Dry Valleys: Biological role, distribution, and evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0125611

Award Number: 0125611
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deneb Karentz                           
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316029             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie B. Connell laurie.connell@umit.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0125611
Connell

Yeasts in the Antarctic Dry Valleys: Biological role,
              distribution, and evolution

The soil community of Antarctic polar desert is
              comprised of few endemic species of bacteria, fungi, and invertebrates. Both
              filamentous and single cellular fungi have been isolated from a diversity of
              Antarctic soil types, but only yeast appear to be endemic to the polar desert
              soils. Although the ecological roles of yeast in Antarctic soils is undefined,
              yeast may be the principal taxa in the heterotrophic communities that
              synthesize sterols required by soil invertebrates. In addition, yeast may be
              involved in accumulating and mobilizing growth limiting nutrients such as
              phosphorus into the polar desert food web. This multidisciplinary research will
              characterize the roles soil yeast play in the McMurdo Dry Valley ecosystem in
              order to better understand polar deserts and other extreme environments, as
              well as provide a foundation for incorporating yeast into biogeochemical models
              of temperate environments. Soil microbiota mediate most of the terrestrial
              ecosystem processes such as decomposition, soil respiration, the uptake and
              fixation of micro and macro-nutrients, detoxification of heavy metals, and
              serve as major global carbon sinks. The complexity of soil communities in
              temperate regions pose difficulties in studying the relationships between
              biotic and abiotic parameters of ecosystem function and the factors controlling
              populations of soil microbiota remain poorly understood. The extreme climate
              and relatively simple community structure of the continental Antarctica desert
              regions offer a unique opportunity to define interactions between soil
              organisms that are central to many ecosystems processes. The abundance and
              distribution of yeast in polar desert soils will be correlated with physical
              and chemical soil properties and these data will be stored and analyzed using
              Geographic Information Systems (GIS). Several physiological parameters will be
              explored in vitro to develop a basis for understanding the functional role(s)
              these organisms may play. The evolution of Dry Valley yeast will be addressed
              by determining intra- and inter-valley population relatedness patterns, based
              on DNA sequence. These experiments will form a strong foundation for future
              investigations, provide additional opportunities for collaborative research and
              students from middle school through college will be given the opportunity to
              participat in this project.

