Title       : Elementary, Secondary, and Informal Education: Birds in the 'Hood / Aves del
               Barrio
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  2002  
File        : a0125633

Award Number: 0125633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Orrin C. Shane                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1019603            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Bonney reb5@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John W. Fitzpatrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Melinda S. LaBranche  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              "Birds in the Hood" or "Aves del Barrio" builds on the Cornell Laboratory of
              Ornithology's (CLO) successful Project Pigeon Watch, and will result in the
              creation of a web-based citizen science program for urban residents.  The
              primary target audience is urban youth, with an emphasis on those participating
              in programs at science centers and educational organizations in Philadelphia,
              Tampa, Milwaukee, Los Angeles, Chicago and New York.  Participants will develop
              science process skills, improve their understanding of scientific processes and
              design research projects while collecting, submitting and retrieving data on
              birds found in urban habitats.  The three project options include a.) mapping
              of pigeon and dove habitats and sightings, b.)  identifying and counting gulls
              and c.) recording habitat and bird count data for birds in the local community.
              Birds in the Hood will support CLO's Urban Bird Studies initiative by
              contributing data on population, community and landscape level effects on
              birds.  Support materials are web-based, bilingual and include downloadable
              instructions, tally sheets, exercises and results.  The website will also
              include a web-based magazine with project results and participant
              contributions.  A training video and full color identification posters will
              also be produced.  The program will be piloted at five sites in year one, and
              then field-tested at 13 sites in year two.  Regional dissemination and training
              will occur in year three.  It is anticipated that 5,000 urban bird study groups
              will be in place by the end of the funding period, representing nearly 50,000
              individuals.
