Title       : ChemQuery: An Assessment System for Mapping Student Progress in Learning General
               Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0125651

Award Number: 0125651
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  2001   
Expires     : October 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499976             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angelica M. Stacy stacy@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7431      CCLI - ASA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7431,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students in general education science courses typically do not appreciate that
              science advances through a series of complex paradigm shifts involving
              considerable debate and discussion. Their perception that scientific
              understanding of issues proceeds in a cut-and-dry process impedes their grasp
              of scientific concepts and their ability to apply science reasoning to issues
              in societal contexts. Unfortunately, there is no way to quantify these
              misconceptions and thereby address them with a concerted curricular response.
              This project is producing an assessment instrument, the Science Perceptions
              Survey, designed to measure these dispositions and changes in them as well. The
              Science Perceptions Survey is being devised in the context of general education
              chemistry courses and validated through correlation with results of written
              essays and interviews. An independent evaluator who is not associated with the
              development of the assessment tool is managing these validation protocols. Once
              validated, the instruments will be freely available to other institutions
              considering changes in curricula focused on enhancing the appreciation of
              science methods and their place in general education courses. The Principal
              Investigators anticipate that the Science Perceptions Survey will be a valuable
              tool in delineating deficiencies in students' ability to understand the way in
              which scientific arguments are constructed and to guide curriculum development
              in correcting these deficiencies. In addition to the curriculum assessment
              format, the Science Perceptions Survey will be disseminated in a web-based
              format for student self-evaluation. This implementation will provide students
              real-time analysis of their tolerance for ambiguity in scientific findings and
              their ability to use the scientific method. This ongoing project can be used by
              instructors as an assignment in the general education courses to help students
              understand how science advances knowledge.
