Title       : Chronology of the Late Pleistocene Yellowstone Ice Cap
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2002  
File        : a0125625

Award Number: 0125625
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167108             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Licciardi jlicciardi@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Kurz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
ABSTRACT

Chronology of the Late Pleistocene Yellowstone Ice Cap
by
Joseph
              M. Licciardi and Mark D. Kurz


	An understanding of climatic linkages
              between western North America and the North Atlantic region is essential for
              identifying causes of abrupt climate variability in the Northern Hemisphere
              during the last glacial period (over the past ~21,000 years).  Advances and
              retreats of alpine glaciers are sensitive indicators of changes in Ice Age
              climate.  The former Yellowstone Ice Cap was the largest alpine glacier system
              in the western U.S., and the deposits it left behind preserve a valuable record
              of past climates in western North America.  In prior research, we successfully
              established a high-resolution chronology of fluctuations of the northern
              Yellowstone outlet glacier.  The initial investigation at Yellowstone, however,
              was restricted to a single drainage, and therefore did not resolve many aspects
              of the complex Yellowstone glacial history.  Here we propose a further
              investigation of this important climate signal and its origin.  We will apply
              isotopic dating techniques to glacial deposits in additional drainages within
              the Yellowstone region.  The new results will greatly enhance current knowledge
              of the Yellowstone glacial history, and will provide an alpine glacial
              chronology of unprecedented resolution in the western U.S.  An improved
              chronology of Yellowstone glaciation will enable a compelling and detailed
              comparison with alpine glacier records elsewhere in the western U.S., and with
              the timing of abrupt climate events in the North Atlantic region. 
              Consequently, the improved chronology will strengthen and refine climatic
              interpretations derived from the glacial record, and will provide an important
              base of evidence for further evaluating the origin of millennial-scale climate
              variability in the Northern Hemisphere.


