Title       : Development of a Numerical Model for the PVTX Properties of Na-K-Ca-Fe-C1
               Solutions in Magmatic/Hydrothermal Ore Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2001  
File        : a0125918

Award Number: 0125918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Bodnar bubbles@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bodnar
EAR-0125918

A three-year experimental study will be conducted to
              determine the temperature-pressure-composition (PTX) limits of fluid
              immiscibility over the temperature and pressure range appropriate for
              magmatic-hydrothermal ore deposits associated with shallow granitic magmas. 
              The study will focus on fluid compositions in aqueous solutions containing Na,
              K, Ca,  and Fe chlorides, starting with the less-complex sub-systems containing
              Na-K, Na-Ca, and Na-Fe chlorides.  Samples of immiscible fluids will be trapped
              in situ using the synthetic fluid inclusion technique, and compositions of the
              fluids will be determined using standard microthermometric analytical
              techniques.  The compositional data will be used to develop an empirical
              numerical model to predict P-T conditions attending magmatic-hydrothermal
              processes.  The model will require only information that is easily obtainable
              during conventional microthermometric and/or microchemical analysis of fluid
              inclusions.  

The feasibility of the project has been documented by
              preliminary studies on the water-NaCl-KCl system.  The data confirm that the
              synthetic fluid inclusions trap a representative sample of the fluid(s) present
              at experimental run conditions, and maintain these compositions during
              quenching to ambient laboratory conditions.  Moreover, conventional
              microthermometric analysis of the coexisting liquid-rich and vapor-rich
              inclusions can be employed to determine the fluid compositions.  Preliminary
              data for the water-NaCl-KCl system show that partitioning of sodium and
              potassium between coexisting liquid and vapor varies systematically with both
              temperature and pressure.  Specifically, sodium partitioning into the liquid
              phase becomes less pronounced with increasing temperature and with decreasing
              pressure. 



