Title       : Innovations in Internationalization: Building Multi-Sector Partnerships for
               Research, Education and Economic Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0125122

Award Number: 0125122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $597542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen Kalonji kalonji@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denice D. Denton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5251,9200,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125122	
Kalonji			

This award is to the University of Washington to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners for the award include the University of
              Washington (Lead Institution), Washington State Office of Economic Development,
              Washington State China Relations Council, Northwest Environmental Business
              Council, Earth Tech, Inc., and Hart Crowser, Inc.

Proposed Activities
The
              proposed effort has the following goals: (1) create new team-based approaches
              for faculty, students, government and industry partners to collaborate on
              international research and education, (2) translate the work of these teams
              into products, systems, and services, (3) produce a scientific and engineering
              workforce to work in an international marketplace.  Teams of faculty and
              students from the University of Washington and Sichuan University in Chengdu,
              China will be working collaboratively on water resource management, waste water
              treatment, forest ecology, environmentally-friendly materials processing,
              biodiversity, and the impact of humans on the ecology. 

Proposed
              Innovation
The focus of the project is on building sustainable relationships
              for research-education-economic development.  Innovation outcomes include
              creation of a workforce to participate in the emerging Chinese market, creation
              of the opportunities for small businesses to participate in academic research
              and to gain access to new international business opportunities, increase trade
              with China for Washington, and "internationalization" of some of the faculty at
              the University of Washington.

Potential Economic Impact
The major economic
              impact will be the expanded opportunities for Washington State business with
              markets in China.

Potential Societal Impact
The Pacific Rim could be a very
              large market for the United States over the foreseeable future.  Preparation of
              a workforce to participate in this market is vital to the citizens of the US in
              general and especially the West Coast.  Asians have already trained a
              workforce, and the US is behind.  This effort will provide the workforce to
              open trade for small business in China.


