Title       : Time-Resolved Structural Analysis of Heavy Metal Cation Exchange Reactions in
               Anionic Clay and Manganese Oxide Nanoparticles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 29,  2001  
File        : a0125908

Award Number: 0125908
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Heaney heaney@geosc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Post  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sridhar Komarneni  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Heaney
EAR-0125908

Anionic clays and manganese oxides occur abundantly as
              nanocrystalline coatings on soil and sediment particles in surficial
              environments.  They exhibit a remarkable facility for exchanging ions dissolved
              in aqueous fluids and act as major traps for anions and cations.  The
              investigators of this proposal will apply a novel crystallographic approach to
              resolve mechanisms of cation exchange in layered double hydroxide and Mn oxide
              materials.  Powdered samples will be monitored by synchrotron X-ray diffraction
              during the process of cation exchange.  These experiments will yield the first
              time-resolved analyses of the structural distortions that occur to accommodate
              substitutions by transition metals in low-temperature minerals.  Additionally,
              in concert with high-temperature infrared spectroscopy, synchrotron XRD
              analyses will be performed as samples are heated, allowing the structural
              manifestations of thermal decomposition to be correlated with cation exchange
              capacity.
These studies will allow the investigators to capture intermediate
              transition steps that are overlooked by a more conventional static analysis of
              final run products. As the structural perturbations that are associated with
              chemical substitutions tend to stabilize the exchanged phases, these studies
              will indicate which factors limit the degree of exchange for selected cations. 
              Consequently, these experiments will suggest approaches to the design of new
              remediation materials with amplified exchange characteristics.


