Title       : Extinction and Recovery of Crinoids Resulting from Climatic Change during the
               Ordovician-Silurian Biotic Crisis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2002  
File        : a0125249

Award Number: 0125249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50974              (Estimated)
Investigator: William I. Ausich ausich.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew R. Saltzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Crinoids (Phylum Echinodermata) were among the most important marine organisms
              throughout the Paleozoic (ca 570 to 265 million years ago). They were dominant
              in maintaining the ecological structure Paleozoic communities, in diversity and
              abundance among echinoderms, and in importance as sediment contributors that
              ultimately led to the limestones of today.  However, end-Ordovician global
              environmental change resulted in a mass extinction of crinoids and, ultimately,
              a macroevolutionary reorganization of crinoids as they diversified during the
              Early Silurian.  End-Ordovician environmental change was caused by global
              cooling and sea level lowering resulting from a continental glaciation on the
              southern paleocontinents.  A thorough understanding of the end-Ordovician
              biotic crisis will provide an important example of the consequences of global
              environmental change in deep time against which to compare global environmental
              changes that have occurred in the most recent past and for predicting future
              oceanic impacts of global environmental change.
	The objectives of this
              proposal are the following. 1) Field collection and study of crinoids in strata
              immediately surrounding the Ordovician-Silurian boundary, i.e. the Ellis Bay
              and Becscie formations. 2) Collection of samples for isotopic analysis will be
              coordinated with work by our Canadian colleagues in order to develop as
              thorough an understanding as possible of these stratigraphic sections. The plan
              is to sample the Ashgillian Vaureal Formation, for which isotopes are not
              known, and to take samples in formations that span the O-S boundary in
              unsampled sections in the eastern part of the island.  3) Within the time
              available, integrate the two data sets to further develop an understanding of
              whether the Anticosti Island Ordovician-Silurian succession is complete or
              whether there are paraconformities present that would affect the objectives of
              the study being proposed. and 4) provide a research learning experience for
              undergraduate and graduate students through field studies, laboratory research,
              and preparation of theses (undergraduate and graduate).




