Title       : Diffusive Soil Transport and Hillslope Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0125843

Award Number: 0125843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2006    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226759             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Furbish dfurbish@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Schmeeckle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammed Y. Hussaini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PIs will pursue a comprehensive theory of diffusive soil transport and hillslope
              evolution associated with biological activity and surface rainsplash, building
              on recent, key developments in hillslope geomorphology.  Their objectives are:
              (i) to clarify the fundamental ingredients and forms of constitutive
              (transport) laws describing these processes, demonstrating the conditions under
              which transport is proportional to the land-surface gradient or to the product
              of the soil thickness and surface gradient; (ii) to provide the analogue of a
              kinetic theory for the diffusion-like coefficient used in hillslope evolution
              models, demonstrating how it is an explicit nonlinear function of soil-particle
              activity, particle size, soil porosity and soil thickness, and indirectly
              related to climatic and biological conditions; (iii) to experimentally obtain
              the form of the constitutive law for transport by rainsplash using high-speed
              video and particle tracking techniques; (iv) to illustrate the fundamental
              significance of particle-activity gradients in producing transport, and
              demonstrate this using sandbox experiments for the case of rainsplash, and
              using field measurements of soil properties and tracer particles for the case
              of subsurface transport; (v) to clarify the ingredients of surface and
              subsurface particle dispersal, mixing and sorting, demonstrating how these
              processes contribute to hillslope catena structure; and (vi) to develop an
              advanced computational model of diffusive transport and hillslope evolution for
              exploring the full coupling between land-surface geometry, soil transport, soil
              thickness and soil production, including nonlinear responses to external and
              boundary forcing.  This four-year program will mesh theoretical, experimental,
              field-based and computational components.  The PIs theoretical work will focus
              on clarifying: (i) the ingredients of particle dispersal, mixing and sorting
              soil-depth and catena scale; and (ii) the forms of constitutive transport laws.
               PIs experimental/field work will: (i) focus on the process of rainsplash, and
              on particle mixing and sorting within soils, and at the soil surface; and (ii)
              be designed to test/validate the theoretical and computational aspects of their
              work.  They will also apply high-performance algorithms based on discontinuous
              spectral element methods in developing advanced computational codes for
              simulating particle behavior at the soil-depth scale, and for simulating
              hillslope evolution at geomorphic scales.  Under the auspices of the Center for
              Earth Surface Processes Center (CESPR), this project will involve collaboration
              of scientists expert in geomorphology, fluid mechanics, applied mathematics and
              advanced computations.  The results of this work will constitute a major, and
              critical, contribution to the growing theoretical foundation of hillslope
              geomorphology.
