Title       : Quantifying the Temporal Characteristics of Congestion Events in the Internet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  2002  
File        : a0125410

Award Number: 0125410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor S. Frost frost@eecs.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tyrone E. Duncan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9150,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to lay the foundation for a QoS metric that
              can be easily 
understood and can be used for the design of future packet
              networks.  The premise of the 
proposed research is that Quality of Service
              (QoS) mechanisms have not been widely 
employed because of both their
              complexity and their lack of relationship to user 
perceived performance. 
              Therefore, it is currently difficult to justify the investment in 
complex QoS
              technologies while their value to the end customer is unknown.  There have
              
been cases where commercial networks have been over provisioned, resulting in
              all users, 
independent of QoS requirement or priority, receiving the same
              service.  Based on these 
experiences network customers are reluctant to pay
              extra for QoS.  
Historically, the telephony QoS metric, call blocking
              probability, was not only  
easily understood but provided the foundation for
              network design.  Clearly this metric is 
not suitable for packet networks like
              the Internet, since packet networks experience delay 
and packet loss in the
              presence of congestion. Recently, it has become increasingly 
apparent that
              temporal characteristics of the congestion episodes have the dominant effect
              
on user perceived QoS.   Reinforcing the increasing importance of the
              temporal 
characteristics of congestion is the recent work in the Internet
              Engineering Task Force 
(IETF) on measurement-based temporal QoS metrics. 
              Once congestion occurs at a 
bottleneck point in the network it tends to
              persist and cause a user observable 
impairment.  Thus,  there is a need to
              increase our understanding of the temporal 
characteristics of congestion.  To
              address this issue a new QoS metric is defined, the rate 
of congestion events
              per unit time, and a research effort identified to develop analytic
              
methodologies to study this QoS metric.  Specifically, this research will
              focus on: 1) 
predicting the frequency of congestion events for long range
              dependent (LDR) like 
traffic, i.e., fractional Brownian motion, in a network
              context, 2) developing simple 
approximations for predicting the frequency of
              congestion events, 3) validating the 
resulting prediction methodologies for
              networks using real high resolution traffic 
measurements, 4) developing
              efficient techniques to measure the rate of congestion 
events, and 5)
              relating the congestion event metric proposed here to new measurement-
based
              temporal QoS metrics.  A rigorous definition is proposed for the time between
              
congestion episodes, which leads to the application of first hitting time
              analysis for its 
prediction. The proposed research will exploit some recent
              theoretical results as well 
develop new methods for predicting first hitting
              times for a realistic traffic.   
Network users have been struggling to
              quantify their perceived performance.  The 
new QoS metric proposed here
              summarizes the network component of performance in 
one easily understandable
              number.  Equally important, the proposed metric is structured 
in such a way
              that it can be used for network engineering.  We expect the proposed 
metric,
              combined with accurate prediction techniques, will play an important role in
              
designing future packet networks. 

