Title       : Statewide Partnership to Support Technology Innovation and Entrepreneurship in
               South Dakota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  2001 
File        : a0125385

Award Number: 0125385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598247             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Melvin Ustad gustad@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Royce C. Engstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125385	
Ustad			

This award is to the University of South Dakota to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners of the award are the University of South
              Dakota (Lead Institution), Black Hills State University, Dakota State
              University, Northern State University, South Dakota School of Mines and
              Technology, South Dakota State University, South Dakota Board of Regents,
              Forward Sioux Falls, Rapid City Economic Development, Genesis of Innovation for
              South Dakota, Genesis Equity Fund, LLC, Small Business High Technology
              Institute, South Dakota Health Research Foundation, Dairean, Inc., Pacer
              Corporation, South Dakota Health Technology Innovations, TJ Technologies,
              Inc.

Proposed Activities
The activities include: (1) creation of a series
              of technology entrepreneurship education modules that will be integrated in
              science, math, engineering, and other subjects, (2) modify several existing
              business and entrepreneurship undergraduate and graduate courses to focus on
              technology and R&D businesses, and (3) integrate university and private sector
              partners into technology evaluation and development teams to move innovations
              and technologies to market.  Current innovation courses at the academic
              institutions are business-oriented with little science, engineering, and
              technology emphasis.  This award will support integration of science and
              engineering with the business and management courses and establishment of
              offices for technology transfer.

Proposed Innovation
The project will
              develop the knowledge and skills needed by students, faculty, entrepreneurs,
              and private sector partners to start and expand technology-based businesses in
              the technology business incubators being developed in South Dakota.  The
              project involves a collaborative effort between public universities and the
              private sector to facilitate technology transfer into viable technology and
              business.  The project will educate and encourage new technology entrepreneurs
              to start and grow new businesses.  The technology sectors being emphasized are
              biomedical sciences and health, materials, information technology/education,
              and biotechnology and agriculture.

Potential Economic Impact
The businesses
              formed will contribute to the economic wellbeing of South Dakota.  Education of
              a workforce to fill positions in those businesses will be a priority.  The six
              university campuses will lead as a source of new knowledge through research and
              a source of education for the businesses as well as in providing an
              entrepreneurial workforce.

Potential Societal Impact
Creation of wealth and
              high-paying jobs for the citizens of South Dakota will be a major outcome. 
              Indigenous Americans will also benefit from 

