Title       : Crustal Anisotropy and Mantle Stratigraphy in the Tibetan Plateau and Central
               Andes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0125121

Award Number: 0125121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2002     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101217             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Zandt zandt@geo.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The largest mountains and highest plateaus on Earth are built when continents
              collide. Seismic converted phases (receiver functions) are used to investigate
              two key questions in continental collisions: does the lower crust flow beneath
              high plateaus, and does continental mantle subduct beneath mountain belts?  If
              crustal flow occurs in a relatively thin channel, as some modeling predicts, it
              would develop a strong structural or mineral fabric that may be identified by
              seismic anisotropy. Unlike shear-wave splitting studies that provide only bulk
              anisotropy information between the source and receiver, azimuthal variations of
              converted phases can constrain anisotropy parameters for layers within the
              crust. Previous studies have generally found crustal anisotropies <5%, but
              highly anisotropic (>10%) layers within the crust have recently been identified
              in New Zealand and the Central Andes using the receiver function method. This
              new technique is being applied to receiver functions recorded across the
              highest elevations on Earth, the Tibetan Plateau, in order to search for
              evidence of large-scale crustal flow.

The upper mantle beneath the stable
              interiors of continents is layered on a large scale.  Some layer boundaries are
              observed regionally and denoted by seismologists as "H", "X", and "L". The
              origin of the stratification of the continental upper mantle is still poorly
              understood. In some locations the layering has significant dip. Receiver
              functions have been used to image modern subductions zones as well as identify
              dipping layers in the upper mantle beneath ancient cratons. Some of these
              layers beneath cratons appear to have anisotropic properties and may identify
              relict continental subduction zones. Even if the origin of the stratification
              is unknown, it can be used as a "tracer" to follow the subduction or
              destruction of an impinging strong plate beneath a continental collision zone,
              for example, to track the Indian plate beneath the Himalayas and Tibet.

The
              primary goal of this project is to map out crustal anisotropy and upper mantle
              layering across the Tibetan Plateau, and use the results to improve our
              understanding of how high plateaus are built. This research will continue the
              development of the receiver function technique in the study of seismic
              anisotropy and mantle stratigraphy, and contribute to the technical education
              of two young scientists.
