Title       : Potential Vorticity Diagnosis of African Easterly Waves and Tropical Cyclones
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0125169

Award Number: 0125169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349079             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. Morgan morgan@meteor.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Potential vorticity (PV) diagnosis has been used as a powerful tool in studying
              midlatitude cyclone developments. The PIs will use this tool to study the
              downstream evolution of African easterly waves (AEWs), their interactions with
              the large-scale flow, and their subsequent development into tropical cyclones
              (TCs). Specific studies include: 1) to reexamine whether AEWs are, in fact,
              wave-like disturbances, 2) to determine whether the deformation and concomitant
              superposition of AEW PV by the large-scale environmental flow is a viable
              mechanism alone to trigger tropical cyclogenesis, 3) to understand more
              completely the three-dimensional structure and evolution of TC PV, 4) to relate
              the steering layer of TCs to the depth of the PV column, and 5) to examine the
              sensitivity of TC steering to various microphysical parameterizations in NWP
              models. The hypotheses associated with the tasks are: 1) the intensification of
              the AEWs is related to their change in shape (from elongated to more circular)
              associated with appropriate deformation and 2) the intensity and track of a
              cyclone is related to its depth.  Global analyses from European Center for
              Medium-range Weather Forecast (ECMWF), in conjunction with satellite data and
              satellite-derived winds and aircraft data, will be used to analyze the
              portrayal of AEWs. Investigation on TCs' development and structure will be
              carried out with high-resolution non-hydrostatic research models. 

Tropical
              cyclone formation remains one of the largely unsolved problems in dynamic
              meteorology. This research using PV analysis has the potential to provide
              greater insight into the mechanisms of the transformation of African easterly
              waves into tropical depressions and provide guidance in tropical cyclogenesis
              prediction. The project provides good opportunities for training graduate
              students.
