Title       : Consortium for Stable Laser Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0125429

Award Number: 0125429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 15,  2001   
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598553             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wm. Randall Babbitt babbitt@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan E. Craig  (Principal Investigator former)
              James A. McMillan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125429
Craig	
	
This award is to Montana State University (Lead
              Insititution) to support the activity described below for 24 months.  The
              proposal was submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program
              Solicitation (NSF 0179).

Partners
The partners include Montana State
              University (Lead Institution), AdvR, Inc., Tektronix, Inc., Scientific
              Materials Corporation, IBM Almaden Research Center, ILX Lightwave Corporation,
              MSU Techlink Center, Gallatin Development Corporation, and Montana Board of
              Research and Commercialization Technology.

Proposed Activities
The partners
              will collaborate to develop the requisite technology and to incorporate it into
              various operational optical communications and computing systems.  The Lead
              Institution will do fundamental research and transfer the results to the
              partner companies.  Two companies will assist in the development of the
              technologies based on the research results.  Two of the partner companies will
              provide insertion platforms into systems level products.  One company will
              provide fabrication facilities for the products.  The not-for-profit partners
              will ensure a pro-business climate for establishment of new small and
              medium-sized companies.  The state partner will provide funds when needed to
              promote the development and commercialization of promising technologies.  This
              effort builds upon a new state-funded center for optoelectronics, named the
              Spectral Information Technologies Laboratory.  The charter of the laboratory
              includes the directive to perform transfer of technology that results form
              basic research on optics.

Proposed Innovation
The consortium of companies,
              university, and public partners cover the entire chain from research to
              development, to insertion, to fabrication to development of business
              opportunities, to funding for formation of companies necessary to transform new
              research into commercial activities.  The optical technologies covered will
              have a large role in the future of information technologies that underlie the
              current innovation economy of the last ten years.  

Potential Economic
              Impact
Montana's economy is currently in the bottom 10% nationally.  The
              population of the state is below 750,000.  Creation of 2000 new high-tech jobs
              in the state will have a major impact.

Potential Societal Impact
The
              proposed activity will use the research and education of the state university
              system to promote new high-paying jobs for bright Montana citizens. 
              Heretofore, most university graduates had very limited opportunity for jobs in
              the state, making the state a net exporter of highly educated talent.  The
              resulting income will raise the economic wellbeing for the entire state.


