Title       : A Computer Activity Approach to College Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0125130

Award Number: 0125130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Reynolds ber@stritch.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Fenton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cardinal Stritch Univ
	      6801 N Yates Road
	      Milwaukee, WI  532173945    414/410-4000

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Mathematical Sciences (21)

Materials are being developed for an
              activity-based college geometry course using Geometer's Sketchpad. The project
              addresses the DUE themes of teacher preparation and integration of technology
              into education. Subsequent work will develop a textbook for the geometry course
              required for teacher candidates at various institutions. This idea has been
              discussed with the acquisitions' editor at Key College Publishing, the
              distributor of Geometer's Sketchpad. 

More than ten years experience each
              using an activity-based approach, cooperative learning, and mathematical
              software to teach calculus, discrete mathematics, and abstract algebra has
              demonstrated the effectiveness of these approaches. This project applies these
              pedagogical strategies to college geometry. The course materials are engaging
              students in exploratory activities designed to develop their intuitive
              understanding of geometric concepts. Students use interactive geometry software
              to construct geometric figures, make and test conjectures about these
              constructions, and create proofs based upon their constructions. Through
              productive group interactions, students are being guided toward constructing
              increasingly robust mathematical proofs. Most students served by this course
              are future teachers. Since teachers often teach as they were taught, it is
              important to model pedagogical strategies consistent with the recommendations
              of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). The project
              materials model such strategies, and are suitable for an introduction to formal
              mathematical reasoning in a first or second proof-course. This is a valuable
              course for any mathematics student, but particularly so for those intending to
              become teachers of mathematics.
