Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Soft Tissue and Membrane Preservation in Permian
               Cephalopods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0125314

Award Number: 0125314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil H. Landman landman@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We plan to investigate the internal features of cephalopod molluscs from Permian
              deposits in North America.  In particular, we are studying the remains of soft
              tissues of siphuncular cords and membranes that have been preserved by early
              diagenetic phosphate mineralization in Permian cephalopods from Buck Mountain,
              Nevada.  This research represents a follow-up study of our initial discovery of
              preserved membranes in three ammonoid specimens from this locality.  We plan to
              expand this discovery with our primary objective  the examination of the Buck
              Mountain cephalopod fauna for preserved membranes and soft tissues.  This fauna
              includes prolecanitids, goniatitids, and nautiloids and is housed in Ohio
              University and Boise State University.  We will prepare these cephalopods using
              acidification techniques and then examine the specimens with scanning electron
              microscopy.  The study of the remains of soft tissues and membranes in
              Paleozoic cephalopods has previously been an unobtainable research goal.  We
              pose two hypotheses:  1) the structures in these cephalopods are, indeed, soft
              tissue remains, now phosphatized, that preserve the details of their original
              microanatomy and 2) that these structures are homologous with those of modern
              cephalopods and reveal information about phylogeny and functional morphology. 
              This study will lead to a better understanding of how these ancient and extinct
              animals lived and functioned in their environment.  In this way, these
              discoveries will contribute to our fundamental knowledge of the paleobiology of
              fossil cephalopods.
