Title       : National Technology Transfer and Commercialization Network - TTCN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2002   
File        : a0125449

Award Number: 0125449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chrysostomos L. Nikias mnikias@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard M. Silverman  (Principal Investigator former)
              Kathleen Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elliot Axelband  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125449	
Silverman			

This award is to the University of Southern California
              to support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was
              submitted in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation
              (NSF 0179).

Partners
The partners for the effort are the University of
              Southern California (Lead Institution), California State University Fresno,
              Caltech, Claremont Graduate University, University of Arkansas, University of
              Nevada-Reno, University of Pittsburgh, NASA Ames, California Technology Trade
              and Commerce, LA Economic Development Corporation, Pricewaterhouse Coopers,
              Gibson Dunn & Crutcher, Niagara Broadband, and National Collegiate Innovators
              and Inventors Alliance.

Proposed Activities
The partners propose to create
              and implement a national Technology Transfer and Commercialization Network to
              coordinate and provide a variety of resources and knowledge so that network
              users can collaborate and innovate.  The activity will provide private sector
              partners that supply needed technology, financial, and legal expertise,
              national labs and state and local governments that assist in firming and
              evaluating the program, academic partners that supply vital content and
              structure.  The partnership will allow the partners and their clients to be
              successful innovators, sustaining the partnership in the future.  

Proposed
              Innovation
The proposed network of academic institutions will provide a
              variety of resources and knowledge to partners, especially under-served
              schools, that they could not generate on their own.  The infrastructure will
              allow academic institutions to move their intellectual property into
              commercialization through partnerships with venture capital, private companies,
              start-ups etc.  The combined engineering expertise of the partners will provide
              resources to small companies that they could not afford otherwise.  The
              business school expertise of the major academic institutions will be available
              for small universities and businesses alike.

Potential Economic Impact
The
              partnership will stimulate and support innovation growth by linking sources of
              knowledge and expertise with those needing such sources to make their
              enterprises prosper, particularly those in under-served areas.  The resulting
              economic growth and development will generate additional resources to sustain
              the partnership.

Potential Societal Impact
Creation of economic wellbeing
              and jobs for people in under-served areas will have a beneficial effect on the
              people of those areas.

