Title       : Hydrous Components in Nominally Anhydrous Crustal Minerals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0125767

Award Number: 0125767
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  2001  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229662             (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Rossman grr@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Rossman
EAR-0125767

Many minerals that are usually formulated as anhydrous
              actually contain low concentrations of water or hydroxide bound in distinct
              sites in their structure. These components influence the properties of the host
              phase to an extent that is far disproportionate to their actual concentrations,
              and together, constitute a globally significant reservoir of hydrogen in planet
              Earth. Our research program is directed at 1) characterizing the chemical form
              and concentrations of these components in natural minerals and related
              synthetic materials, 2) relating the hydrous components to other physical and
              chemical properties of the host phases, and 3) exploring the significance of
              the hydrous components to the terrestrial geologic system. 

We select
              naturally occurring minerals from several geologic occurrences and characterize
              their hydrous components with a variety of spectroscopic probes. One major
              objective is to determine the quantitative amount of the hydrous components in
              the host phases. The general characterization of hydrous components in minerals
              provides basic information about the global water reservoir contained in
              minerals systems and provides information relevant to the entry and role of
              hydrogen into technological products (synthetic minerals and related
              structures) used in a variety of industries.  The absolute calibration data is
              needed to constrain the quantitative amount of hydrogen in the various mineral
              reservoirs, an important parameter in evaluating the role and transport of
              volatiles in the Earth's systems.  We ultimately expect to be able to prepare
              general calibrations for major groups of minerals found in the earth's
              crust.

The content of these components in anhydrous minerals is potentially
              a useful indicator of fluid history or fluid variation within a geological
              system.  We will work to establish the extent and conditions under which
              anhydrous minerals preserve a record of water activity in rock by investigating
              the variation of OH in anhydrous minerals in well-studied geological
              environments that have experienced inhomogeneous fluid conditions. Our results
              will be compared to oxygen isotope systematics that record fluid history in the
              same mineral or rock. Through detailed studies, we will gain insight into
              factors such as oxygen fugacity that could modify the retention of OH and H2O
              in anhydrous mineral structures.

