Title       : Revisiting the Tidal Activation of Seismicity with a Damage Mechanics and
               Friction Point of View
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0125242

Award Number: 0125242
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68575              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles G. Sammis sammis@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart W. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1576,9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              If earthquake nucleation were strictly a stress-threshold effect, then one would
              expect a correlation between times of peak tidal stress and regional
              seismicity. Failure of statistically rigorous tests to find such a relationship
              places important constraints on the nucleation process. Explanations of this
              failure to observe correlation generally involve an accelerating self-driven
              nucleation process that occurs on a time scale longer than the diurnal tide
              thereby destroying the expected synchronization.

Although a general
              correlation between tides and earthquakes is not observed, it has recently been
              reported that a correlation of seismicity with tides is observed to develop
              during the few years before an earthquake in a finite sized region that scales
              with the magnitude. This emergent correlation has been interpreted as a
              consequence of the "critical point model" for regional seismicity. According to
              the critical point model, an earthquake, once nucleated, can jump barriers to
              grow large only when the crust is in a "critical state" that is characterized
              by long-range stress correlation. The rational is that the crust is more
              sensitive to tidal stress perturbations when it is near the critical state. If
              true, the emergent correlation of seismicity with tides offers another tool (in
              addition to accelerating seismic moment) for monitoring the approach of a fault
              network to the critical state, and the attendant possibility of a large
              earthquake.

A preliminary attempt to reproduce the reported observations of
              emergent correlation between diurnal tides and seismicity before large
              earthquakes has not been successful. After reviewing published theoretical
              arguments in support of emergent diurnal correlation, there is no reason why,
              even in the critical state, it should not be destroyed by self-driven delayed
              nucleation. However, review of the theory leads to formulation of a new
              hypothesis for the tidal activation of seismicity: tidal activation occurs only
              when the sum of tectonic plus tidal stress exceeds the prior maximum value
              (analogous to the Kaiser effect in acoustic emissions). In this case the 15-day
              beat between solar and lunar tides predicts a strong 15-day correlation. The
              delayed nucleation that is hypothesized to destroy the diurnal correlation may
              not have as large an effect on the new longer cycle.

This project is
              developing suitable observational techniques to optimize detection of this
              15-day quasiperiodic signal and searching for it before a suit of large
              earthquakes in a variety of tectonic settings. also developing a suitable null
              hypothesis and tests for the statistical significance of any signals we find.
              Even if the 15-day signal is not observed, a statistically significant negative
              result places important constraints on the physics of earthquake
              nucleation.

The effects of cyclic perturbations on a uniformly driven system
              as it approaches a critical state using a cellular automaton are being
              investigated. The Olami-Feder-Christensen non-conservative automaton develops
              long-range stress correlations leading to a critical state. Rate- and
              state-dependent friction is added to the automaton's failure criterion to
              produce self-driven delayed nucleation. Although this automaton is not
              realistic in its simulation of long-range elastic interactions between faults,
              it provides a suitable testbed for the two hypotheses being explored: 1)
              whether tidal activation becomes stronger near the critical state, and 2)
              whether delayed nucleation associated with rate and state-dependent friction is
              expected to attenuate the 15-day correlation to the same extent as the diurnal
              correlation.
