Title       : High-resolution Study of the Correlation of Earthquakes and Earth Tides:
               Constraints on Earthquake Nucleation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2001  
File        : a0125732

Award Number: 0125732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kaye Shedlock                           
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71404              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Vidale vidale@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The lunar tide has been suspected of causing earthquakes for more than a
              century.  It is important to understand the influence of tides on the
              occurrence of earthquakes to improve understanding of the stress and the strain
              patterns just as an earthquake begins. A better understanding of earthquake
              nucleation could aid attempts to predict earthquakes.

Most previous studies
              of whether earthquakes are sensitive to tides have been inconclusive.  A
              recently completed project by the investigators showed that earthquake rates
              are no more than a few percent higher when tides favor stresses than when tides
              act to discourage earthquakes. This work used tens of thousands of earthquakes
              on simple parts of the San Andreas fault in northern and central California and
              computes the tides with a sophisticated model including the moon, the observed
              tides in the world's oceans, and the detailed coast line in California.

This
              project examines an expanded dataset with greater resolution and resolves the
              level of tidal influence on earthquakes.  The work will also check to be sure
              that several possible confounding effects, including the temporal clustering of
              earthquakes into swarms and aftershock sequences and the presence of artifacts
              in earthquake catalogs do not affect the results. A refined estimate of the
              effect of lunar tides on the rate of earthquake occurrence will be produced.
              Results of this study will be useful in the search for new ways to further
              improve understanding of earthquake nucleation.
