Title       : Genes for Georgia: Translating Genomic Research into Regional Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0125304

Award Number: 0125304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2002     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Holbrook   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert D. Ivarie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew H. Paterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125304	
Holbrook			

This award is to the University of Georgia to support
              the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners for this award are the University of Georgia,
              Avigenics Inc., Georgia Cotton Commission, Georgia Research Alliance,
              OneGeorgia Authority.

Proposed Activities
The effort will focus on creating
              gene encyclopedias and bioinfomatic infrastructure needed to identify diversity
              of potential value to bio-based industries.

Proposed Innovation
Leveraging
              genomic technologies in this manner is expected to spawn an unprecedented era
              of innovation in bio-based industries, nurturing the development of new
              value-added products and intrinsic genetic solutions to agricultural
              challenges, in a manner that is publicly acceptable and compatible with
              responsible stewardship of the ecosystem.

Potential Economic
              Impact
Outcomes from this effort will include: (1) new ventures to expand and
              diversify regional bio-based industry opportunities, (2) empowering small
              businesses to compete with multinationals by partnering with public researchers
              as a virtual R&D resource, (3) strengthening the national science
              infrastructure by adding enabling tools for new plants and animals, (4)
              partnering with existing outreach networks to provide regional professionals
              with the training needed to exploit these tools, while preserving the links of
              the individuals to their home regions.

Potential Societal Impact
Young
              professionals will receive the education and jobs needed to provide regional
              economic wellbeing and remain in the region avoiding a regional "brain
              drain".

