Title       : Ice-Shelf Rift Propagation: Computational Simulation Using a Fracture Fracture
               Mechanics Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0125754

Award Number: 0125754
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2002      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christina Hulbe chulbe@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to develop computational models to simulate
              ice-shelf rift propagation using a combination of well-established ice-shelf
              creep-flow models and new crevasse models, based on linear elastic fracture
              mechanics (LEFM).  The overall objective of the proposed work is to simulate
              rift propagation and eventual large iceberg calving,and place those processes
              within a larger ice sheet and climate context.  The work will proceed in
              stages, first developing models of single-and multiple-crevasse propagation;
              then using those models to evaluate propagation sensitivity to various
              environmental conditions; and third developing models that incorporate both
              crevasse propagation and advection within an ice- shelf system.   Model
              development will be guided by and evaluated according to satellite observations
              of rift propagation in several characteristic locations on Antarctic ice
              shelves.   New numerical models of fracture in ice will have applications to
              many problems in glaciology.  The research proposed here is directed toward
              large rift formation in ice shelves and subsequent iceberg calving.  It is
              motivated by the need to understand observed changes in modern ice shelves,and
              their connection to climate.  Where it has been sampled, the sedimentary record
              of the Weddell Sea sector implies Peninsular ice shelf variability on
              millennial time scales.  The ability to simulate iceberg calving in a credible
              way will improve our ability to reproduce such events and place the complete
              cycle of ice shelf advance and retreat in an ice-dynamics context.  That will,
              in turn, enable us to place ice-shelf cycles within the climate cycles that
              ultimately drive ice-sheet mass balance.
