Title       : Collaborative Research: Characteristics of Snow Megadunes and their Potential
               Effects on Ice Core Interpretation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0125960

Award Number: 0125960
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74712              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Shuman christopher.shuman@gsfc.nasa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NASA-Goddard Space Flight
	      
	      Greenbelt, MD  20771    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a program of field surveys of an area within the large,
              well-developed megadune field southeast of Vostok station.  The objectives are
              to determine the physical characteristics of the firn across the dunes,
              including typical climate indicators such as stable isotopes and major chemical
              species, and to  install instruments to measure the time variation of
              near-surface wind and temperature with depth, to test and refine hypotheses for
              megadune formation. Field study will consist of surface snowpit and shallow
              core sampling, ground penetrating radar (GPR) profiling, GPS topographic and
              ice motion surveys, AWS installation,  accumulation/ ablation measurements,
              subsurface temperature, and firn permeability studies.   Field work in two
              successive seasons is proposed.   Continent-wide remote sensing studies of the
              dunes will be continued, using the new group of instruments that are now, or
              will shortly be available (e.g., MODIS, MISR, GLAS, AMSR). The earlier study of
              topographic, passive microwave, and SAR characteristics will be extended, with
              the intent of determining the relationships of dune amplitude and wavelength to
              climate parameters, and further development of models of dune formation.
              Diffusion, ventilation, and vapor transport processes within the dune firn will
              be modeled as well. A robust program of outreach is planned and reporting to
              inform both the public and scientists of the fundamental in-situ and remote
              sensing characteristics of these uniquely Antarctic features will be an
              important part of the work. Because of their extreme nature, their broad
              extent, and their potential impact on the climate record, it is important to
              improve our current understanding of these.  Megadunes are a manifestation of
              an extreme terrestrial climate and may provide insight on past terrestrial
              climate, or to processes active on other planets.   Megadunes are likely to
              represent an end-member in firn diagenesis, and as such, may have much to teach
              us about the processes involved.
