Title       : Integrated Inquiry-Based Field Investigations in Environmental Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0125540

Award Number: 0125540
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  2002  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sean Richards SEANR@evb.uoguelph.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth G. Nichols  (Principal Investigator former)
              Dawn Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen Adsit  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Chattanooga
	      615 Mccallie Avenue
	      Chattanooga, TN  374032504    423/425-4141

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7428,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biological Sciences (61)
This project is developing, implementing, and
              assessing student-driven, hypothesis testing laboratory modules for
              introductory and upper level courses in our Environmental Science Program. Our
              project provides students with field opportunities to conduct hypothesis
              testing by revising current laboratory curriculum and improving field testing
              instrumentation. The targeted courses may lack student-driven, field
              investigation components, contain limited field investigations due to lack of
              equipment, or do not offer a laboratory course due to lack of equipment.
              Investigative modules are based on concepts developed by Switzer and Shriner
              (2000) and Eisen (1998) and successful models for field site
              investigations
implemented at the Florida Institute of Technology, Northern
              Arizona University, and Middlebury College. Our primary goal is to provide
              students with active and cooperative learning techniques to improve their
              understanding of the hypothesis-testing nature of science. Each module requires
              students to generate hypotheses for "environmental risk" at one of four common
              study sites. Individual groups within classes are testing hypotheses on-site,
              analyziong their data, presenting their results to the class, and conducting
              peer assessments of individual student and group work. Our assessment plan aims
              to determine if the implemented modules improve student use of problem-solving
              skills and the scientific method to test hypotheses. The project results will
              be disseminated by presentation at scientific and education meetings, by
              web-site, instructor manual supplements, and peer-reviewed journals, and by two
              GLOBE summer workshops for high school teachers and UTC student science
              teachers.
