Title       : Thermal Conductivity of Quartz and Feldspars with Application to Continental
               Heat Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 21,  2001  
File        : a0125883

Award Number: 0125883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne M. Hofmeister hofmeist@levee.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0125883
Hofmeister

A one-year investigation of thermal conductivity (k)
              of crustal minerals using spectroscopic measurements and modeling is proposed.
              The data will be supplemented with new measurements of the thermal diffusivity
              of a plagioclase feldspar using a laser-flash apparatus. These measurements
              will provide a benchmark of the PI's model for the lattice contribution against
              available reliable data on thermal conductivity below room temperature for
              quartz and feldspar, and against the laser flash measurements at high T. The
              calibrated model will provide high T data appropriate for diffusion of heat in
              the Earth, and will constrain pressure dependencies through the equation of
              state. The purpose is to try and understand why the most recent heat flow data
              from the continents is lower than that from the oceans (Pollack et al. 1993),
              contrary to the expected correlation of high heat flow with high radioactive
              contents, and to the partitioning of almost all of Earth's radioactive elements
              into the crust The imbalance suggests that virtually no heat from the mantle
              escapes through the crust. From the determination of k(T,P) for quartz and
              feldspars, the continental crust can be approximated by a conductive cooling
              model that incorporates internal heating. Requiring that the surface heat flux
              and temperature be matched will give solutions relating the basal temperature
              to the radioactive contents. Comparison of results with previous independent
              estimates of radioactive contents (based on chemical inventory) and of
              temperatures (based on phase relations) will set limits on these interrelated
              quantities, and thus on the basal heat flow from the mantle. This result should
              provide a constraint for convection models of the mantle.


