Title       : Collaborative Research: The Chemical Ecology of Shallow-water Marine Macroalgae
               and Invertebrates on the Antarctic Peninsula
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2002  
File        : a0125152

Award Number: 0125152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $434332             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bill J. Baker bbaker@fit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0125152
Amsler/Baker/McClintock

The benthic marine ecosystem near Palmer
              Station, Antarctica provides an excellent site for the study of the function
              and evolution of chemical defenses in marine organisms. Antarctica is unique in
              that sea stars and other invertebrates are the major predators on benthic
              animals. Sea stars are quite different from other, biting predators because
              they often feed by extruding their cardiac stomach over their prey for external
              digestion. This feeding pattern should be a particularly strong selective force
              for surface-sequestration of chemical defenses, especially in Antarctica where
              sea stars are the major sponge predator and biting spongivores are relatively
              uncommon. Antarctic sea stars are slow moving predators that feed on individual
              sponges for long periods of time and can have patchy distributions. However,
              they are much larger than the small grazers thought to be important in inducing
              chemical defenses at lower latitudes. Previous studies by the investigators
              have established the presence and ecological role of secondary metabolites in a
              wide variety of sessile and sluggish antarctic marine invertebrates and in
              marine macroalgae. 

The current project focus on two sets of questions
              concerning the function and evolution of chemical defenses. First, the
              predictions of the Optimal Defense Theory and the Induced Defense Model of
              plant and animal chemical defenses will be tested. The former theory predicts
              that chemical defenses will be differentially sequestered in tissues that are
              most susceptible to predation. The latter theory predicts that such predators
              should select for inducible defenses and these Antarctic predator-prey
              relationships provide the opportunity to separate the issue of predator size
              from the basic predictions of the model. Second, the investigators propose to
              utilize the ecologically dominant members of the Antarctic Peninsula's rich
              macroalgal flora and the distinctive nutrient environment of coastal Antarctica
              to test predictions of multiple, interactive roles for secondary metabolites in
              brown macroalgae including predictions of the Induced Defense Model. An
              additional test will examine whether increased ultraviolet radiation in shallow
              water benthic communities caused by atmospheric ozone depletion might be
              affecting secondary metabolite production. Because of the dominance of these
              macroalgae in their communities, understanding factors that influence their
              trophic relationships are important for understanding community dynamics as a
              whole. The investigators plan to continue to vigorously pursue and foster
              opportunities to integrate their scientific research with a variety of
              educational activities, including supporting undergraduate, as well as graduate
              and postgraduate research; and science teachers through the NSF Teachers
              Experiencing Antarctica program.



