Title       : Momentum and Scalar Exchange Between Channels and Vegetated Banks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0125056

Award Number: 0125056
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $433500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heidi M. Nepf hmnepf@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0125056
Nepf
Wetland systems often consist of a branching network of channels
              cutting through regions of dense vegetation.  While the channels provide most
              of the flow conveyance, the vegetated regions provide most of the
              bioremediation and particle trapping.  Thus, exchange between the channel and
              vegetated zone may control the overall wetland function, in particular with
              regard to water quality and sediment trapping.  A similar relationship exists
              between the channel and vegetated bank of a river system.  Laboratory
              experiments will be used to quantify the exchange of momentum and mass between
              a channel and a zone of emergent vegetation of equal or lesser depth (a bank),
              and to develop a model that predicts this exchange from representative
              vegetation and flow parameters.  In the flume model, the exchange will be
              observed by tracking the evolution of dye plumes released from different
              locations within the channel and vegetated zone.  The model vegetation will be
              designed using geometric and dynamic similarity to real vegetation.  A
              preliminary flow visualization study will be used to assess major mechanisms,
              to define ranges of behavior across different geometry, and to refine the
              experimental system.  Subsequent detailed studies will simultaneously measure
              concentration and velocity to directly quantify turbulent fluxes of momentum
              and mass.   The study will draw from existing models for floodplains, including
              the effects of vegetation on hydraulic roughness and floodplain geomorphology. 
              After the completion of this project, future phases of this research will
              integrate the new model for exchange between channels and vegetated zones with
              existing models for channel flow and vegetated flow to construct a
              comprehensive wetland model capable of predicting wetland circulation and
              transport.  This model will provide an important tool for managing wetland
              systems by enabling stake holders to predict the changes in wetland function
              that will arise with proposed development and land-use changes.

