Title       : Collaborative Proposal: Active Faulting Within the Eastern Tibetan Margin and
               Western Sichuan Basin, P. R. China
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a0125565

Award Number: 0125565
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Arthur G. Goldstein                     
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198125             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Ellis ellis@ceri.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander L. Densmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The eastern margin of Tibet is one of the most enigmatic plateau margins in the
              world.  Elevations rise from less than 500 m within the Sichuan Basin to more
              than 6.5 km over a distance of about 30 to 50 km.  This is steeper than the
              Himalayan front, which owes its origin to the active thrusting of the Indian
              subcontinent under Tibet.  In stark contrast to the Himalaya, however, the
              eastern margin of Tibet shows insignificant evidence of active thrusting. 
              Moreover, the lack of a significant sedimentary basin adjacent to the margin
              and the absence of geodetic shortening further testify to the insignificance of
              active thrusting.

New field investigations indicate that while active
              thrusting is indeed scarce, there is ample evidence for significant active
              strike-slip faulting.  Initial reconnaissance field investigation reveals three
              and possibly four significant right-lateral strike-slip faults that trend NE,
              and two major left-lateral strike-slip faults that trend ~N-S.  Research is now
              focused on determining the rates and detailed geometry of these faults, each of
              which are critical components in planned attempts at constraining relative
              crustal motions in the region.  These observations are able to constrain the
              various proposed hypotheses and therefore enable us to understand the evolution
              of this part of the Tibetan margin.

Early investigation has also revealed
              the likelihood of significant active faulting within the Sichuan Basin.  This
              is of particular concern, because the suspect faults may represent significant
              strong ground motions and the Sichuan Basin is home to about 60 million
              people.

Rates of fault slip are being determined by a careful sampling
              strategy whereby the ages of landforms that have been offset by faulting are
              being estimated by cosmogenic radionuclide analyses.  The style and pattern of
              active faulting is being determined by a combination of imagery analysis,
              topographic analyses, and detailed field mapping in regions previously
              identified during reconnaissance field work.  The combination of slip rates and
              fault geometry yields a set of kinematics that discriminate among the competing
              models.
