Title       : Towards a Robust Constitutive Law for Calcite Rocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2001  
File        : a0125669

Award Number: 0125669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199997             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Brian Evans brievans@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0125669
J. Brian Evans


In this project the investigators focus on
              crystal plastic mechanisms involving dislocation creep and diffusion flow. Our
              understanding of the creep strength of calcite rocks, which are usually complex
              polyphase assemblages, is largely based on data from a few relatively pure
              limestones and marbles, from single-phase synthetic marbles, or even from
              single crystals, and, with a few exceptions, only over very small strain
              increments. Based on experience with deformation of other rocks and ceramics,
              one might expect rock strength to be highly dependent on dispersed second
              phases, solute impurities, preexisting porosity, grain size, and grain-size
              distribution, as well as temperature, pressure, and pore-fluid chemistry. The
              standard paradigm, steady-state power-law creep, as applied to calcite rocks,
              typically relates only temperature, stress, strain rate, and for diffusion
              creep or boundary sliding processes, grain size. Current data from tests on
              synthetic marbles with and without an added second phase, and on natural rocks
              suggest that the standard power-law equation fails to predict accurately the
              stress sensitivity of strain rate observed in conventional triaxial mechanical
              experiments in the dislocation flow regime. One particular problem may arise if
              the microstructure in the rock evolves with strain or time. Such structural
              variables might include average grain size, grain-size distribution, grain
              orientation, and dislocation structures that scale with grain-size. Previously
              it has been assumed that grain size had no influence on strength for
              high-temperature dislocation creep. In materials composed of more than one
              phase, the average grain size, shape, and distribution of second-phase
              particles, and the total amount of the second phase may also affect strength.
              In this work, carefully controlled samples of marble will be synthesized and
              tested at high temperature and pressure. The investigators intend to
              systematically investigate the effect on strength of matrix grain size,
              second-phase content, and solid solutions of magnesium, iron, manganese, and
              strontium. An important aspect of the work is the correlation of grain and
              dislocation microstructure with mechanical behavior. High strain experiments
              will be conducted using loading in simple shear, conventional triaxial
              extension, and confined torsion. The expanded data set will be used to
              construct a more robust constitutive law, applicable to a larger set of
              thermodynamic conditions.

