Title       : Electrostatic Tools for Learning and Assessment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0125831

Award Number: 0125831
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curtis J. Hieggelke curth@jjc.cc.il.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              David P. Maloney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Kanim  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Joliet Junior College
	      1215 Houbolt Road
	      Joliet, IL  60431    815/729-9020

NSF Program : 7427      CCLI-EDUCATIONAL MATERIALS DEV
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7427,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Physics (13) The objective of this project is to produce a collection of
              easy-to-administer, ready-to-use, classroom- and student-tested materials in
              electrostatics (electrically-charged objects, static electric fields, and
              electric potential) that can be used as classroom materials, web assignments,
              or homework assignments. In addition, pre/post- assessment tools in the same
              area are being developed. These focused materials will employ TIPERs (Tasks
              Inspired by Physics Education Research) that are easily incorporated partially
              or as a whole into existing courses and teaching styles. This second stage
              follows a similar project in magnetism and may be followed by incremental
              development in stages concentrating on areas such as thermodynamics, waves, and
              optics. This project is a collaboration between two-year college and university
              physics faculty from institutions that have diverse, representative student
              populations. This project team is experienced in educational research as well
              as developing and implementing new approaches to, and assessment of, learning.
              These materials are being classroom tested at several institutions and will be
              made available widely in both print and electronic versions. This project
              facilitates the incorporation and application of the results of physics
              education research into classrooms and thus improve the learning of physics by
              students at post-secondary education institutions.
