Title       : Collaborative Research: Investigating Timescales of Hydrologic Transport in
               Catchments Using Natural Tracer Time Series, Theoretical Models, and
               Laboratory-Scale Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2003     
File        : a0125550

Award Number: 0125550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2002      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264069             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Kirchner kirchner@seismo.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              .0125550
Kirchner

	The travel time of water through a catchment -- that is,
              the time it takes for rainfall to reach the stream -- is a fundamental
              hydraulic parameter controlling the persistence of soluble contaminants, and
              thus the downstream consequences of pollution episodes.  A catchment is
              characterized by a distribution of travel times, reflecting the diverse flow
              paths that rainfall can take to the stream.  Thus, quantifying catchments'
              travel time distributions should help to clarify the hydrologic mechanisms
              controlling flow routing in the subsurface.  Understanding the timescales of
              transport and storage in catchments is also important for predicting how
              rainfall inputs will be chemically modified by reactions with catchment soils
              and bedrock.  But despite the importance of catchment travel time distributions
              for watershed hydrology and geochemistry, they have rarely been quantified and
              the mechanisms controlling them are poorly understood.  
	Catchment travel
              time distributions can be inferred from long-term time series of inert tracers,
              such as chloride, in rainfall and streamflow.  It has recently been shown that
              catchment travel-time distributions can have unexpectedly long "tails",
              implying that they can retain soluble contaminants for much longer than would
              otherwise be expected [Kirchner, Feng, and Neal, Fractal stream chemistry and
              its implications for contaminant transport in catchments, Nature, 403, 524-527,
              2000].  The proposed research program builds on this recent work, and has four
              main components:
a) analyses of long-term time series of rainfall and
              streamflow concentrations of chloride (a naturally occurring nonreactive
              tracer) from humid forested catchments in diverse geological settings, using
              spectral, autocorrelation, and cross-correlation methods to infer each
              catchment's characteristic travel time distribution,
b) development and
              testing of alternative conceptual models for the observed travel-time
              distributions, 
c) construction of laboratory-scale physical models to
              simulate the hypothesized mechanisms underlying these conceptual models,
              and
d) analyses of reactive tracer data, to complement the passive tracer
              (chloride) studies.
	This integrated program of data analysis, conceptual
              modeling, and laboratory-scale physical models is designed to clarify the
              mechanisms that control catchment-scale transport, storage, and mixing of
              waters and their associated solutes.  This project is expected to lead to:
a)
              improved understanding of catchment flowpaths and travel time distributions,
              and the factors controlling them,
b) improved understanding of how catchment
              flowpaths, and reactions between aqueous and solid phases, affect the mobility
              of reactive solutes at catchment scale,
c) improved tools for using hydrologic
              and geochemical time series to probe the internal workings of catchments,
              and
d) improved methods for testing catchment flow and routing models through
              comparisons with field data.

