Title       : Development And Commercialization of Advanced Wood-Based Composites In Maine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2001 
File        : a0125343

Award Number: 0125343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $575543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Habib J. Dagher dagherh@maine.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James S. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Davids  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Heather Almquist  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125343	
Dagher		

This award is to the University of Maine to support the
              activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in response
              to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners for the award include the University of Maine
              (Lead Institution), Maine Technology Institute, Eastern Maine Development
              Corporation, State Department of Economic and Community Development, The
              Manufacturing Extension Partnership, Maine Department of Transportation,
              Louisiana Pacific, Dow Chemical, State Farm Insurance, Henderson and Bodwell,
              The Kenway Corporation, Market Development Alliance of the FRP Composites
              Industry, APA the Engineered Wood Association, National Institutes of Standards
              and Technology, USDA Forest Products Laboratory.

Proposed Activities
The
              award will support the following activities: (1) strengthen partnerships among
              the University of Maine, private industry, state organizations, forest product
              industry organizations, and national laboratories to foster commercialization
              of composite reinforced wood, (2) develop innovative strategies for
              commercializing composite reinforced wood hybrids that can become models for
              other university research centers, establish commercialization projects
              (reinforced wood composite beams using low-grade hardwoods, disaster-resistant
              housing using reinforced sheathing panels, novel long-strand composite lumber
              beams and columns).

Proposed Innovation
Housing industry in the US accounts
              for 28% of the total construction industry, and most of the wood used is
              high-grade conventional wood lumber.  The supply of high-grade lumber is
              declining in the US.  Reinforced composite wood will allow the use of low-grade
              lumber from other species of trees in more abundant supply, and provide skilled
              jobs in Maine.  These products will lower the cost of wood products for housing
              in the US.  Increasing the resistance of housing to disasters such as
              hurricanes and earthquakes will make a major impact on the economy of the
              nation.

Potential Economic Impact
Ninety percent of Maine is forested, and
              25% of the state's economy is based on forest resources.  The forest economy
              has traditionally been based on export of raw lumber with unskilled labor and
              few value added timber products.  Other manufacturing jobs have moved from the
              state recently, leaving unskilled jobs and service industries (e.g., tourism)
              as the major source of income.  Successful commercialization of composite
              reinforced wood will play a large role in developing a growing state economy. 
              Lower costs for wood products for housing construction will have a major
              economic impact in the US.  Increasing the resistance of housing to disasters
              will lower the cost of repair, maintenance, and insurance for
              disasters.

Potential Societal Impact
Maine ranks 29th in the nation in
              terms of advanced degree scientists/engineers and 50th in science/engineering
              graduate students.  The job market for young scientists and engineers is bleak
              in Maine.  The educational program will include entrepreneurial education as
              well as science and engineering to provide a skilled workforce for the economy
              surrounding the new wood-based technology/economy.  The housing industry
              amounts to $800 billion/year in the US alone.

