Title       : Collaborative Research: Neotectonic Structure of Terror Rift, Western Ross Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0125624

Award Number: 0125624
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry J. Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award, provided by the Antarctic Geology and Geophysics Program of the
              Office of Polar Programs, provides funds for a study to investigate the
              tectonic development of the southwestern Ross Sea region. Displacements between
              East and West Antarctica have long been proposed based on global plate
              circuits, apparent hot spot motions, interpretations of seafloor magnetic
              anomalies, paleomagnetism, and on geologic grounds. Such motions require plate
              boundaries crossing Antarctica, yet these boundaries have never been explicitly
              defined. This project will attempt to delineate the late Cenozoic - active
              boundary between East and West Antarctica along the Terror Rift in the western
              Ross Sea, where young structures have been identified, continuity between
              active extension and intracontinental structures can be established, and where
              accessibility via ship will allow new key data sets to be acquired. We will use
              multi-source marine and airborne geophysical data to map the fault patterns and
              volcanic structure along the eastern margin of the Terror Rift. The
              orientations of volcanic fissures and seamount alignments on the seafloor will
              be mapped using multibeam bathymetry. The volcanic alignments will show the
              regional extension or shear directions across the Terror Rift and the
              orientations of associated crustal stresses. Swath bathymetry and single
              channel seismic data will be used to document neotectonic fault patterns and
              the eastern limit of recent faulting. Delineation of neotectonic fault patterns
              will demonstrate whether the eastern margin of the Terror Rift forms a
              continuous boundary and whether the rift itself can be linked with postulated
              strike-slip faults in the northwestern Ross Sea. Seafloor findings from this
              project will be combined with fault kinematic and stress field determinations
              from the surrounding volcanic islands and the Transantarctic Mountains. The
              integrated results will test the propositions that the eastern boundary of the
              Terror Rift forms the limit of the major, late Cenozoic -active structures
              through the Ross Sea and that Terror Rift kinematics involve dextral
              transtension linked to the right-lateral strike-slip faulting to the north.
              These results will help constrain the kinematic and dynamic links between the
              West Antarctic rift system and Southern Ocean structures and any related
              motions between East and West Antarctica.  In the first year, a collaborative
              structural analysis of existing multichannel and single channel seismic
              profiles and aeromagnetic data over the Terror Rift will be conducted. The
              location of volcanic vents or fissures and any fault scarps on the sea floor
              will be identified and a preliminary interpretation of the age and kinematics
              of deformation in the Terror Rift will be produced. Late in the second year, a
              one-month cruise on RVIB N.B. Palmer will carry out multibeam bathymetric and
              sidescan sonar mapping of selected portions of the seafloor of Terror Rift.
              Gravity, magnetics, seismic reflection and Bathy2000 3.5 kHz sub-bottom profile
              data will also be collected across the rift. In the third year, we will use
              these multisource data to map the orientations and forms of volcanic bodies and
              the extent and geometry of neotectonic faulting associated with the Terror
              Rift. The project will: 1) complete a map of neotectonic faults and volcanic
              structures in the Terror Rift; 2) interpret the structural pattern to derive
              the motions and stresses associated with development of the rift; 3) compare
              Terror Rift structures with faults and lineaments mapped in the Transantarctic
              Mountains to improve age constraints on the structures; and 4) integrate the
              late Cenozoic structural interpretations from the western Ross Sea with
              Southern Ocean plate boundary kinematics.

