Title       : Shelf-Basin Exchange of Large-Bodied Zooplankton [Copepods] in the Chukchi and
               Beaufort Seas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  2002   
File        : a0125004

Award Number: 0125004
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $856217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon L. Smith ssmith@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack W. Fell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5219,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Physical forcing in the North Pacific/Western Arctic region exhibits abrupt
              regime shifts in which several decades (~25-35 years) of relatively cold, icy
              (2% above average) conditions are replaced in the span of a year or two by
              decades of warmer, less icy (3% below average) conditions; these cycles of
              climate in the region can be traced back at least to the late 1700s. The
              response of the Chukchi/Beaufort shelf ecosystem to warmer climate could follow
              two quite different pathways. In one scenario, warm periods would reduce ice
              cover and could create stronger thermal stratification, less mixing, limited
              nutrient supply, lower primary production, smaller-sized phytoplankton and
              smaller, coastal-like zooplankton. In a second scenario, also during warm
              periods with less ice, increased wind could result in shelf-break upwelling and
              mixing, enhanced nutrient supply, larger-sized phytoplankton and larger,
              deep-water zooplankton advected
onto the shelf. Will global change,
              particularly warming, result in more large-sized zooplankton which support
              fish, birds, and mammals over the Chukchi and Beaufort shelves and slopes or
              smaller-sized zooplankton which will diminish the fish, birds, and mammals and
              favor sedentary benthic organisms?
Large-bodied copepods on the Chukchi and
              Beaufort shelves must be advected there from the slope waters of the Arctic
              Ocean or Bering Sea; none of them can complete their life cycles on the shelf
              itself. Therefore, they are tracers of shelf-basin exchanges. The project will
              seek to understand which large-bodied copepods reach the Chukchi (wide) and
              Beaufort (narrow) shelves, and the physical forcing (upwelling, intrusions,
              eddies) that is responsible. Once on the shelves, how do size and reproductive
              responses of large copepods vary spatially, and what are the roles of physical
              processes and food supply? These responses define the robustness of the shelf
              habitat for supporting a pelagic ecosystem. The project will determine which
              copepods are transported off the shelves and the physical processes (eddies,
              plumes) associated with that transport. The investigation will integrate these
              ecosystem measurements with the physical forcing (both observations and models)
              to understand how advection shapes the food web in the region.

