Title       : Delaware Valley Community College and High School Outreach Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EHR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  2001 
File        : a0125668

Award Number: 0125668
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $599999             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Luzzi luzzi@sol1.lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Graves  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ali A. Houshmand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sally D. Solomon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eduardo D. Glandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125668	
Luzzi			

This award is to the University of Pennsylvania to support
              the activity described below for 36 months.  The proposal was submitted in
              response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners in this effort are the University of
              Pennsylvania (Lead Institution), Drexel University, the Collegiate Consortium,
              HUBS (Hospitals, Universities, Businesses, Schools), MAGPI (Metropolitan Area
              GifaPop in Philadelphia for Internet2), Bucks County Community College,
              Delaware County CC, Montgomery County CC, the CC of Philadelphia in
              Pennsylvania, Camden County CC in New Jersey, Delaware Technical CC in
              Delaware, Hartford CC in Maryland, SAIC through HUBS, Centocor, Cephalon,
              Sunthes, Life Sensors, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and Ben Franklin
              Technology Partners.

Proposed Activities
This proposal presents a
              partnership or academic, non-profit and corporate partners in the Pennsylvania,
              New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland region to provide the infrastructure, curriculum
              development, teacher training and curriculum implementation for Associates
              Degree programs in nano- and nano-bio-technology.  The proposal includes the
              building of an infrastructure that will leverage the power of high bandwidth
              communications for regional virtual classrooms and telexperimentation.  The
              program also includes outreach to high schools in the region.

Proposed
              Innovation
The proposal centers on the need for a technically skilled
              workforce, if the region is to achieve its full economic potential in the
              technology-rich pharmaceutical, life science and advanced chemical sectors. 
              The companies in these technology sectors will need workers from PhDs to
              technicians to enable growth and economic well-being.  The partners propose a
              coordinated effort in tech-based outreach for education and training,
              especially at the associates degree level.  Approaches included are internet
              portal and collaboration groupware to support dynamic formation of research
              teams and virtual classrooms, distance learning, tele-experimentation with
              remote participation in experiments via near-real-time digital images of
              scientific instruments, high-bandwidth communication through Internet 2 for
              video-conferencing.

Potential Economic Impact
Partnerships with
              universities, community colleges, the private sector, and regional government
              are needed to provide the workforce education/training from associate degree
              through PhD degrees will provide the workforce needed to attract and retain
              high-tech industry in pharmaceuticals, advanced chemical, and life sciences to
              the four-state region.

Potential Societal Impact
Currently a significantly
              lower percentage of the high school graduates in the region receive education
              beyond high school than for Silicon Valley.  The region needs a highly-trained
              workforce to attract and retain industry for high paying jobs.  The young
              people in the region now have to accept low-paying jobs or relocate.  This
              integrated effort will provide the training and the jobs needed to change
              that.


