Title       : Collaborative Research: Dynamics and Climatic Response of the Taylor Glacier
               System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0125579

Award Number: 0125579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $307704             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt M. Cuffey kcuffey@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to significantly improve our understanding of how
              Taylor Glacier flows and responds to climate changes.  Taylor Glacier drains
              the Taylor Dome region of the East Antarctic Ice Sheet and terminates in Taylor
              Valley, one of the Dry Valleys of Victoria Land.  It provides a crucial and
              unique link between two intensively studied Antarctic environments: the Taylor
              Dome, from which a 130 kyr ice core paleoclimate record has recently been
              extracted, and the Dry Valleys, a pivotal Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER)
              site and a focus of research on geomorphology and glacial geology.  The
              proposed work will thus make an important contribution to ongoing efforts to
              exploit the Taylor Dome - Dry Valleys system to build a uniquely comprehensive
              view of regional long-term environmental changes.  The proposed work has two
              complementary components: field research and numerical modelling. Two field
              seasons will be used to measure velocity, surface strain rate, mass balance,
              ice thickness, glacier bed reflectance, and subglacial topography, along a
              nearly complete longitudinal transect of the Taylor Glacier, and along select
              cross-valley transects.  This information will be used to constrain numerical
              models of ice and heat flow for the Taylor Dome - Taylor Glacier system. These
              calibrated models will be used to analyze the time-dependent response of the
              Taylor Glacier to climate changes. The synthesis of results will be aimed to
              improve understanding of the glacial geomorphology of Taylor Valley, and to
              illuminate impacts on the Taylor Valley lakes ecosystem.  The project will have
              a major role in furthering the careers of a doctoral-level graduate student and
              a post-doctoral researcher.
