Title       : Ecological Diversity of Miocene Mammals of Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2002   
File        : a0125663

Award Number: 0125663
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2002   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390151             (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine Badgley cbadgley@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Barry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thure E. Cerling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anna K. Behrensmeyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ecological diversity of Miocene mammals of Pakistan

Catherine Badgley, Thure
              Cerling, Anna K. Behrensmeyer, John C. Barry
EAR-0125663

Abstract

	This
              collaborative project evaluates the ecological and evolutionary responses of
              mammals to changes in climate and vegetation during the late Miocene (5 to 11
              million years ago), as known from the terrestrial record of Pakistan.  Fossils
              and sedimentary rocks of northern Pakistan are well documented by the work of
              our international research team that has conducted over 25 years of field work
              on the geology, paleontology, and paleoecology of the Siwalik sequence. 
              (Siwalik refers to fluvial sediments shed by the rising Himalayas over the last
              20 million years.)  Work to date on Siwalik sediments and vertebrate fossils,
              especially mammals, has provided a detailed record of changing fluvial systems,
              climate and vegetation, preservational attributes of fossil assemblages, and
              mammalian faunas.  This record is one of the best documented continental
              ecosystems of the Cenozoic and now presents the opportunity to evaluate changes
              in taxonomic composition, speciation, immigration, local extinction, and
              ecological attributes of mammalian species and faunas in relation to sustained
              environmental change.
	Our project involves first the creation of an
              electronic database (the Siwalik species database) for fossil mammals.  The
              database will contain ecologically informative, specimen-based measurements,
              including morphological and isotopic data for each species.  Next, we will use
              this compilation of data to test three models of how mammalian faunas changed
              over time.  One model focuses on the direct effects of changing climate and
              vegetation on the composition and ecological attributes of mammals.  The second
              model evaluates whether or not species with large geographic ranges and high
              local abundance dominate the pattern of faunal change.  The third model
              examines the hypothesis that the arrival of several species of extremely large
              mammals (the size of elephants) altered the local habitat through feeding and
              trampling and caused changes in the rest of the ecological community.  Each
              model makes a unique set of predictions about the timing and nature of faunal
              change in relation to environmental change.  These predictions will be tested
              with the data assembled in the database.
	The Siwalik species database will
              stabilize the taxonomic and ecological data for Siwalik mammals and make these
              data accessible for other studies of Old World history.  Tests of the three
              models of faunal change will demonstrate how the fossil record contributes to
              patterns and theory in community ecology.

