Title       : From Intellectual Capital to Successful Business Enterprises
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  2003  
File        : a0125516

Award Number: 0125516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek W. Urban Marek.Urban@usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cecil D. Burge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shelby F. Thames  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Angeline G. Dvorak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Y. Lochhead  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Ray Cotten  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 1662      PARTNRSHIPS FOR INNOVATION-PFI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0125516	
Urban			

This award is to the University of Southern Mississippi to
              support the activity described below for 24 months.  The proposal was submitted
              in response to the Partnerships for Innovation Program Solicitation (NSF
              0179).

Partners
The partners involved include the University of Southern
              Mississippi (Lead Institution), Petal High School, Jones Junior College, Pearl
              River Community College, Mississippi Department of Economic and Community
              Development, Mississippi Technology Alliance, Mississippi Technology
              Incorporated, Mississippi Center for Community and Economic Development, Area
              Development Partnership, Mississippi Polymer Institute, Office of Naval
              Research Laboratories, Cooperative State Research Education and Extension
              Service, National Institute of Science and Technology, John C. Stennis NASA
              Space Center, Bayer, Inc., Rohm and Haas, J.M. Huber, Eastman Chemical
              Company.

Proposed Activities
The proposed activities include: (1) develop,
              promote, and sustain an accessible infrastructure for innovation, (2) develop
              mechanisms for innovation for three model companies (an existing startup, a
              developing company, a new company), (3) design and implement educational
              program leading to the increase of the workforce.  The vision is to develop a
              mechanism capable of translating polymer science and engineering discoveries to
              commercialization through development of new and retention and enhancement of
              existing companies.

Proposed Innovation
Proposed innovations include: 
              creation of new jobs in the region, establishment of an infrastructure for beta
              testing and marketing to drive business plans and strategies for success,
              provide an educated workforce (engineers, scientists, management, sales),
              attraction of capital investors, provide continuing technical support for new
              and young companies, return of capital to the research base to ensure continued
              innovation.

Potential Economic Impact
The potential economic impacts
              include creation of three new companies with up to 300 new jobs in Mississippi
              over the next five years, establishment of an infrastructure for technical
              support for new companies to ensure success, establishment of an education
              partnership to provide a workforce from skilled laborers to Ph.D. scientists
              and engineers to support the polymers industry in Mississippi, attraction of
              investment capital to the region.

Potential Societal Impact
The major
              societal impact will be the increased standard of living for the state
              resulting from higher paying jobs and wealth/taxes from new companies in the
              state.

