Title       : Identification Problems in the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  1996  
File        : a9223220

Award Number: 9223220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204158             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Manski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Econometricians have long found it useful to separate inferential              
              problems into statistical and identification components.  Studies              
              of identification seek to characterize the conclusions that could              
              be drawn if the researcher had available a sample of unlimited                 
              size.  Studies of statistical inference seek to characterize the               
              generally weaker conclusions that can be drawn given a sample of               
              positive but finite size.  Statistical and identification                      
              problems limit in distinct ways the conclusions that may be drawn              
              in empirical research.  Statistical problems are most severe when              
              the available sample is small.  Identification problems are most               
              severe when the researcher knows little about the population                   
              under study and the sampling process yields only weak data on the              
              population.  The proposed research continues the investigator's                
              program of work on identification problems in the social                       
              sciences.  Four projects are planned: (1) continued research on                
              the selection problem; (2) analysis of identification in the                   
              presence of errors in data; (3) study of identification of                     
              endogenous social effects; and (4) investigation of the use of                 
              subjective data to identify personal expectations.                             
                                                                                             
              One of the most exciting and novel parts of the project involves               
              the use of subjective data to identify personal expectations.                  
              Distinguishing the objective and subjective determinants of                    
              behavior may be the most challenging identification problem                    
              facing social scientists.  It is certainly the problem that most               
              clearly separates the social from the natural sciences, where the              
              units of analysis are not thought of as possessing free will.                  
              For many years, economists have exercised a self-imposed                       
              prohibition on the use of subjective data in empirical analysis.               
              Economists have sought to infer the subjective constructs of                   
              economic theory, namely preferences and expectations, almost                   
              entirely from data on actual choices.  But, economists do not                  
              know whether they are making valid inferences on preferences or                
              wrong inferences based on incorrect expectations assumptions.                  
              This project develops methods that will permit economists to                   
              rethink their research conventions and entertain seriously the                 
              collection and analysis of subjective data on expectations and                 
              preferences.
