Title       : A Proposal to Develop and Test an Intensive Short Course to Train Engineering
               Faculty to Teach Engineering Ethics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9223553

Award Number: 9223553
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46432              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Rabins mrabins@mengr.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Harris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              This project will plan and test an intensive engineering ethics                
              short course for engineering faculty.  The course will take the                
              form of a two to three day summer workshop, a fall seminar                     
              series, and a capstone half day workshop in January 1994.  These               
              activities emphasize case studies, role plays, the development of              
              communication skills, team teaching and application of both                    
              analytical and creative thinking to arrive at solutions of                     
              problems in engineering ethics.  The course will train                         
              engineering faculty to teach discussion sections in the                        
              engineering ethics course at Texas A&M.  This 3 credit, elective               
              course is soon to be required of most engineering undergraduates               
              at the university, and could involve as many as 800 students each              
              year.  The short course would expose 25 faculty to most of the                 
              material covered in the course and enable them to assign and                   
              grade coursework, lead discussions, and set the tone of the                    
              course.  As a result, these instructors will be prepared to make               
              writing assignments, grade student papers, lead class discussion,              
              and set the tone of the course.  They will also be better                      
              prepared to introduce ethics case study narratives into their own              
              engineering courses.  Several engineering faculty from other                   
              campuses of the Texas A&M system will also be invited to                       
              participate in the short course.  Faculty for the course will                  
              come from Texas A&M, and from several other universities where                 
              courses similar to theirs are in existence.  These faculty may                 
              develop similar training short courses at their own institutions.              
              The short course could also be offered as a professional                       
              development activity at professional society meetings on a                     
              tuition, self supporting basis.
