Title       : History and Philosophy of Non-Archimedean Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1994  
File        : a9223839

Award Number: 9223839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Edward J. Hackett                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Ehrlich   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Between the 1870's and the appearance of A. Robinson's                         
              extraordinary work, "Non-standard Analysis" in 1961, there emerged             
              a large, diverse, technically deep and philosophically pregnant                
              body of consistent (non-Archimedean) mathematics of the infinitely             
              large and infinitely small.  Unlike non-standard analysis, which is            
              concerned with providing a treatment of the calculus making use of             
              infinitesimals, most of the former work either focused on geometry             
              and the concepts of number and magnitude, or grew out of the                   
              natural evolution of such discussions.  Moreover, whereas non-                 
              standard analysis derives its arithmetic content from an                       
              exceptionally narrow, albeit an extremely important, subclass of               
              the class of real-closed ordered number systems, the former work               
              deals with arbitrary ordered number fields as well as with ordered             
              general conception of numbers great and small, as well as with                 
              ordered number systems having failures of communitivity,                       
              associativity, etc.  This so-called non-Archimedean mathematics                
              thereby reveals a more general conception of numbers great and                 
              small, as well as a richer theory of the infinitely large and                  
              infinitely small.  This body of work, published under the rubric               
              The Theory of Non-Archimedean Geometric and (Totally) Ordered                  
              Algebraic Systems has continued to grow in recent decades producing            
              a number of major accomplishments including J.H. Conway's work on              
              Surreal Numbers.                                                               
                                                                                             
              In this project, Dr. Ehrlich aims to provide a detailed sketch of              
              the historical development of this largely ignored but                         
              philosophically important subject, and to develop a number of the              
              philosophical implications of its results for the concepts of                  
              number, the infinite, the infinitesimal, and the continuum, as well            
              as for a number of issues in the philosophy of measurement and the             
              philosophy of space and time.
