Title       : Reference Networks and Scientific Development: A Comparative Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1993      
File        : a9223317

Award Number: 9223317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Overmann                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Lowell L. Hargens   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In the "great chain of being" humankind is placed at the top of the            
              hierarchy of creation.  In science, ironically, the study of humans            
              and their behavior is ranked at the bottom in prestige and funding.            
              Physical and biological sciences are "hard" sciences while social              
              sciences are "soft."  This ranking is maintained even within the               
              "science of science" which has sought to support via citation                  
              studies the view that scientific research within the physical and              
              biological sciences are progressive along a fast-moving research               
              front while the softer social and behavioral sciences fail to                  
              progress beyond the founding theories of their disciplines.                    
                                                                                             
              Derek de Solla Price, founder of the modern "science of science"               
              argued in 1965 and 1970 that a basic feature of the production of              
              scientific knowledge is researchers' tendency to build on                      
              relatively recent work.  Price claimed that this tendency evidences            
              a cumulative enterprise in which scholars extend recently won                  
              knowledge, and that it distinguishes the production of scientific              
              knowledge from humanistic knowledge.  If this is true, he argued,              
              reference networks for scientific literatures should show a                    
              concentration of references to relatively recently published papers            
              --the "research front"--and few to older papers--the "archive."                
              Price argued that humanistic scholarship shows a different pattern,            
              one in which the age of a previously published document is                     
              uncorrelated with its probability of being cited.  Finally, he                 
              claimed that reference networks in the social and behavioral                   
              sciences fall somewhere between these two extremes.                            
                                                                                             
              Although Price's thesis has been an important guiding principle in             
              "scientometrics" and bibliometrics, he presented only weak evidence            
              for these claims.  Professor Hargens is examining whether research             
              in different fields generate the characteristic reference-network              
              patterns Price hypothesized.  Such a study will provide evidence on            
              putative differences--or similarities--between "hard" and "soft"               
              sciences, and will allow us to begin integrating results from                  
              micro-studies of individual journal articles and macro-studies of              
              entire research literatures
