Title       : Electronic Properties, Magnetotransport and STM in Quasi-One-and-Two-Dimensional
               Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1995       
File        : a9223576

Award Number: 9223576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bellave S. Shivaram bss2d@Virginia.Edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert V. Coleman  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 9003
	      Charlottesville, VA  229069003    804/924-0311

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research involves the study of electronic structure due to                
              charge-density waves (CDWs) and spin-density waves (SDWs) in lower             
              dimensional metals, semimetals and semiconductors.  The research               
              utilizes scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force                  
              microscopy (AFM) to detect both the atomic and electronic structure            
              with resolution on the scale of individual atoms and correlates the            
              results with studies of the effects of high magnetic fields on the             
              electronic transport properties of the some materials.  The                    
              materials to be investigated include transition metal                          
              chalcogenides, as well as more complex crystals such as tantalum               
              nickel selenide.  This combination of the above techniques provides            
              a unique characterization of the electronic modifications                      
              associated with CDWs, SDWs and mixed density waves.  They also                 
              provide extremely sensitive detection of modifications in the CDW              
              structure as induced by impurity doping.  Doping of                            
              trichalcogenides produces new electronic phases, metal-insulator               
              transitions and modified CDWs, all of which can be detected by STM             
              spectroscopy, AFM scanning and high magnetic field transport.                  
              Results should provide a detailed understanding of the electronic              
              properties of materials as modified by the presence of density-                
              waves in the electron gas as well as changes in the electronic                 
              density waves due to impurity doping.                                          
              %%%                                                                            
              The highly anisotropic metals being studied in this research and               
              the unusual electronic properties associated with density-waves                
              provide insight into new electronic modifications of materials.                
              Studies of these properties on an atomic scale by scanning                     
              tunneling microscopy (STM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM),                  
              combined with macroscopic measurements of the associated electronic            
              conduction phenomena in high magnetic fields, lead to a unique                 
              understanding of the overall electronic structure.  The STM and AFM            
              studies provide a picture of both the crystal structure and the                
              electronic structure at the atomic level.  These methods are                   
              extremely sensitive to modifications by impurities and defects and             
              can be used to systematically follow impurity atom locations,                  
              ordering and the formation of new electronic phases in the                     
              crystals.  The accompanying modifications of the electronic and                
              magnetotransport properties will correlate the changes in atomic               
              configuration and local electronic structure with the overall                  
              electronic response of the material.  The development of these                 
              methods should be extremely useful for the design and testing of               
              new electronic materials.
