Title       : Dissertation Research: Comparative Foraging Psychology of Golden Lion Tamarins
               and Wied's Marmosets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1993  
File        : a9223912

Award Number: 9223912
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jonathan S. Friedlaender                
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8120               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Platt  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  A number of primatologists contend that primate and human                 
              intelligence evolved in the context of exploiting "patchily"                   
              distributed, high quality food, such as fruits, as against                     
              leaves. Among primates, species that rely on patchy resources do               
              exhibit larger brains relative to body size than those that rely               
              on evenly distributed foods.  This relationship suggests that the              
              distribution of food has been important in the evolution of                    
              increased brain size and its presumed cognitive correlates.                    
              However, the extent to which primates exhibit particular                       
              cognitive skills adapted to specific foraging problems rather                  
              than a general purpose intelligence suited to a broad range of                 
              tasks, is still open to investigation.                                         
                                                                                             
                   This dissertation project will investigate the relationship               
              of dietary preferences and spatial memory in two primate species.              
              The graduate student will compare a leaf eating and a fruit                    
              eating prosimian is a series of sophisticated laboratory tests                 
              involving spatial memory - defined as their ability to find and                
              relocate objects in space (the fruit eaters should be superior).               
              Then, the species will be tested for non-spatial memory, where                 
              they would not be expected to differ.  Finally, experiments have               
              been devised which may examine the mechanisms underlying spatial               
              memory in the different species.
