Title       : Monte Carlo Investigation of Three Issues: Exact Monetary Aggregation under
               Risk, Tests for Nonlinearity and Chaos, and the AIM Model's Regularity
               Properties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 22,  1995  
File        : a9223557

Award Number: 9223557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49991              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Barnett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              If there is risk aversion relative to current period prices or                 
              interest rates, the tracking properties of all statistical index               
              numbers, including the Divisia and superlative index numbers, are              
              unknown.  Under the previous NSF grant, the investigator                       
              demonstrated that the tracking ability of the discrete time                    
              Divisia index is not seriously compromised by risk aversion.                   
              However, that study used data produced by the economy.  The use                
              of data from the economy leaves many problems unanswered.  For                 
              example, it is possible that specification errors might be large               
              and might coincidentally offset the tracking error in the Divisia              
              index.  If that were true, the conclusion that the Divisia index               
              is robust to risk aversion might be wrong.  This project uses a                
              Monte Carlo approach to generate simulated data in which only one              
              possible source of tracking error remains: the degree of risk                  
              aversion.  The results of this project are important for monetary              
              policy because monetary aggregates are used by monetary                        
              authorities to track the performance of the economy.  The                      
              research is also methodologically significant because it requires              
              computationally demanding replications of state of the art                     
              nonlinear rational expectations models.
