Title       : Archaeological Reconnaissance at Chau Hiix
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9223103

Award Number: 9223103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66498              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Anne Pyburn APYBURN@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Anne Pyburn and her               
              collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological research at            
              the site of Chau Hiix. This site, located in the lowlands of                   
              Belize, was only brought to archaeological attention in 1990 and is            
              extremely unusual because villagers who live in the region have                
              protected it from looting. Preliminary research suggests that Chau             
              Hiix served as a major regional center because it contains a number            
              of mounds and associated courtyards. In this first season of work              
              Dr. Pyburn and her colleagues will map and survey the site. They               
              will conduct limited excavations on visible structures and also                
              carry out a program of coring to determine whether less obvious                
              archaeological features are also present. On this basis they should            
              be able to provide more exact dates for the span of occupation and             
              obtain a better idea of its internal organization. These data will             
              provide the basis to design a second, more extensive project.                  
                                                                                             
              The Maya constitute a central focus of archaeological interest                 
              because they developed a civilization with monumental architecture,            
              writing and large population concentrations in a difficult lowland             
              tropical environment. Just as mysteriously as it arose, the Maya               
              civilization then declined as large centers were abandoned and                 
              large scale construction ceased. Dr. Pyburn wishes to gain insight             
              into this process. In the last decade Belize has been the scene of             
              much archaeological research and a number of Mayan sites have been             
              studied. It is unclear to what extent each functioned as an                    
              independent center and it is not known whether sites were grouped              
              into larger functional units. Through excavation of Chau Hiix and              
              comparison with other sites known from the area Dr. Pyburn wishes              
              to examine this question.                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide                
              insight into how complex societies arise, are maintained and                   
              decline. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists               
              and assist in the training of undergraduate students.
