Title       : Dissertation Research on Regional Structure of Species Assemblages and
               Conservation of Small Mammals in South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9223313

Award Number: 9223313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Brown jbrown@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 5926,
Abstract    :
              This Americas Program award will fund a                                        
              dissertation improvement research by Dr. James                                 
              H. Brown, graduate advisor, and Mr. Pablo A.                                   
              Marquet, PhD student, of the University of New                                 
              Mexico.  The present award will extend research                                
              on patterns of distribution and abundance of                                   
              small mammal species in the highlands, already                                 
              in progress in Argentina and Chile, to Bolivia.                                
              The investigators will collect and analyze data                                
              to test hypotheses regarding regional patterns                                 
              of assemblage structure.  Results of this                                      
              research will provide new insights and new                                     
              impetus to conservation efforts in South                                       
              American countries where human induced                                         
              landscape changes and overpopulation represent                                 
              an increasing threat to biodiversity.                                          
                                                                                             
              This research will be among the first studies                                  
              specifically designed to evaluate patterns in                                  
              the distribution and abundance of small mammal                                 
              species at a regional scale in South America.                                  
              Thus, it will open the way for comparisons with                                
              similar studies carried out in North American                                  
              deserts and will also provide the first                                        
              assessment of the conservation status of the                                   
              small mammals species inhabiting the Puna area                                 
              of Chile, Argentina and Bolivia.
