Title       : International Law and Global Environmental Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1996       
File        : a9223158

Award Number: 9223158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harmon M. Hosch                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160333             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold K. Jacobson hkj@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edith B. Weiss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
              International accords to advance the protection of the global                  
              environment are newly prominent in international relations.  Little            
              is known about their effectiveness, however, in part because                   
              standard assumptions about implementation and compliance are not               
              easily applicable when the national interest of the parties is not             
              directly at stake.  This study will gather basic data about how and            
              why ten countries entered into five environmental accords, what                
              they have done to implement them, and whether they are complying               
              with the international obligations created by these accords.  These            
              findings will be related to a set of legal, social, political and              
              economic factors that are likely to affect implementation and                  
              compliance.  The five accords to be considered address not only the            
              familiar topics of conservation of natural resources and pollution             
              but also the larger emerging topics of global environmental                    
              changes, such as ozone depletion and possible climate change.                  
              Analysis of these data will provide the empirical basis for an                 
              important theoretical contribution to our understanding of the                 
              effectiveness of international agreements in the new circumstances             
              of the contemporary world.                                                     
                                                                                             
              The project will include field work and data collection in all ten             
              countries.  Interviews will be conducted with key participants in              
              the process.  The project aims to create a data base to be used by             
              other scholars as well as the knowledge necessary to provide                   
              guidance for policy communities in the global environmental field.             
              It is anticipated that this project will be the basis for                      
              developing a field of study that is comparable in rigor and                    
              knowledge to the study of arms control.
