Title       : Adsorption on Weak Binding Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9223775

Award Number: 9223775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Taborek ptaborek@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Rutledge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9223775  Taborek    This research project focuses on fundamental studies of
              adsorbed  films of hydrogen, helium and neon on alkali metals and frozen 
              hydrogen.  The binding between the films and the substrates is  weak, and as a
              result the adsorbed films display phases and phase  transitions that do not
              occur on strong binding substrates (where  the binding energy of the first few
              layers of adsorbate to the  substrate is larger than the binding energy of the
              adsorbate to  itself).  Theoretical analysis indicates that these systems 
              represent the entire range of weak binding behavior.  The emphasis  will be on
              the determining the dependence of features of the  prewetting phase diagram on
              the adsorbate-substrate and adsorbate-  adsorbate interaction parameters and on
              understanding the interplay  between prewetting and bulk phase transitions,
              inducing superfluid  onset in helium and the triple and critical points for the
               classical systems.  The predominant technique will be the  measurement of
              adsorption isotherms using microbalances  supplemented by calorimetry and third
              sound.  %%%  The behavior of adsorbed films of liquid on solid surfaces is of 
              interest from both fundamental and technical viewpoints.  The study  of the
              behavior of liquid films as they wet surfaces is complicated  by the presence
              of various impurities at normal temperatures.  This  research will investigate
              the wetting of a range of surfaces by  helium, hydrogen and neon.  These films
              require ultralow  temperatures, where impurity effects are essentially absent. 
              The  research will test recent theoretical predictions that suggest that  the
              surface behavior of the various films will include unusual  phase transitions
              that can be investigated by sensitive calorimety  and microbalance techniques. 
              The research will test these theories  and potentially lead to films with new
              properties that may suggest  new technological applications.  ***
