Title       : US-Poland Joint Fund Research on Mechanisms Controlling Intramuscular Lipid
               Metabolism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1993      
File        : a9223864

Award Number: 9223864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : January 1,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Hanna Kaciuba-Uscilko   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polish Academy of Science
	      
	      Warsaw, PL  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Poland Marie Sklodowska-Curie Joint                                    
              Fund research project between Dr. Hanna                                        
              Kaciuba-Uscilko of the Department of Applied                                   
              Physiology, Medical Research Center, Polish                                    
              Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, and Dr. Ronald L.                                 
              Terjung, Department of Physiology, State                                       
              University of New York, Syracuse, is on                                        
              "Mechanisms Controlling Intramuscular Lipid                                    
              Metabolism."  Skeletal muscles play an                                         
              important role in the whole lipid metabolism                                   
              since they remove a considerable amount of                                     
              circulating lipids that are partly oxidized and                                
              partly stored, forming an intramuscular                                        
              triacylglycerol (TG) pool.  However,                                           
              contribution of intramuscular TG to energy                                     
              metabolism at rest and during exercise as well                                 
              as systemic and local mechanisms controlling TG                                
              synthesis and utilization in muscle cells are                                  
              poorly recognized.  The purposes of the planned                                
              study are: (1) to elaborate an adequate system                                 
              for quantitative estimation of intramuscular TG                                
              metabolic turnover; (2) to determine an                                        
              influence of muscle contractions of different                                  
              intensity and duration on the rate of synthesis                                
              and utilization of intramuscular TG, and to                                    
              estimate TG contribution to exercise energy                                    
              metabolism; (3) to investigate the effects of                                  
              physical training, nutritional status, dietary                                 
              modifications and some hormones on the                                         
              intramuscular TG metabolism; (4) to evaluate                                   
              interactions between the systems controlling                                   
              intramuscular TG metabolism, the mechanisms of                                 
              lipid removal from the plasma by skeletal                                      
              muscles and the whole body lipid metabolism.                                   
              The results are supposed to enlarge the                                        
              understanding of metabolic adaptation to                                       
              physical work, and dietary modifications and                                   
              the role of physiological factors in prevention                                
              and therapy of some lipid metabolism                                           
              disturbances-- e.g., atherosclerosis, obesity.                                 
                                                                                             
              This project in physiology fulfills the program                                
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by                                 
              enabling leading experts in Poland and the                                     
              United States to combine complementary talents                                 
              and pool resources in areas of strong mutual                                   
              interest and competence.
