Title       : Synchrotron Radiation Investigation of Electronic, Structural and Catalytic
               Properties of Alkali Metal-Covered Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9223710

Award Number: 9223710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zdenek Hurych   (Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick Soukiassian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a continuation of a research program to study the              
              modification of solid surfaces by alkali metal overlayers.  The                
              effort focuses on investigating the electronic promotion of surface            
              reactions and on the modification of the electronic and atomic                 
              structure of several important semiconductors and metals by alkali             
              overlayers and the catalytic oxidation and nitridation of                      
              semiconductors.  The project is based on technique of photoelectron            
              spectroscopy using the soft x-ray spectrum provided by the high                
              brilliance 1 GeV electron storage ring at the Synchrotron Radiation            
              Center of the University of Wisconsin-Madison.  In addition to the             
              electronic properties, information on the atomic structure of                  
              investigated interfaces is provided by the use of the relatively               
              new technique of photoemission extended x-ray absorption fine                  
              structure.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              Knowledge of the atomic and electronic structure of metal                      
              semiconductor and semiconductor/oxide interfaces is essential to               
              the basic understanding of these systems, as well as for the                   
              optimum performance of current and future electronic devices.  This            
              project coveres several experimental spectroscopic techniques using            
              existing national resources at the 1 GeV Synchrotron Radiation                 
              Center, at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.  The work will                 
              provide valuable information on the electronic structure, atomic               
              geometry, and the microscopic mechanisms of important catalytic                
              reactions like oxidation or nitridation of the semiconductor and               
              metal surfaces under investigation.                                            
                                                                                             
              The potential impact of this research on the applied and                       
              technological areas of metal/semiconductor interfaces is                       
              indicated by two recent U.S. patents.
