Title       : Studying Changes in the Rules of the U.S. House of Representatives: Electorial
               Forces and Majority Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  1995     
File        : a9223337

Award Number: 9223337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rick K. Wilson                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33972              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evelyn C. Fink efink@unlinfo.uni.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian D. Humes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the relationship between changes in the              
              rules of legislative procedure of the U.S. House of Representatives            
              and the electoral environment.  The genesis of rules changes in the            
              Congress is of significant theoretical interest.  Many studies of              
              Congress have chronicled the occurrence of historic rules changes              
              in the House while others have created theoretical models of why               
              institutional rules have an independent effect on the determination            
              of policy outcomes within the chamber.  In addition, students of               
              American political parties, at the congressional level, have argued            
              that party change was responsive to changes in the American agenda.            
                                                                                             
              This project explores and tests the degree to which the changes in             
              the electorate also caused changes in the rules of the House as a              
              response to changing electoral demands.  Specifically, the project             
              tests the following relationship between electoral influences and              
              institutional change:  major rules changes will not occur directly             
              after rapid and major alterations take place in the coalitions that            
              make up the two major political parties and in the issues that                 
              divide them and dominate politics.                                             
                                                                                             
              Testing this hypothesis requires the creation of a database on                 
              proposed rules changes in the U.S. House.  A major product of the              
              project will be the creation of a database concerning proposed                 
              changes of the rules in the House from the First through the One               
              Hundredth Congress.  Data will not be collected on the size and                
              cohesion of the political parties in the House since that is                   
              available elsewhere.  The primary data source is the Journal of the            
              House of Representatives for each session of Congress.  The                    
              Journals for the Sixteenth through the Hundredth Congress are                  
              available at the host institution of the Principal Investigator.               
                                                                                             
              The data collected will be archived with the Inter-University                  
              Consortium for Political and Social Research at the University of              
              Michigan.  This database should enable further research which will             
              enhance substantially our understanding of the topic.
