Title       : A Laboratory Study of Price Formation and Learning in Auction Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9223461

Award Number: 9223461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Friedman dan@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              How do self-interested traders with private information arrive at              
              equilibrium prices for market exchange?  This question of price                
              formation has always been central to economic theory.  The                     
              question is also crucial in practical applications because many                
              policy interventions (ranging from job retraining programs to SEC              
              reporting requirements in securities markets) are intended to                  
              influence the adjustment to equilibrium and therefore their                    
              effectiveness depends entirely on the price formation process.                 
              Unfortunately, the underlying price formation process is still                 
              not well understood, despite centuries of theoretical debate and               
              crucial practical implications.  This project conducts four sets               
              of laboratory experiments designed to shed new light on the price              
              formation process.  One set employs the Continuous Double Auction              
              (CDA) market institution, which is known to promote exceptionally              
              rapid and reliable price formation in the laboratory.  A second                
              set of experiments employs the Single Call Market (SCM), less                  
              commonly seen in the field and less efficient in the laboratory                
              but better understood theoretically than the CDA.  The other sets              
              of experiments examine intermediate trading institutions called                
              the Multiple Call Market (MCM) and the Uniform Price Double                    
              Auction (UPDA).                                                                
                                                                                             
              This project provides new empirical evidence on price formation                
              process by addressing two major shortcomings in existing                       
              laboratory data.  First, almost all market experiments are                     
              repetitively stationary (or use fixed additive shifts), so                     
              equilibrium price remains constant (or shifts in lockstep) across              
              trading periods.  Such an experiment provides only a single                    
              observation of price formation, spread across several trading                  
              periods.  The proposed experiments incorporates random values -                
              private cost and value parameters drawn independently each period              
              from announced uniform distributions.  Second, although it is                  
              clear that the price formation process depends crucially on the                
              market institutions, the institutional variations in most                      
              experiments are insufficient to identify why and how market                    
              institutions matter.  The proposed experiments incorporate wide                
              institutional variations.  Data analysis will be used to test the              
              three promising theoretical approaches found in recent literature              
              to understanding price formation.
