Title       : Dynamic Latent Variable Models-Likelihood Evaluation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9223365

Award Number: 9223365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Francois Richard fantin+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since the 1970's there has been a major resurgence of interest in              
              the topic of latent variable models.  Latent variable models are               
              broadly defined as variables which enter the formulation of an                 
              econometric model and yet are not (directly) observable.  Latent               
              variables are widely recognized to be major components of the                  
              behavior of economic agents.  They are inherently dynamic for a                
              broad class of models including intertemporal optimization,                    
              search or duration processes, error correction mechanisms, habit               
              formation or persistence, rational expectations and state                      
              dependence.  The likelihood functions of dynamic latent variable               
              models are mostly analytically intractable, largely because the                
              elimination of the latent variables require high dimensional                   
              interdependent integration with the additional complication that               
              the actual distribution of the latent variables conditional on                 
              the observables can rarely be seen.  Without likelihood                        
              functions, it is impossible to rigorously and accurately test                  
              economic theories with real-world data because one can not answer              
              the question what is the probability that the observations are                 
              due to chance and do not reflect the theory being tested.  A                   
              number of Monte Carlo simulation techniques have been developed                
              and used to estimate the characteristics of these likelihood                   
              functions.  The main problem arises from the fact the "brute                   
              force" MC estimates of likelihood functions typically take a                   
              prohibitively large number of iterations for all but small sample              
              sizes.  A number of acceleration techniques are currently                      
              available.  These techniques can produce fairly dramatic                       
              efficiency gains (by a factor of 1,000 or more), but they come                 
              nowhere close to what is actually required in order to render MC               
              likelihood evaluation practical for moderate to large sample                   
              sizes.  The contribution of this project comes from developing a               
              new generic acceleration technique that in a pilot study achieved              
              results unheard of in the econometric literature.  All                         
              indications are that the new technique might well constitute a                 
              major leap in Monte Carlo technology.                                          
                                                                                             
              This project operationalizes the new acceleration technique                    
              within the context of a broad range of dynamic latent variable                 
              models.  By removing a key stumbling block to the analysis of                  
              dynamic latent variable models, the new technique opens                        
              intriguing new avenues of research across a broad range of                     
              important economic applications.  In this project the technique                
              is applied it to a set of substantive real-life applications                   
              drawn from the recent literature on financial markets,                         
              disequilibrium models and housing markets.  Systematic                         
              comparisons with results derived under alternative techniques                  
              provide an assessment of the merits of the new techniques from a               
              practitioner's viewpoint.  Software needed to use the new                      
              technique will be made available to other researchers.
