Title       : Investigation of Levantine Mousterian Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9223855

Award Number: 9223855
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148284             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald O. Henry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Donald Henry will                 
              continue his archaeological research in southern Jordan. He will               
              excavate at three stratified sites proven rich in archaeological               
              remains. The materials they contain are attributable to the                    
              "Mousterian" cultural tradition and the upper layers of one have               
              been dated to ca. 65,000 years ago. All are rich in cultural                   
              remains. Work will center on a block (ca 45 square meters)                     
              excavation of Tor Faraj which contains a large deep (+3.5m)                    
              Levantine Mousterian deposit. The top 80 cm. of the deposit                    
              display hearths and ash lenses defining three "living floors." In              
              addition to analysis of lithic and faunal remains, Dr. Henry and               
              his colleagues will study the pollen and phytoliths contained in               
              the sediments as well as the matrix itself. The team's goal is to              
              reconstruct and date the changing environment and understand                   
              Mousterian adaptation within this context.                                     
                                                                                             
              Many anthropologists are interested in the question of when and                
              where anatomically modern humans emerged and how these groups                  
              spread across both the Old and New Worlds. While most recent data              
              points to an African origin, the Near East has been the focus of               
              much attention because of the apparent intermixing of "modern"                 
              and more "ancient" forms as well as the archaeological remains                 
              which characterize each. The term "Mousterian" refers to the                   
              stone tool tradition and culture which, in the Near East, North                
              Africa and Europe, characterizes the last of the pre-modern                    
              forms. Archaeologists wish to understand how these groups were                 
              socially organized and what subsistence strategies they followed               
              since they set the stage from which modern humans emerged. The                 
              sites which Dr. Henry will excavate date from the end of the                   
              Mousterian period and are thus directly relevant to this                       
              question. They are also extremely rich in cultural remains and                 
              the apparently undisturbed living floors should yield valuable                 
              social information.                                                            
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons. It will increase               
              our understanding of the factors which led to the emergence of                 
              anatomically modern humans. It will shed new light on the                      
              prehistory of the Near East and provide data of interest to many               
              archaeologists.
