Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Intelligent Distributed Control for Power
               Plants and Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1993  
File        : a9223030

Award Number: 9223030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36564              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwang Y. Lee kwanglee@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 5942,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to permit Dr. Kwang Y.                               
              Lee, Department of Electrical and Computer                                     
              Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, to                                 
              pursue with Dr.Young Moon Park, Department of                                  
              Electrical Engineering, Seoul National University,                             
              for 36 months, a program of cooperative research on                            
              intelligent distributed control for power plants and                           
              power systems.  These scientists will collaborate in                           
              research to achieve a highly automated control                                 
              system which will maximize safety, reliability, and                            
              efficiency; minimize pollution; and ensure a rapid                             
              and cost-effective load following capability.  The                             
              control systems to be developed will be applicable                             
              to nuclear and fossil-fuel power plants.                                       
                                                                                             
              In the present operating environment, system and                               
              controller failures or significant variations in                               
              operating conditions are dealt with by a human                                 
              operator who must initiate appropriate control                                 
              actions.  Utility companies, therefore, rely on the                            
              development of extensive and complicated operating                             
              procedures and operator training to cope with the                              
              nearly continual changes inherent in normal power                              
              plant operation.  The intelligent distributed                                  
              control approach offers an alternative by providing                            
              fault-accommodating control algorithms and automated                           
              reconfiguration of control strategies.  The U.S. and                           
              Korean collaborators are highly respected scientists                           
              with proven ability in this field.  They have                                  
              collaborated successfully in related research under                            
              NSF Grant No. INT-8617329.  The present project will                           
              add an international cooperative dimension to Dr.                              
              Lee's research under NSF Grant No. EID-9212132 and                             
              will allow the collaborators to combine their                                  
              talents and interests for mutual benefit.  This                                
              project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-                             
              Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to                               
              increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and                             
              Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange                           
              of scientific information, ideas, skills, and                                  
              techniques and through collaboration on problems of                            
              mutual benefit.  Korean participation in the project                           
              is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering                              
              Foundation (KOSEF).
