Title       : Community College Faculty Development on Ethics, Values, Science and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9223333

Award Number: 9223333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jere Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Raritan Valley Cmty Col
	      P O BOX 3300
	      Somerville, NJ  088761265    201/526-1200

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9223333  Jones  Little attention has been paid to ways to engage students at 
              community colleges in the consideration of ethical and value  dimensions of
              scientific and engineering practice and the impacts  of science and technology.
               This faculty development project has  at its core an intensive study group
              program for eight faculty  members from Raritan Valley Community College (RVCC)
              and Somerset  County Technical Institute (SCTI).  The program will enable the 
              faculty to integrate into the standard curriculum attention to  the ethical and
              value aspects of science and engineering.  To  achieve its goals and to
              disseminate results and provide a model  for others to consider, the program
              involves a collaboration  among faculty at RVCC and SCTI, the New Jersey
              Institute of  Technology, and high schools, industries, and other consortia 
              involved in advancing science and engineering education in the  region and the
              nation.  The project uses an across the curriculum  methodology that involves
              the faculty in the process of  discovering ways of modifying their standard
              classroom  presentations in order better to prepare students for their 
              careers.  The participants will meet with an expert on ethics and  science and
              technology who will provide advice and instruction on  approaches to ethical
              decisionmaking concerning science and  technology and on developing classroom
              environments that foster  the analytical, conceptual and social skills
              necessary to  encourage ethical reflection in undergraduate students in 
              scientific, engineering, and technical courses.  Individual core  faculty,
              assisted by other experts if appropriate, will conduct  weekly seminars on
              particular issues of science, engineering and  ethics during the Fall semester.
               A day-long open workshop on  ethics and effective working relationships
              between industry and  academia will end the Fall semester program.  The Spring
              program  will recruit eight additional group members for weekly seminars  and
              monthly curriculum development activiti es.  At the end of  that semester,
              faculty, students, and members of the commuhnity  will be invited to
              participate in a week-long program on  "Technology across the Curriculum," and
              a day-long program for  high school faculty will be designed to make them aware
              of  opportunities to consider ethics issues in science curricula.   Program
              activities and results will be disseminated in a wide  variety of ways. 
              Newsletters will keep faculty at the involved  institutions informed. 
              Statewide, results will be made available  through the New Jersey Institute for
              Collegiate Teaching and  Learning, which is a state funded project to
              disseminate ideas  through publications and faculty and staff development
              workshops.   In the state and more broadly, information will be made available 
              through the Statewide Systematic Initiative for Achieving  Excellence in
              Mathematics, Science, and Technology Education,  through the NJ Mathematics
              Coalition and the Academic Officers  Association of the Community Colleges, and
              through the  MidAtlantic Consortium for Math and Science Education.  Project 
              results will also be disseminated nationally at appropriate  conferences and
              through appropriate journals.   ***
