Title       : Collaborative Research on Principles of Constitutional and International
               Stability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1993  
File        : a9223185

Award Number: 9223185
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50026              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emerson Niou niou@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Designing a constitution involves one of the most critical and                 
              complex series of explicit decisions that a society can confront.              
              Should the government be presidential or parliamentary; should it              
              have a two-house or single-chamber legislature; should there be any            
              differences in the powers of the chambers of a bicameral                       
              legislature; should representation be territorial or by                        
              proportional representation; what role should the courts play in               
              constitutional interpretation; what provisions should be included              
              for emergencies; what authority should be given to local and                   
              regional governments; what rights properly belong in a                         
              constitution?                                                                  
              Large and ethnically heterogeneous states confront an additional               
              series of questions, including:  Should the country be federal or              
              unitary, and if it is federal, should its constituent parts have               
              the right to secede, to veto legislation, or to nullify federal law            
              on their territories?  These last questions are important not only             
              because they influence the operation and stability of a state after            
              it has formed, but also, as in the case of countries such as Russia            
              and Ukraine, they can influence whether a viable constitution can              
              be written and implemented in the first place.  With various                   
              republics and regions of Russia, for example, claiming autonomy,               
              sovereignty, and even independence and secession, it may not be                
              possible to implement a constitution that does not provide for the             
              right to secession.                                                            
              Unfortunately, we do not know very much empirically or                         
              theoretically about the implications of including a secession right            
              in a constitution.  Nor do we know the extent to which other                   
              provisions, such as allowing subunits the right to veto or                     
              nullification.  Which device (secession, veto, nullification)                  
              provides a constituent unit of a federalism the greatest guarantee             
              against violation of its rights and which, if any, fosters the                 
              development of a mutually beneficial federal state?                            
              This research investigation explores such questions by drawing a               
              theoretical parallel between federations and alliances in                      
              international political systems.  The rationale for this parallel              
              is that alliances, like federations, must be consummated and                   
              maintained on a wholly voluntary basis.  As such, alliances contain            
              within them the right to secession and veto (and, in some                      
              instances, nullification).  At the same time, in joining an                    
              alliance, each member must relinquish some of its sovereignty to a             
              central, coordinating agent, or at least state a verbal (but                   
              possibly non-enforceable) agreement to do so.  By developing some              
              common ideas and theoretical principles, the researchers hope to               
              show how alliances and federations operate under the same                      
              principles and how the properties of unstable alliances parallel               
              and are different from stable and unstable federations.  Finally,              
              by looking at alliances, it is possible to gain a clearer view of              
              the way in which the right of secession might operate in a                     
              constitutional democracy.
