Title       : Regional Policy, Spatial Polarization and Inequality in China, 1982-1990
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9223163

Award Number: 9223163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27978              (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Fun C. Fan fan@geog.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      National governments long have wrestled with issues of how             
              to deal with differences among regions in the formulation and                  
              implementation of economic development policies.  While the                    
              general goal of promoting equality in development among various                
              regions often is promoted in order to improve the wellbeing of                 
              all residents of a nation, differences in the human and natural                
              resources and in the geographic situations among regions argue                 
              for differential development policies to be developed and                      
              implemented.  The conflicts between these different approaches to              
              regional development have been apparent in the People's Republic               
              of China in recent decades.  Under the leadership of Mao Zedong,               
              development policies favored regional equity in hopes that poorer              
              inland provinces would "catch up" with wealthier eastern coastal               
              provinces.  Regional policies under Deng Xiaoping have emphasized              
              regional specialization and division of labor, however, with                   
              export-oriented industrialization and trade in the east                        
              generating more rapid development than agricultural and energy-                
              related activities in central provinces and animal husbandry and               
              mineral-related activities to the west.  This project will                     
              investigate the dynamics and implications of the shift in                      
              regional development policies through construction and analysis                
              of a database containing demographic and socio-economic data for               
              all counties in China in 1982 and 1990.  Special attention will                
              be given in the analyses to assessing the extent of spatial                    
              polarization in China, to measuring the degree of spatial                      
              inequality among different regions and changes in levels of                    
              inequality, and to identifying factors that explain those                      
              variations.                                                                    
                      This project will contribute to new understandings in a                
              number of ways.  The demographic and socio-economic database will              
              provide unprecedented opportunities to explore differences in                  
              economic development and related factors across different parts                
              of China over time.  The analyses will provide new insights into               
              the spatial implications of different regional development                     
              policies, especially the degree to which differential policies                 
              foster unequal levels of development.  Not only will these                     
              insights be useful for those interested in the dynamics and                    
              implications of current Chinese economic policies, they also will              
              enhance more general understandings of the spatial implications                
              of development policies and practices in other locales.
