Title       : Metal Surfaces, Quantum Wells, and Superlattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1994  
File        : a9223546

Award Number: 9223546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tai C. Chiang chiang@mrl.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              A study of the structure, growth behavior; and properties of                   
              selected metal surface, interfaces, overlayers, quantum wells,                 
              multilayers, and superlattices is proposed.  The purpose is to                 
              obtain a fundamental understanding of the scientific principles                
              that govern the crystalline form, chemical composition, and                    
              electronic properties of metal epitaxial systems and quantum                   
              structures.  The experimental techniques to be employed include                
              (angle-resolved) synchrotron photoemission, Auger spectroscopy,                
              electron diffraction, scanning tunneling microscopy and                        
              spectroscopy, and grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction.  Samples                
              will be prepared and fabricated using standard ultrahigh vacuum                
              techniques as well as molecular beam epitaxy and chamical vapor                
              deposition.  The work will include investigation of bulk and                   
              surface band structure, coherence and scattering lengths, and                  
              spatial distributions of electronic states; adsorption geometry,               
              cluster and island formation, and film growth behavior; evolution              
              of surface, interface, and quantum-well states as a function of                
              sample structure; atomic structure of buried interfaces; coupling              
              between quantum wells; and phenomena pertaining to superlattices               
              and multilayer structures.                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              Artificial structures made of stacks of thin layers can exhibit                
              interesting and potentially useful electronic properties.  Using               
              state-of-the-art techniques for materials synthesis, it is now                 
              possible to fabricate layer configurations with layer thicknesses              
              approaching the atomic dimension.  In such systems, electrons can              
              become trapped, reflected, or refracted by the boudaries between               
              layers.  Because these happen on an atomic scale, substantial                  
              modifications of the electronic properties can be achieved by                  
              tailoring the structure.  This research project will employ a                  
              variety of experimental techniques to address the basic questions              
              concerning the growth and characterization of various layer                    
              configurations, and the relationships between the atomic structure             
              and the electronic properties.  Part of the work will be carried               
              out at the Synchrotron Radiation Center at Madison, Wisconsin                  
              and the National Synchrotron Light Source at the Brookhaven                    
              National Laboratory.  This research involves a cooperation between             
              work supported by the National Science Foundation and the                      
              Department of Energy.
