Title       : The History of the Chesapeake Bay Drainage Ecosystem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1995      
File        : a9223402

Award Number: 9223402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Curtin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Grace S. Brush  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Fisher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,
Abstract    :
                   Intense specialization in all fields of knowledge often                   
              precludes contact by scientists with common interests in                       
              environmental problems.  A traditional vehicle for promoting                   
              cross-disciplinary research on important topics is conferences                 
              organized around a specific scientific research theme.  This                   
              award continues NSF support for a project that has brought                     
              together a group of recognized experts on all aspects of social                
              and ecological research in order to write a comprehensive history              
              of the Chesapeake Bay drainage basin.  The project focuses on                  
              long-term ecological change leading to present day problems                    
              facing the ecosystem, including both human and natural causes of               
              change.  One conference already has been held to bring together                
              recognized authorities to exchange ideas and research findings.                
              A second conference will reconvene this group and allow them to                
              make arrangements for revisions in individually written chapter                
              texts, which should result in a more coherent and synthetic                    
              volume that documents and explains how human and natural forces                
              have shaped the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem.                                      
                   Through this innovative project, biological scientists from               
              several specialties are assessing problems of natural change in                
              concert with historians and anthropologists, who are focusing on               
              the impacts of human activity.  The result will be a                           
              comprehensive study of the Chesapeake Bay drainage basin, which                
              in addition to providing valuable new information and insights                 
              about that region, will also provide a benchmark for integrative               
              analyses of other regions.
