Title       : A Hybrid Sliding Isolation System with Controllable Friction Bearings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1993      
File        : a9223234

Award Number: 9223234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $322355             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria Q. Feng mfeng@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1497      ARCHITECTURE & MECHAN SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 0000,9102,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recently, a hybrid sliding isolation system employing                          
              computer-controllable friction bearings has been developed                     
              and proven to be more effective in controlling the seismic                     
              response of a single-degree-of-freedom system than the                         
              corresponding conventional passive sliding system.  This                       
              proposed research intends to extend the applicability of                       
              this hybrid isolation system to multistory buildings by                        
              conducting a series of analytical and experimental                             
              investigations to develop an improved isolation system                         
              design.  Analytical work will involve development of two                       
              control algorithms and computer simulation studies with                        
              different structural and isolation system parameters and                       
              different input motions.  The experimental work will involve                   
              shaking table laboratory test on the proposed computer                         
              controllable isolation devices.                                                
                                                                                             
              The hybrid sliding isolation systems are more advantageous                     
              over the conventional passive systems in that they are more                    
              effective for earthquakes with a broad intensity range, and                    
              tend to be more robust.  However, to fully implement such a                    
              system with confidence in practice, there appear to exist                      
              several major technical and practical problems that are yet                    
              to be overcome.  The proposed research will develop:  (1)                      
              improved friction controllable bearings with proper                            
              consideration of the problems of the possibility of                            
              uplifting and its prevention, choice of the proper materials                   
              for sliding interface, chamber pressure control, energy                        
              supply, and system maintenance, (2) robust control                             
              algorithms to satisfy requirements for simultaneously                          
              controlling three-dimensional multitudinous responses, such                    
              as floor acceleration, interstory deformation, and sliding                     
              displacement, and to prevent excessive overturning moment                      
              and uplifting problems associated with buildings, and (3) a                    
              unified computer codes package to conduct simulation studies                   
              of isolation performance on various building models under                      
              different earthquake excitations.  The laboratory tests for                    
              component performance and scaled building model tests using                    
              a shaking table as well as the redesign of systems                             
              incorporating the changes suggested by the experimental                        
              results will also be performed in this study.                                  
                                                                                             
              The proposed research will resolve the remaining technical                     
              as well as practical problems existing with the innovative                     
              hybrid sliding isolation system - thus paving the way for                      
              its broad applications in building structures constructed in                   
              active seismic areas.
