Title       : Cognitive Processes in the Auditor's Evaluation of an Organization's Control
               Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1995       
File        : a9223522

Award Number: 9223522
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Schneider sandra@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary L. Holstrum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0512003   Collective Decision-Making              
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will improve the reliability and accuracy of financial            
              reporting by helping auditors, regulators, and corporate management            
              to better assess an organization's control environment (CE).  The              
              CE is made up of various abstract, non-financial factors such as               
              management's integrity, attitudes, and practices.  Specifically,               
              this project investigates how the experienced auditor represents               
              and processes information about the CE.                                        
                                                                                             
              The project blends theory and practice by incorporating a cognitive            
              science approach into the assessment of an audit judgment task.                
              The project will improve CE evaluations by:  (a) accumulating a                
              database of expert knowledge regarding factors critical to CE                  
              evaluation; (b) creating structured representations of the                     
              auditor's mental model of relations among CE factors and audit risk            
              factors; (c) relating information-gathering techniques to relevant             
              CE factors; (d) elucidating how information framing and the                    
              auditor's perspective influence CE evaluation and memory; and (e)              
              developing a CE decision aid for systematic assessment and                     
              documentation of the CE.                                                       
                                                                                             
              Improving the assessment of the CE will not only increase the                  
              reliability of the financial reporting process, but will also                  
              improve the validity and accuracy of financial reports.  This, in              
              turn, will promote increased confidence in the securities markets,             
              benefiting not only corporations and their investors, but the                  
              economy and society as well.
