Title       : Genetic Consequences of Social Behavior and Demographic Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1994    
File        : a9223335

Award Number: 9223335
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald J. Barfield                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137863             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne Altmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1160,9119,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this project is to initiate a fine-grained analysis                
              of relationships between demographic and behavioral processes on               
              the one hand and genetic structure on the other, in a natural,                 
              complexly organized mammalian population, savannah baboons (Papio              
              cynocephalus), of Amboseli National Park, Kenya.  Data on births,              
              deaths, movements of males among social groups, social dominance,              
              and reproductive behavior in three groups of free-living baboons               
              extend back for almost two full generations, over a 20-year                    
              period, and provide a unique data set for the study.                           
                                                                                             
              A significant characteristic of the multi-male, multi-female                   
              baboon groups, and those of most other monkey species, is their                
              strongly matrilineal structure.  The effects, within and among                 
              groups, of this matrilineal structure will be evaluated through                
              analysis of maternally inherited, mitochondrial, DNA.  Within                  
              individual social groups, long-term as well as short-term                      
              patterns of male residency, social dominance status, mate choice,              
              and variability in female reproductive success are predicted to                
              impact on patterns of genetic variability, both separately and in              
              combination.  Microsatellite genotyping, involving development of              
              a microsatellite library for biparentally inherited, nuclear DNA,              
              will be used to investigate these effects.                                     
                                                                                             
              An understanding of relationships between genetic variability and              
              that of demography and social structure is critical for use of                 
              contemporary information to make inferences about the history of               
              natural populations and projections of their future, as in                     
              evolutionary and conservation biology.  Both the development of                
              the molecular techniques and the empirical findings obtained in                
              this research will have potentially broad application to other                 
              systems.
