Title       : 4th Engineering Foundation Conference on "Reaction Engineering for New Materials
               and Processes."
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1992  
File        : a9223718

Award Number: 9223718
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry C. Foley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan J. Lerou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael T. Klein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Reaction engineering deals with the quantification of                          
              molecular interactions at solid surfaces, transport phenomena,                 
              dynamics and control of reaction systems and the interplay of                  
              all of the above.  The size scale ranges from 10-10 to 102                     
              meters.  The application of reaction engineering principles is                 
              essential in experimentation, scale-up, and design for                         
              chemical, biochemical, petroleum, electrochemical and other                    
              processes.  Reaction engineering is an interactive discipline                  
              whose initial applications were confined to the petroleum and                  
              chemical industries, but current utilization of these                          
              principles is spreading to the biotechnology, electronics, and                 
              specialty chemical industries where the emphasis is upon new                   
              meterials.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Three Engineering Foundation Conferences in Chemical Reaction                  
              Engineering have been held in the past that have focussed on                   
              the various research issues of the day in this area.  This                     
              grant is partial support for the fourth Engineering Foundation                 
              Conference whose main theme is to open pathways between                        
              chemists and chemical engineers by cross-cutting the                           
              established boundaries between these two disciplines with                      
              topically and technically common themes.  The meeting will be                  
              divided into four days that cover catalysis, kinetics,                         
              modeling, and reactors and its overall format will be similar                  
              to the "Gordon Research Conference" style with ample time for                  
              lengthy discussions.***
