Title       : U.S.- Singapore Cooperative Research on Computer-Aided Design of VLSI Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1993       
File        : a9223712

Award Number: 9223712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25482              (Estimated)
Investigator: C. L. Liu liucl@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5927,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. C.                                  
              L. Liu, Department of Computer Science,                                        
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, to                                 
              pursue with Dr. Hon-Wai Leong, Department of                                   
              Information Systems and Computer Sciences,                                     
              National University of Singapore, for a period                                 
              of 24 months, a program of research in the area                                
              of computer aided design of very large scale                                   
              integrated (VLSI) circuits.  Their research                                    
              will be directed toward two major areas,                                       
              namely, (1) design and synthesis and                                           
              (2) reliable VLSI circuits.  Initially, their                                  
              effort in the first area will deal with                                        
              research on physical design, an area in which                                  
              they have considerable experience.  Later, they                                
              will work in the area of higher level synthesis                                
              on such topics as logic minimization, module                                   
              generation, and state assignment.  In the area                                 
              of reliable VLSI circuits, they will build on                                  
              their own promising results on reconfigurable                                  
              VLSI chips.  One of the goals of the research                                  
              is to understand the interplays between design                                 
              and reliability.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The research problem is of great importance in                                 
              computer science and has the potential for                                     
              impacting favorably on the semiconductor                                       
              industry in the United States and in Singapore.                                
              This research could assist in solving some of                                  
              today's design problems and produce new design                                 
              tools for the future.  Singapore's computer and                                
              semiconductor industries are thriving and are                                  
              key players in the world market.  In addition                                  
              to direct benefits derived from this                                           
              collaboration, it will be important for U.S.                                   
              scientists to follow scientific developments in                                
              Singapore.  Dr. Liu is a senior researcher who                                 
              has an excellent international reputation.                                     
              Dr. Leong brings to the project special                                        
              expertise in algorithms for VLSI physical                                      
              design.  This project is relevant to the                                       
              objectives of the Division of International                                    
              Programs which seeks to increase the level of                                  
              cooperation between U.S. scientists and                                        
              engineers and their counterparts in developing                                 
              countries through the exchange of scientific                                   
              information, ideas, skills, and techniques and                                 
              through collaboration on problems of mutual                                    
              benefit.  This project adds an international                                   
              cooperative dimension to the PI's research                                     
              under NSF Grant No. MIP-8906932.***
