Title       : Studies in Applied Public Finance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1995     
File        : a9223737

Award Number: 9223737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185713             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Poterba poterba@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project pursues research on several distinct questions in                 
              public economics.  The first part considers the impact of fiscal               
              institutions on the dynamics of state tax and expenditure policy.              
              This research uses states as "laboratories of democracy" to shed               
              light on how different institutional arrangements affect the way               
              governments respond to fiscal shocks.  It focuses on the                       
              experience of the 1980s, and explores how balanced budget rules                
              and anti-deficit laws affected the way states respond to                       
              unexpected budget deficits.  The second is a more traditional                  
              study on the incentive effects of tax policy.  It focuses on the               
              effects of 401(k) tax-deferred saving plans on household saving                
              decisions.  These plans were the fastest growing tax-favored                   
              saving vehicle in the 1980s, yet there is little evidence on how               
              the availability of these plans and the federal and program-                   
              specific limits on individual contributions, affect saving                     
              behavior.  This project helps fill this gap.  The third part is                
              also concerned with tax policy, but focuses on the increasingly                
              important question of how tax incentives affect the demand for                 
              health insurance.  The research develops new estimates of the                  
              elasticity of demand for both coverage and the amount of                       
              coverage.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The first part of this project addresses one of the central                    
              issues in political economy - the effect of fiscal institutions,               
              such as balanced-budget amendments or supermajority requirements               
              for tax increases, on tax and expenditure policies.  Because                   
              federal budgetary institutions exhibit relatively little                       
              variation, empirical research on budgetary institutions has                    
              focused on interstate or international comparisons.  The                       
              difficulty with past studies is that they do not take into                     
              account the possibility that states with anti-spending voters are              
              more likely to adopt certain fiscal institutions.  For example,                
              the apparent effectiveness of state constitutional balanced                    
              budget requirements in restraining government expenditures could               
              simply reflect the preferences of the voters in states with these              
              requirements.  This project takes a novel and ingenious approach               
              to this problem.  It explores how different fiscal institutions                
              affect the dynamics of state taxes and spending following an                   
              unexpected shock to the state deficit.  The last half-decade,                  
              when many states have experienced substantial fiscal stress,                   
              provides a natural opportunity for exploring this link between                 
              fiscal institutions and fiscal outcomes.  A systematic study of                
              recent state experience with unexpected deficits is also a timely              
              important topic by itself.
