Title       : Flame Structure and Kinetics in Chlorinated Hydrocarbon Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1995      
File        : a9223783

Award Number: 9223783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294267             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chung K. Law   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              0313010   Air Pollution                           
              0313030   Solid Waste Disposal                    
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9187,ENVI,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This program is a continuation of an on-going research project in              
              the area of flame structure and kinetics in the combustion of                  
              chlorinated hydrocarbons (CHCs).  In the first half of this                    
              program, the research will involve modifying an existing burner                
              setup to study CO flames in the presence of HCl and CH3Cl; both                
              premixed and nonpremixed flames will be studied.  Velocity,                    
              temperature, and species concentration fields will be measured via             
              laser diagnostic procedures.  In addition, numerical simulations               
              for validation of the existing CO reaction mechanisms in the                   
              presence of HCl and CH3Cl will be carried out, with modifications              
              to previous chloromethane work being re-examined.  With the new                
              flame structure measurements obtained with the expanded diagnostic             
              procedures, comprehensive comparisons will be made between numerics            
              and experiments.  In the second half of the program, the research              
              will involve studies of the influence of higher Cl/H ratios on                 
              global flame characteristics and flame structure using mixtures of             
              chloromethane, dichloromethane, trichloroethylene, oxygen, and                 
              nitrogen.  Under these highly chlorinated conditions, the existence            
              of two-stage flame structures will also be examined in premixed and            
              nonpremixed flames, again through non-intrusive mapping of the                 
              flame structure.  Finally, the tendency of soot formation will be              
              investigated in detail and possible control approaches examined.               
                                                                                             
              The experimental results are anvicipated to provide a basis for                
              validation of detailed reaction mechanisms employed in the                     
              numerical simulation of flame structures.  Such comparisons should             
              provide useful insight into the oxidation mechanisms of CHCs.  In              
              addition, through identification of the important species and                  
              reaction steps via sensitivity analysis, simplified, reduced                   
              mechanisms can be developed to describe the chemistry of CHC                   
              flames; these reduced mechanisms will enable incorporation of                  
              realistic finite-rate chemistry models into simulation of turbulent            
              and/or three-dimensional flame structures found in incinerators,               
              with ultimate development of design capability for safe, optimal               
              incinerator operation.
