Title       : Price Rigidity, Economic Fluctuations, and Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1997     
File        : a9223043

Award Number: 9223043
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157127             (Estimated)
Investigator: N. Gregory Mankiw   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is an accomplishment based renewal of a project that has                  
              made important contributions to macroeconomics, financial                      
              economics, economic growth and labor economics.  This grant                    
              permits the investigator to continue research in two broad                     
              categories: (1) theories of price rigidity and economic                        
              fluctuations and (2) theories of economic growth.                              
                                                                                             
              One of the fundamental questions of macroeconomics is: What                    
              determines the rate of inflation?  Most macroeconomists agree                  
              that in the long run, the primary determinant of inflation is                  
              growth in the money supply.  The short-run behavior of inflation,              
              however, is more controversial.  Certainly monetary policy and                 
              other determinants of aggregate demand have important roles.  Yet              
              since the 1970s, many economists have also emphasized the role of              
              "supply" or "price" shocks.  The contribution of this project                  
              comes from developing a rigorous theory on the way shifts in                   
              relative prices can affect the rate of inflation and conducting                
              further empirical research on the fraction of the variation in                 
              inflation in the postwar United States that is explained by price              
              shocks.  Special emphasis is placed on the OPEC energy shocks:                 
              large increases in the prices of oil-intensive goods generated                 
              price shocks and aggregate inflation rose.  This research is                   
              clearly relevant to understanding the economic implications of                 
              carbon taxes and other global environmental change policies or                 
              economic implications of future price shocks caused by global                  
              environmental catastrophes.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The other part of the project continues research on the gap                    
              between standard growth theory and the evidence on convergence in              
              standard of living.  Researchers examining a wide variety of                   
              datasets have concluded that economies tend to converge--that is,              
              poor economies tend to grow faster than rich economies.  Yet                   
              standard models of economic growth cannot easily explain this                  
              fact.  The project develops a model of economic growth that                    
              explains gradual convergence in output per person while allowing               
              the real interest rate to be equal across economies at all times.              
              The key to the model is that borrowing is possible to finance                  
              accumulation of physical capital but not accumulation of human                 
              capital.  More generally, this project studies the restrictions                
              that facts about poor and rich countries place on the form of the              
              production function, such as complementarity among labor, human                
              capital, and physical capital.
