Title       : Size Effects in Ferroic Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1996 
File        : a9223847

Award Number: 9223847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1993    
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1620000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Newnham bobnewnham@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie E. Cross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9165,9178,9251,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9223847  Newnham    This award is the initial funding for a new Materials
              Research  Group at the Pennsylvania State University on the topic of size 
              effects in ferroic solids.  Scaling phenomena in representative  oxide ferroics
              are being investigated theoretically and  experimentally.  Emphasis is being
              placed on determining the  critical sizes for the following four regimes:  (1)
              large  particles that each contain many domain walls which reduce in  number as
              the particle size decreases,  (2) particles that  contain a single domain,  (3)
              particle sizes smaller than a  single domain,  (4)  particles in the nanometer
              size scale.  The  material systems of choice are ferroelectrics, ferroelastics,
              and  secondary ferroics.  The goal is to determine the critical  particle sizes
              for each system where the material and its  behavior transitions from bulk
              behavior to single domain behavior  to glass-like, and non-ferroelectric
              behavior.  The experimental  program involves preparation of  fine-grain
              powders plus  ceramic/polymeric, and ceramic/ceramic composite materials in the
               form of thin films;  characterization of the particle/grain  microstructure,
              domain configurations, phase transformations, and  critical sizes using thermal
              analysis, x-ray diffraction, Raman  spectroscopy, electron microscopy, and
              spectroscopic  ellipsometry; measurement of permittivity, elasticity, as a 
              function of  applied field, temperature, and frequency.  The  theory component
              is based on the Landau-Ginsburg-Devonshire  formalism.  The effects of volume,
              external surfaces, and  internal interfaces (both grain boundaries and domain
              walls)  are considered.    Ferroic crystals have domain walls which can be
              moved by electric  fields (ferroelectrics), magnetic fields (ferromagnets),
              mechanical   stress (ferroelastics), or some higher order phenomena involving a
                combination of the first three (secondary ferroics).  These materials   are
              used as transducers, capacators, transformers, sensors, and actuators,  
              because of the lar ge contribution that domain walls make to piezoelectricity,
              permittivity, permeability, elastic compliance, and other property 
              coefficients.  A basic understanding of size effects is critical to the  
              development of these devices, which are being made smaller in the form   of
              thin films, fiber-filled composites, and multilayer ceramics with   submicron
              grain sizes.
