Title       : Theoretical and Experimental Study of Electronic Non- adiabaticity in Molecular
               Collisions and Photofragmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1995  
File        : a9223081

Award Number: 9223081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Millard H. Alexander mha@mha-ibm4.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,1318,9156,9188,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, supported by the Physical Chemistry Program of                
              the Chemistry Division, Profs. M. Alexander of the University                  
              of Maryland and P. Dagdigian of Johns Hopkins University will                  
              pursue a joint theoretical-experimental effort to determine how                
              molecular collisions and photodissociations are affected by                    
              molecular energy states.  In particular, since molecular energy                
              states are rarely the idealized, independent states used in the                
              initial stages of theoretical formulations, the interactions                   
              between them play a signifant role in determining the details                  
              of the collision and photodissociation processes.  Several                     
              prototypical free radical molecules, including di-and triatomic                
              monohydride species, will be investigated.  The theoretical                    
              portion of this project (M. Alexander) involves the development                
              of new methods to elucidate the mechanism of molecular                         
              collisions and photodissociation.  The experimental portion (P.                
              Dagdigian) involves the determination of cross sections for                    
              inelastic collisions in which molecules undergo energy changes.                
               Also to be determined are the distributions over the internal                 
              energy states of a molecular fragment that results from the                    
              photodissociation of the parent molecule.                                      
              %%%                                                                            
              Molecular energies are considered in the main to be the result                 
              of translational, rotational, vibrational  and electronic                      
              motions, with the latter being made up of orbital and spin                     
              contributions.  This separation of the total energy into                       
              independent contributions is, however, only an idealized first                 
              step in the conceptual model of molecular structure and                        
              dynamics, and allowing for interactions between these motions                  
              is necessary in order to account for the observed molecular                    
              properties.  Photodissociations and collisions between                         
              molecules are also affected by these interactions, which are                   
              particularly evident in open shell (free radical) molecules.                   
              The investigations to be carried out in this research will                     
              contribute to the understanding of these processes and will                    
              assist in establishing the limits of validity of the                           
              fundamental Born-Oppenheimer approximation to open shell                       
              molecules.
