Title       : Gender Differences in Academic Career Paths Among Economists Scientists, Social
               Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9223131

Award Number: 9223131
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shulamit B. Kahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The under representation of females among faculty in the fields of             
              science  and engineering has been a concern and a topic of                     
              research of many committees, institutions, and scholars.  There                
              seem to be a multitude of causes behind this under representation              
              of females in scientific academic jobs.  Starting from high                    
              school, women seem to drop out of the science/engineering pipeline             
              at practically every step along the way.  This project focuses on              
              the last stage in this process - the low proportion of women at the            
              associate or full professor ranks.   It is the first study to be               
              based on a continuing panel of PhD's and to use the panel nature               
              of this data to follow people's careers as they develop over                   
              time.   This approach is superior to the cross sectional analysis              
              in other studies because it controls for the size of the entrant               
              cohort, allows covariants to have independent effects on the                   
              probabilities, and accounts for people who leave academia.  The                
              panel data allow analysis of the entire time pattern of the                    
              likelihood of promotion and comparison of the probabilities of                 
              eventually receiving tenure.                                                   
                                                                                             
              This project focuses on gender differences in promotion in academic            
              jobs in the fields of economics, the other social sciences, science            
              and engineering.  It uses panel data collected by the National                 
              Science Foundation in its biannual survey of Doctorate Recipients.             
              The project investigates whether women and men who enter academia              
              with similar backgrounds have the same likelihood of progressing               
              in academic careers and progress at similar speeds in their                    
              careers.                                                                       
              Using hazard rate analysis, the project estimates gender                       
              differences in the probabilities of receiving tenure.   A similar              
              approach is used to study the promotion to full professorship.  The            
              first stages of the research will consider the field of economics.             
              Specifications and models developed for the field of economics will            
              then be extended to other fields with the social sciences and to               
              science and engineering.  The final stage of the analysis will                 
              perform similar on all fields together in order to be able to draw             
              conclusions about the overall promotion process in academia and on             
              how differences among fields in the promotion process can be                   
              explained by different characteristics of the fields themselves.
