Title       : Simulation and Semiparametric Estimation of MicroeconometricModels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1994        
File        : a9223325

Award Number: 9223325
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lung-Fei Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9216,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of three separate but related research                   
              projects in maximum simulated likelihood estimation,                           
              semiparametric minimum distance estimation and estimation of                   
              nonlinear error-in-variables econometric models with validation                
              data information.  These projects investigate simulation and                   
              semiparametric methods of estimation and statistical tests for                 
              many important microeconometric models.  The methodologies will                
              be useful for the estimation and testing of discrete panel data                
              models, simultaneous equation models with limited dependent                    
              variables, multimarket disequilibrium models, consumer demand and              
              production systems with nonnegativity and/or quantity                          
              constraints, and nonlinear models with error-in-variables.                     
                                                                                             
              More specifically, the first part of the project involves the                  
              generalization of bias correction procedures for maximum                       
              simulated likelihood estimation methods developed under the                    
              previous NSF grant for discrete choice models.  These estimation               
              and inference procedures are applied to empirical estimation of                
              consumer demand and/or production systems with data from                       
              Indonesia.  The second part introduces semiparametric estimation               
              procedures for the classical minimum distance estimation method                
              for simultaneous equation models with qualitative and limited                  
              dependent variables, multimarket disequilibrium models, and                    
              sample selection models with conditional expectation                           
              specifications.  Semiparametric estimation methods of such models              
              are limited in the current econometric literature.  The third                  
              part develops estimation methods which take into account the                   
              information of validation data and survey panel data and the                   
              measurement errors in all of the variables.  The proposed                      
              methodologies will be applied to the study of a labor supply                   
              model using data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics.
