Title       : Constituency Preferences and Representation: Evidence From Voting On Ballot
               Propositions and Roll-Calls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9223389

Award Number: 9223389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110411             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Snyder   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Opinion Research Ctr
	      
	      Chicago, IL  60637    312/962-1200

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
              Understanding the relative importance of various influences on                 
              the behavior of elected representives is one of the central                    
              concerns of modern political-economy.  Among the possible                      
              influences are the representative's constituency, campaign                     
              contributions and lobbying efforts by special interest groups,                 
              the representative's own preferences, and pressures from various               
              party and nonparty leaders, such as the president and committee                
              chairmen.  Although aggregated vote data are often used to                     
              measure citizens' preferences in empirical studies of                          
              representation, and are also analyzed in studies of direct                     
              democracy, there has been little work carefully linking the                    
              statistical models to well-defined models of voter choice.  As a               
              result, the behavioral assumptions underlying these empirical                  
              studies are often vague.  This is especially problematic for                   
              analyses of voting data, because of past work showing that many                
              widely used statistical techniques are probably inconsistent with              
              certain reasonable models of voter behavior.  The contribution of              
              the project comes from developing a framework for the statistical              
              analysis of aggregated vote data of the sort that researchers                  
              often encounter in the study of ballot propositions and candidate              
              elections, that is based on the standard spatial voting model.                 
              The framework is applied in a number of empirical studies of                   
              voting data on ballot propositions in California and other states              
              over various periods since 1892.  These studies utilize not only               
              voting data on ballot propositions, but also demographic                       
              information, data on voting in presidential, gubernatorial and                 
              other elections, and data on roll-call voting in state                         
              legislatures and the U.S. Congress.  One particularly important                
              issue is the extent to which elected representatives act in the                
              interest of a majority of their constituents.
