Title       : Information Processing In Firms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1993      
File        : a9223917

Award Number: 9223917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67648              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Van Zandt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy Radner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The study of returns to scale in firms has traditionally focused on            
              technological returns to scale in the production process.  However,            
              as the scale of a firm's production process grows, so does its                 
              administrative apparatus.  The task of much of this administrative             
              apparatus is information processing, including communication and               
              decision-making.  This task is important to the performance of the             
              firm, and hence relevant to returns to scale.                                  
                                                                                             
              This research uses a model of stochastic control with explicit and             
              costly computation of policies, coupled with a parallel processing             
              model of information processing in organizations.  It is expected              
              that a variety of results will be obtained for which returns depend            
              on assumptions on the statistical properties of the information to             
              be processed and on the loss function.  Further studies include a              
              locational model of scale, explicit models of the firm with scale              
              measured by physical inputs and outputs rather than by the                     
              informational size of the environment, and a distributed                       
              computational model of information processing.                                 
                                                                                             
              This research works across the frontier between computer science               
              and economics.  It relates information processing and organization             
              design and function, and will enhance our understanding of a                   
              problem of long standing and great importance in economics.
