Title       : Determination and Impacts of Surface Radiative Fluxes for TOGA COARE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1994      
File        : a9223150

Award Number: 9223150
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jay S. Fein                             
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $823099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith A. Curry curryja@cloud.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Webster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1324,1577,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                   In support of the TOGA/COARE objectives, this project is a                
              study of the surface radiative processes in the western Pacific                
              warm pool region.  The objective of the program is to provide                  
              analyses of:  sea-surface "skin" temperature, precipitable water,              
              cloud properties, and components of the surface longwave and                   
              shortwave radiative fluxes, with spatial resolution of 30 km and               
              temporal resolution of 3 hours for the entire TOGA COARE primary               
              domain.   The data for the analyses will be obtained principally               
              by satellite remote sensing, with the ISCCP data set and                       
              algorithms playing a substantial role.  Available surface and                  
              aircraft data will be utilized to validate the remote sensing                  
              algorithms and will also be blended with the satellite retrievals              
              for the final analysis products.  An aircraft sub-program is                   
              proposed specifically to investigate cloud-radiative properties,               
              and to validate the satellite-derived surface fluxes.                          
                   The proposed research will be accomplished in three stages:               
              i) remote sensing pilot study to develop and compare satellite                 
              algorithms; ii) validation of remote sensing algorithms using                  
              TOGA COARE IOP surface and aircraft observations and preparation               
              of high-resolution analyses for the IOP; and iii) diagnostic and               
              studies modeling studies utilizing the analyzed fields.                        
              Diagnostic fluxes by synoptic and mesoscale atmospheric focing                 
              will be conducted.  The temporal response of the ocean mixed                   
              layer to fluctuations in the surface radiative fluxes will be                  
              examined using an ocean mixed-layer model.  The ocean mixed-layer              
              model will be coupled to an atmospheric radiative-convective                   
              model to assess the radiative and cloud feedbacks occurring                    
              between the atmospheric and oceanic boundary layers.                           
                   This research is important because it serves as one of the                
              principal TOGA/COARE studies of the processes responsible for                  
              sensitive region of the world, the western Pacific Ocean, the                  
              field site of TOGA/COARE.
