Title       : Numerical Modeling of Problems in Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1998      
File        : a9870420

Award Number: 9870420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans P. Engler                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68502              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eugene C. Gartland gartland@math.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports ongoing research in the area of   numerical modeling of
              basic and applied problems that arise  in the physics of liquid crystals.  The
              work is interdisciplinary   in nature, involving collaborations with physicists
              in the Liquid   Crystal Institute at Kent State University as well as with  
              computer scientists and applied and computational mathematicians   at Kent,
              Purdue University, and the Courant Institute.  The   emphases of the work will
              be in three project areas: (1) numerical   modeling of equilibrium
              orientational properties of confined   liquid crystal materials, (2) developing
              and utilizing modern CS  problem-solving environments (for rapid prototyping of
              such numerical   codes and packages), and (3) numerical modeling of the
              interaction   between a laser beam and the liquid-crystal medium through which
              it   is propagating (to investigate and validate modeling and asymptotic  
              analyses performed on such a system by a group at Courant).    Liquid Crystals
              are materials capable of existing in states   (call "mesophases") in between
              solids and liquids.  They enjoy   properties of both.  They are fluid; yet
              their molecules tend   to orient themselves in certain preferred ways
              (depending on   inter-molecular forces, geometry, conditions at boundaries,  
              external applied electric or magnetic fields, and the like).  They have
              significant commercial importance because of applications   in the display
              industry.  Modern liquid crystal devices (with   microscopic geometry and
              interfering neighboring effects) now   require considerable two- and
              three-dimensional numerical modeling   for analysis and design.  The proposed
              work will contribute  to the advancement of the general state of the art for
              this type   of scientific computing while numerically modeling specific  
              systems of current interest.
