Title       : IGERT: Program in Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9870631

Award Number: 9870631
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2287997            (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven H. Strogatz shs7@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1339,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              Nonlinear Systems that emphasizes common mathematical and theoretical ideas
              that find expression in the analysis of natural and engineering systems.  This
              activity is a joint effort of thirty-six scientists and engineers from the
              Departments of Aerospace Engineering, Agricultural and Biological Engineering,
              Applied and Engineering Physics, Biometry, Chemical Engineering, Economics,
              Electrical Engineering, Geological Sciences, Management, Mathematics,
              Mechanical Engineering, Neurobiology and Behavior, Operations Research and
              Industrial Engineering, Physics, Physiology, and Theoretical and Applied
              Mechanics at Cornell University.  Joining them are scientists, engineers, and
              business scholars from Morgan Stanley, SUNY Health Science Center, Los Alamos
              National Laboratory, Georgia Institute of Technology, Hewlett-Packard, and the
              Boyce-Thompson Institute.  Members of this group of scholars have established
              research collaborations; their collective expertise will provide the
              intellectual underpinning for the training of a diverse cadre of some sixty
              graduate students over the five-year tenure of the award. Doctoral students in
              this IGERT activity will be admitted to one of Cornell's existing Graduate
              Fields and will take an integrated two-semester course in nonlinear science
              that includes both deterministic and stochastic mathematical methods, and
              explore applications in various disciplines.  These students must also complete
              the PhD requirements in their respective fields, take a minor in a different
              field, attend weekly colloquia and seminars, and complete a summer internship
              in a laboratory, hospital, Wall Street firm, or industrial setting as
              appropriate.  The goal of the program is to educate students to be fluent in
              several disciplines and theoretical methodologies, all of which bear on the
              theme of nonlinear phenomena.  IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program intended to
              facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs
              that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared
              to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options.  IGERT provides
              doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed
              multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational boundaries
              and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to establish a
              highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and research. 
              In this first year of the program, support will be provided to seventeen
              institutions for new or nascent programs that collectively span all areas of
              science and engineering supported by NSF.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
