Title       : IGERT: Urban Environmental Sustainabilty -- A Multidisciplinary Doctoral
               Education Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2002    
File        : a9870711

Award Number: 9870711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Devinny devinny@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              Urban Environmental Sustainability within the existing Environmental Sciences,
              Policy, and Engineering (ESPE) Program at the University of Southern
              California.  This activity is a joint effort of eleven scientists and engineers
              from the Departments of Environmental Engineering, Civil Engineering, Chemical
              Engineering, Earth Sciences, Biological Sciences, Geography, Political Science,
              Economics, and Medicine in the School of Engineering, the College of Letters,
              Arts and Sciences, and the College of Medicine.  This group of scientists and
              engineers has established research collaborations and their collective
              expertise will provide the intellectual underpinning for the training of a
              diverse cadre of some seventy graduate students and thirty undergraduates over
              the five-year tenure of the award.  This IGERT activity provides an integrated
              four-part program consisting of a seminar on cities and urban systems; three
              team-taught courses (The Urban Environment: Research and Policy Issues;
              Environmental Technologies; and Negotiating Boundaries in Environmental
              Research); individual doctoral-level directed research supervised by a
              multidisciplinary faculty team; and a faculty-supervised, multidisciplinary
              collaborative project conducted for a client.  Program diversity will be
              maximized through strategic recruiting of graduate and undergraduate trainees,
              and by diversification of the ESPE faculty.  IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program
              intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based graduate
              programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers to be
              well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options.  IGERT
              provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research.  In this first year of the program, support will be provided to
              seventeen institutions for new or nascent programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
