Title       : Analysis of Floral Induction Pathways
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9870843

Award Number: 9870843
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Amasino amasino@biochem.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The transition of shoot apical meristems from vegetative growth to flowering is
              the major developmental switch in the plant life cycle. It is important because
              flowering results in the production of the edible portion of most major crops.
              Plants have evolved multiple pathways to precisely regulate flowering time to
              maximize reproductive success. These flowering pathways involve mechanisms to
              monitor both environmental cues and the developmental state of the plant. The
              proposed work is designed to further the understanding at a molecular level of
              flowering-time control.

A major focus of this work is to define the genes
              involved in floral induction in Arabidopsis thaliana. Arabidopsis is quite
              versatile in its flowering behavior as it maintains photoperiod, vernalization,
              hormone and developmental (autonomous) flowering pathways. Arabidopsis is
              normally a facultative long day plant, but single genetic changes can cause
              Arabidopsis to exhibit the flowering behavior of many other plant species. Thus
              knowledge of the molecular basis of flowering-time control obtained from
              Arabidopsis studies can be used to explore the evolution and control of
              different modes of flowering regulation among higher plants.

One goal is to
              identify and molecularly clone flowering-time genes and study the function of
              the protein products. The LD and FPA loci will be emphasized, but genetical
              analyses will provide other targets such as a flowering suppressor locus and a
              locus involved in enhancing the role of ethylene in flowering. A second goal is
              to continue to genetically analyze genes in the flowering pathways to define
              the players in these pathways as completely as possible. This involves screens
              for new loci, studies of interactions among genes and characterization of the
              flowering physiology of mutants and various genetic combinations. A final goal
              is to explore the relationship between flowering pathways in Arabidopsis and
              maize by comparative studies of LD homologs in both species.
