Title       : Equivariant Methods in Algebraic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9870088

Award Number: 9870088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75180              (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Graham wag@math.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          9870088  Graham      The purpose of this project is to apply
              equivariant methods to some problems in algebraic geometry.  These problems
              come from, and are motivated by, geometry, combinatorics, and representation
              theory. The PI  plans to consider several questions related to Schubert
              varieties, in particular, a geometric positivity conjecture motivated by
              conjectures of Peterson and Billey, which is possibly related to work of Fulton
              and Lazarsfeld on positive polynomials in Chern classes.  Another Schubert
              variety problem is to find a Pieri formula in the equivariant K-theory of the
              flag variety, generalizing work of Fulton and Lascoux for the general linear
              group.  Besides Schubert varieties, the PI plans to investigate other
              directions where equivariant methods can be applied. One direction is to extend
              localization formulas in equivariant Chow groups to higher Chow groups, and use
              localization to investigate the Chow groups of interesting spaces.  Another is
              to relate an equivariant Riemann-Roch theorem to results on the Chow groups of
              quotients; this is joint work with Dan Edidin.  Finally, equivariant methods
              have been used to study multiplicities in representations; the PI would like to
              make these results more explicit, especially for the general linear group.     
                This is research in the field of algebraic geometry.  Algebraic  geometry is
              one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but  one which has had a
              revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated
              figures that could be defined  in the plane by the simplest equations, namely
              polynomials. Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from algebra, 
              but from analysis and topology, and conversely is finding  application in those
              fields as well as in physics, theoretical computer science, and robotics.
