Title       : IGERT: Astrobiology: Life in and Beyond Earth's Solar System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9870713

Award Number: 9870713
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2010821            (Estimated)
Investigator: James T. Staley jtstaley@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Conway B. Leovy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Woodruff T. Sullivan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9870713  Staley       This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training 
              (IGERT) award will support the establishment of a broadly-  based graduate
              training program in study of life in extreme  environments and on its relevance
              to understanding the  evolution of life on earth and, potentially, on other
              planets.  Recent scientific results have highlighted the practical and 
              theoretical importance of studying microbes that prosper in  unusual habitats,
              including those whose temperature and  chemical composition may well duplicate
              the conditions thought  to exist at the time life evolved on earth.   These
              results  have also pointed to the utility of such studies in planning  and
              evaluating efforts aimed at detecting environments on  other planets that might
              also foster the evolution of life.  This later aspect of the program is now
              often referred to as  "Astrobiology".  The multidisciplinary program will be
              the  joint effort of 14 faculty from the Departments of Aeronautics  and
              Astronautics, Astronomy, Atmospheric Sciences,  Biochemistry, Chemistry,
              Genetics, Geological Sciences,  Geophysics, Microbiology and Oceanography, as
              well as  internship mentors in the private and public sector.  NSF  support
              will provide stipends for 11 graduate students each  year, and for related
              costs of student research training.  Students will take at least three of five
              new courses to be  created for the IGERT program, and must complete existing 
              coursework requirements of their home departments.  Required  coursework will
              emphasize current knowledge of the evolution  of life from prebiotic synthesis
              through development of  Eukaryotic cells, and the physical and chemical
              principles of  planetary formation.  Along with participating faculty, 
              students will participate in a weekly IGERT seminar and an  annual workshop at
              a field site or laboratory that will focus  on methods and techniques not
              available on campus.       IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program whose goal is to
              sponsor  the establishment of innovative,  research-based graduate  programs
              that will train a diverse group of new scientists and  engineers to be
              well-prepared for varied careers in the  private and public sectors.  IGERT
              provides an opportunity for  the development of new, well-focused
              multidisciplinary  programs that bridge traditional organizational barriers, 
              uniting faculty from several departments or institutions to  establish a
              highly-interactive collaborative environment for  both training and research. 
              In its first year, the program  will provide support to 17 institutions for new
              or nascent  programs that collectively span all areas of science,  engineering
              and mathematics eligible for support by the NSF.
