Title       : Structure of Inorganic Network Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a9870246

Award Number: 9870246
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Josef W. Zwanziger jzwanzig@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9870246  Zwanziger    Two glass families with important non-linear optical 
              properties will be studied, using a suite of structural  probes.  The goal of
              the project is to correlate the  structural features in the glasses with the
              non-linear  optical response, so that the optical properties may be  understood
              and tuned to desired values.  Glasses and  glass-ceramics composed of tellurium
              dioxide and a  transition metal oxide co-glass-former will be made, and 
              studied with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), neutron  diffraction, and x-ray
              diffraction. Oxides of the group VB  elements vanadium and niobium will be used
              as co-former, in  order to understand the second order non-linear optical 
              properties observed in telluriteniobate glass ceramics.  These structures will
              be investigated using oxygen,  vanadium, and niobium NMR, as well as
              diffraction  techniques.  The resulting structures will be correlated  with the
              second order optical properties.  The second glass  system studied will be
              germanium sulfide, modified with  phosphorus or gallium.  These materials show
              strong third  order optical non-linearity, and are of interest for  photonics
              applications. Various design compromises must be  made in their application,
              however, stemming principally  from their thermal behavior and optical
              absorption.  Their  local structural features will be studied with phosphorus 
              and gallium NMR, diffraction methods, and Raman  spectroscopy. and the
              resulting features correlated with  both the non-linear optical properties and
              the thermal  properties.  It is conjectured that symmetric local  structures,
              such as rings and homopolar bonds, are  significant in inducing a slow nuclear
              response in the  optical non-linearity.  This hypothesis will be tested by 
              comparing the non-linear behavior with the local structures  found from the NMR
              and diffraction data.  In support of the  above two areas, new experimental
              probes of materials  structure will be developed. In particular new NMR 
              experiments expressly designed to  reveal spatial  correlations between atoms
              in disordered solids will be  implemented. Furthermore, the results of these
              experiments  will be incorporated with those from diffraction-based 
              measurements to generate large real-space models of the  material structure.
              From these models not only individual  structural elements but also their
              frequency and  distribution in space will be inferred.  %%%  Glass and optical
              science will be enriched through the  knowledge created about which structures
              are stable in  complex oxide and chalcogenide glasses, and how these 
              structures affect the optical properties of the materials.  Moreover, the
              creation of new non-linear optical materials  for applications such as
              photonics could be of great  economic benefit to society, via the creation of
              faster  computers and communications networks.  ***
