Title       : A Database System for Neuronal Pattern Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2002        
File        : a9870821

Award Number: 9870821
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $764075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Gabriel mgabriel@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark E. Nelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce C. Wheeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric Jakobsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William T. Greenough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9139,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DBI 9870821; Gabriel, Michael; University of Illinois, Urbana
              Champaign

Much current knowledge about brain function is based on analyses
              of the firing patterns of 
neurons. This field is experiencing an explosion of
              data. Huge data sets are being amassed 
with new computer-based data
              acquisition systems and techniques for recording 
simultaneously from multiple
              neurons and brain sites. Neural modeling generates large 
simulated data sets
              that must be analyzed and compared smith experimental data. The goal 
of this
              project is to develop an information system for all aspects of neuronal data
              
management, including storage, retrieval, analysis, visualization and sharing
              of 
experimental and simulated data. The ultimate aim is to develop a set of
              tools, techniques 
and standards that can be disseminated to help meet the
              needs of a large community of 
neuroscientists who work with neuronal
              data.

Neuronal recordings can be intra-, or extracellular recordings of
              single spikes, ensembles 
of neurons and field potentials. Researchers
              correlate neuronal activity with other time-
varying signals such as stimuli
              and ongoing behavior. All of these data are instances of 
general data type,
              namely time-series data. The proposed information svstem will be 
specialized
              for neuronal time-series data. This focus is complementary to efforts of other
              
groups to develop neuroscience information systems in domains such as
              molecular 
neurobiology and functional brain imaging, which primarily deal
              with sequence and 
image data.

The overarching goal of the project is to
              provide a system of general utility to 
neuroscientists. In its current scope,
              the project involves the laboratories of ten facultv of 
the Universitv of
              Illinois/Beckman Institute Neuronal Pattern Analysis (NPA) Group, 
Which can
              be viewed as a prototype of the larger community of neuroscientists that will
              
benefit from this effort. In addition the project will continue to be guided
              by resident 
colleagues of the National Center for Supercomputing Applications
              (NCSA), and working 
associations have been formed with related projects and
              individual researchers to 
incorporate a broad set of data handling
              conventions and requirements. The basic 
components of the proposed svstem
              have either reached or are well on the way toward 
completion. These include:
              a) a database component for organized storage and efficient 
search and
              retrieval of neuronal data meeting specified criteria of interest; b) digital
              brain 
atlases, to provide high-resolution neuroanatomical images for use in
              entering, retrieving 
and analyzing time series data; c) the time series data
              protocol (TSDP), a standard for 
representation, transfer and analysis of time
              series data in a platform-independent manner. 
d) a suite of flexible and
              intuitive tools for data analysis and visualization, as vvrell as a
              
programming library for development of TSDP-compliant tools which will be
              
interoperable within the research community.

The database component has
              been implemented using a generalized database table 
schema, allowing multiple
              laboratories to develop custom interfaces that work with a 
shared database
              system. Digital fish and rabbit brain atlases have been assembled and an
              
interface is being prepared to integrate the atlases with the database and
              analysis 
functions. The atlases will be supplied to several researchers, and
              exportation of TSDP to 
other projects is planned to promote full
              interoperability of multiple neuronal data sets and 
powerful time-series
              analysis and visualization tools. Development of TSDP is near 
completion and
              will be field tested by on-site and external researchers. Powerful
              
commercial, public domain and custom tools have been harnessed for data
              analysis and 
visualization, and a modular programming library is being
              developed to render near and 
existing tools TSDP-compliant and therefore
              widely interoperable in the research 
community. 

The system will meet the
              needs of neuroscientists at several levels. It can serve as a 
personal
              database management system for individual laboratories, a "workgroup" tool for
              
exchange of data within communities and as a means to implement an
              Internet-accessible 
ÊpublicË database. Steps remaining for full operational
              status are: a) completion and 
implementation of TSDP; b) integration of
              digital brain atlases erith data-entry, query-
development and with analysis
              and visualization tools; c) activation to full on-line status 
of NPA pilot
              laboratories; d) completion of the programming library for developing
              
TSDP-compatible analysis and visualization tools. These steps will be carried
              out within 
an ongoing cycle of performance testing, evaluation and
              improvement.


