Title       : Energy Balance, Puberty and Foraging Behavior in Naturalistic Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9870811

Award Number: 9870811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franklin H. Bronson Bronson@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                98-70811    BRONSON, F.H.    The brain monitors body fatness by assessing the
              amount of  leptin in circulation.  Leptin is the protein product of a  gene
              that is expressed only in fat cells.  It has been  hypothesized that leptin
              acts as a metabolic gate for  puberty in females.  That hypothesis stems from
              correlative  studies and relates to an older and quite controversial 
              hypothesis, namely that the pubertal ovulation cannot occur  until energy
              stores are adequate to support pregnancy and  lactation.  A worry about both of
              these hypotheses is that  they stem from experiments done in conditions that
              are  exceptionally benign compared to those in which the  relationship between
              leptin, fatness and ovulation actually  evolved.  The first specific aim of
              this proposal is to test  these two hypotheses using wild house mice that are
              exposed  to conditions that mimic those that wild animals experience  in
              nature.  The alternative hypotheses being offered here  are (a)  that a young
              female must be in positive energy  balance in order to ovulate but that energy
              reserves per se  are important only indirectly in that they are a component  of
              the energy balancing process and thus (b) that leptin  does not act as a
              metabolic gate for puberty. Numerous  studies in a variety of laboratories have
              shown that  circulating levels of leptin are important in regulating  feeding
              behavior. The worry here again is that these studies  have been done in
              oversimplified conditions and that the  relationship between leptin and feeding
              behavior is much  more complex that now thought.  The second specific aim of 
              this proposal is to test the hypothesis that the the effect  of leptin on
              feeding behavior is actually only one component  of its role in regulating the
              economics of foraging  (calories gained vs. calories lost while foraging) This 
              hypothesis will be tested using wild house that are exposed  to the kinds of
              complex foraging conditions they would  experience in the wild. Overall, the
              object of this proposal  is  to greatly clarify the relationship between energy
               balance, foraging behavior, leptin and puberty.
