Title       : Number Theory and Allied Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9870060

Award Number: 9870060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140982             (Estimated)
Investigator: George E. Andrews andrews@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              W. Dale Brownawell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        9870060  Andrews        This award supports research for separate
              projects by Professor Andrews and Brownawell. Andrews will focus on problems
              related to the theory of partitions and q-series. Recently, Andrews showed that
              MacMahon's Partition Analysis has great potential for new discoveries; this
              project will be continued and greatly expanded. In collaboration with A.
              Berkovich, Andrews established an analog of Bailey's Lemma for q-trinomial
              coefficients. There are several promising possible extensions here that will be
              explored including ties between Bailey's Lemma and Partition Analysis. In
              addition, Andrews has recently found a new aspect of Schur's 1926 partition
              theorem which should allow a more efficient proof and vast generalization of
              his theorems (joint with Beesenrodt and Olsson) for application to modular
              representation theory. Brownawell will focus on problems in transcendence
              theory. He proposes to further investigate transcendence properties in the
              Drinfeld setting. In joint work with L. Denis, he plans to obtain and extension
              of known results on the linear independence properties of the logarithm of a
              separably algebraic number involving the divided derivatives of it and of
              quasi-periodic functions. He will look at the situation that Sinha exploited so
              strikingly in his thesis, and he will also look into the possibility of
              applying interpolation considerations for the Carlitz exponential functions. In
              other projects, Brownawell will look at two problems relating differential
              equations and transcendence. One is an old and neglected question of Siegel's.
              The other is a new question that arose in recent work of Nesterenko; a positive
              answer here would base a new proof of Nesterenko's marvelous theorems on a
              criterion of algebraic independence due to the co-PI. Brownawell will
              investigate a Lojasiewicz inequality that will improve even further the current
              impressive work of Berenstein and Yger on the Nullstellensatz. Finally, he will
              develop a multi-homogeneous Nullstellens atz.    This research falls into the
              general mathematical field of number theory. Number theory has its historical
              roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as those
              dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among the
              oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However, within  the last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool in diverse  applications in areas such as data transmission
              and processing, and  communication systems.
