Title       : Interior-point Methods for Large-scale Nonlinear Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9870317

Award Number: 9870317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Vanderbei rvdb@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870317
Robert Vanderbei

The objective of this research project is to extend
              interior-point methods so that they can be applied to smooth nonlinear
              optimization problems.  In particular, an existing linear/quadratic solver will
              be enhanced so as to become an easy-to-use and efficient system for the
              solution of these problems.  If a problem is convex, the system will find a
              globally optimal solution.  If it is nonconvex, then the system will find a
              locally optimal solution in a neighborhood of a given initial solution.  The
              algorithmic issues to be addressed include: (a) which merit function to use,
              (b) when and by how much to perturb indefinite Hessians, (c) how to adapt the
              predictor-corrector variant, (d) how and when to sparsify Hessians, (e) how
              much to push initial values away from bounds, (f) how to detect and handle
              problems in which the constraints don't satisfy a constraint qualification
              condition, and (g) how to ensure that the infeasible interior-point method
              doesn't evaluate any function outside its domain.  As part of this research, a
              database of real-world nonlinear optimization models will be assembled.  This
              database will be freely available via the internet.  Finally, techniques will
              be sought that will enable one to use the interior-point-based
              nonlinear-programming system to solve semidefinite programming
              problems.

Nonlinear optimization plays a fundamental role in all branches of
              applied science and engineering.  Whether it is maximizing the speed at which
              flutter destroys a wing, minimizing the use of nonrenewable resources in
              hydrothermal power generation, designing a structure that can bear a specified
              load with minimal amount of material, or minimizing side-lobe signal strength
              in the output of an antenna array while preserving main-lobe characteristics,
              there is one commonly shared theme: optimization.  Interior-point methods
              provide a new approach to the solution of these problems, which promises to
              enable one to solve them more reliably and much more efficiently than before.
              This research project will focus on resolving the issues involved in producing
              an efficient and robust interior-point algorithm for nonlinear
              optimization.


