Title       : The Differential Geometry of Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a9870164

Award Number: 9870164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185359             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Bryant bryant@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS-9870164  Principal Investigator:  Robert Bryant   
              The principal investigator plans to apply the theory of differential   systems
              and the method of equivalence to problems in differential  geometry and
              mathematical physics that have resisted more traditional  approaches,
              emphasizing two main problems.  A Finsler structure on a  manifold M assigns a
              notion of length to each tangent vector in M,  leading to a notion of length
              for paths in M. Riemannian geometry is a  special case where the length is
              derived from an inner product on  tangent spaces.  Finsler structures are
              essentially geometrized  calculus of variation problems and the fundamental
              problems involve  studying paths that are extremals of length (i.e., the
              geodesics),  their stability properties, their computability, and so forth.  As
              in  the familiar Riemannian case, the geometric object that controls  stability
              of geodesics is a sort of curvature tensor, called the flag  curvature.  Bryant
              plans to develop classification and global existence  theorems for Finsler
              structures with constant flag curvature, using  exterior differential systems
              techniques.  The second main problem  arises in certain models of
              super-symmetric string  theory that require  the construction on a smooth
              manifold of a connection  with reduced  holonomy, perhaps with torsion, out of
              a Riemannian metric and a  three-form.  The problem is to classify which pairs
              of metric and  three-form will allow the physical theory to be super-symmetric.
                Bryant has already done the classification in various low dimensions  and is
              ready to study the intermediate dimensions (six through  twenty-six) that are
              of physical interest, using the techniques of  exterior differential systems
              that contributed to the solution of the  holonomy problem in the classical case
              (in which the three-form was  identically zero).  Bryant also plans to continue
              his collaboration  with Griffiths and Hsu on the geometry of PDE and their
              conservation  laws and to generalize  his recent structure theorems for
              harmonic  morphisms.    Optimization is a central problem in mathematics, in
              which one tries to  select the 'best' configuration in the space of possible
              configurations  in a model for a physical system.  An example is the problem of
               navigating on a body of water in which one must take water currents  into
              account in planning the 'best' path from origin to destination,  where 'best'
              is taken to mean 'shortest time of traverse'.   A path  that is optimal for a
              short period (a 'geodesic') might not remain  optimal if pursued long enough. 
              This is known as instability.  (For  example, in a river where the current is
              faster in midstream it turns  out that downstream geodesics are stable, but
              that upstream geodesics  are not.)  The geometric quantity that measures this
              notion of  stability is known as 'curvature', since it was first identified in 
              studies of the curvature of the Earth. Bryant's work studies curvature  and
              'over-determined' systems of differential equations, and is  relevant to
              optimization problems in motion planning, control theory,  robotics, and string
              theory models in high energy physics.
