Title       : Biological Inequality at Tikal, Guatemala: Bioarchaeological Aspects of Social
               Complexity in an Ancient Maya Site
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1998      
File        : a9870351

Award Number: 9870351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lori E. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Lori Wright will conduct a
              preliminary analysis of skeletal material collected from the Tikal, a Mayan
              archaeological site. Located in the lowlands of the northern Guatemalan
              Department of Peten, the city of Tikal has been a critical source of
              information about the development and demise of ancient Maya civilization.
              Occupied from ca. 600 BC through AD 1,000, Tikal grew to be among the largest
              cities of ancient Mesoamerica. Like other Maya polities, Tikal's fortunes waxed
              and waned. During the earlier part of its existence, the population is thought
              to have been divided into only two social tiers. During the following Late
              Classic period, Tikal grew to become the center of a centralized state,
              encompassing as many as 62,000 people, with greater socioeconomic diversity and
              a proliferation of status levels. Archaeological reconstruction's of
              prehistoric social systems have emphasized material symbols of wealth and
              energy expenditure. However these data provide only limited information and do
              not reflect the direct impact of these distinctions on individuals. Physical
              anthropological techniques can address the biological implications of social
              inequality through the identification of patterns of differential food
              consumption, differences in morbidity and childhood growth and through study of
              genetic structure. Such trends are commonly assumed to have pertained in
              prehistoric Mayan states but have yet to be fully explored.       Excavations
              at Tikal have recovered several series of human skeletal remains and
              preliminary analyses by other investigators suggest that reconstructed height
              differences reflect, in fact, status differences. Dr. Wright wishes to do a
              detailed analysis of the entire sample. A variety of biological and chemical
              techniques can be applied to determine growth patterns, degree of physical
              stress and diet. However the materials are stored in three locations and none
              are well inventoried. Skeletal preservation is often poor in tropical
              conditions and many of the materials are incomplete. With this NSF award, Dr.
              Wright will travel to Guatemala, conduct a complete inventory and assess the
              state of each skeleton. These data will provide the basis to assess the
              feasibility of a full scale research project.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
