Title       : The Role of Snz and Sno Proteins in the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  1999   
File        : a9870878

Award Number: 9870878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret C. Werner-Washburne maggieww@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Anne Nelson  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ability to regulate growth and division is recognized as one of the most
              important characteristics of living cells. However, in nature cells spend most
              of their time in a quiescent state or stationary phase, during which pathways
              that regulate non-growing, non-dividing cells become critical. Because most of
              a cell's life may be spent in a quiescent state, the ability to regulate entry
              into, survival during, and exit from this state is as important for species
              survival as the ability to divide. Although the quiescent state is of obvious
              significance, little is known about the mechanisms that allow cells to enter or
              exit this state or to survive for long periods of time, experiencing a variety
              of life-threatening stresses, including starvation.  The long-term objective of
              this is to understand the molecular events that are important for the process
              of entry into, survival during, and exit from stationary phase, the quiescent
              state, in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In prior research two novel
              genes, SNZ1 (SNooZe) and SNO1 (SNZ-proximal Open reading frame) that are
              induced in stationary phase were identified. SNZ and SNO genes are members of
              highly conserved gene families that are found in divergently transcribed pairs.
              Most yeast strains contain three SNZ/SNO gene pairs. Snz proteins are the most
              highly conserved proteins yet identified that are present in all three
              phylogenetic domains, i.e. the archaea, bacteria, and eucarya. The majority of
              this project focuses on SNZ1. In addition to its induction in stationary phase,
              SNZ1 is induced by specific amino acid, purine, and pyrimidine starvation. snzl
              mutants are also exquisitely sensitive to 6 azauracil, an inhibitor of the UTP
              and GTP biosynthetic pathways, and this sensitivity is suppressed by addition
              of uracil. These results suggest that Snzl protein, and probably also Sno 1
              protein, is required for production of pyrimidine nucleotides, possibly through
              regulation of or involvement in a salvage pathway required in yeast during
              times of dire starvation.
