Title       : POWRE: Attachment and Caregiving Processes in Intimate Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1998    
File        : a9870524

Award Number: 9870524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy L. Collins ncollins@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When individuals are faced with stressful or threatening events, they often turn
              to trusted others for comfort, assistance, and support.  Indeed, a large body
              of research indicates that receiving social support, or feeling confident that
              it is available when needed, helps individuals cope more effectively with
              stressful life events and appears to have long-term benefits for health and
              psychological well being.  This is a study of attachment processes in
              adulthood.  The goal of the study is to explore normative processes as well as
              individual differences in patterns of careseeking and caregiving by having
              couples keep detailed daily diaries for a period of three weeks.  A short-term
              longitudinal follow-up will also be included in order to investigate the role
              of caregiving processes in the development of trust relationship satisfaction
              over time.  Eighty couples will be recruited to participate.     Although we
              know a great deal about the important benefits of social support for personal
              adaptation, we know much less about the specific ways in which social support
              processes are carried out in close relationships.  Attachment theory provides a
              useful perspective from which to study this topic.  A rich data set from which
              to examine a variety of hypotheses will be created and substantial theoretical
              and empirical contributions are expected.  The investigator is at a critical
              state in her career because she is nearing tenure review and has recently
              relocated to Southern California.  This award will support the investigator in
              a one-year Visiting Professorship at the University of California, Santa
              Barbara.  During this time, the investigator will engage in a variety of
              research and educational activities.   In addition to conducting her research,
              she will obtain advanced training in two multivariate statistical methodologies
              that are essential for studying diary and couples data, and she will teach a
              graduate seminar.  Together, these and other activities will enable the
              investigator to broaden her research program, strengthen her methodological
              skills, and greatly increase her visibility among scholars within and outside
              her research area.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
