Title       : IGERT FORMAL PROPOSAL: Integrated Graduate Education and Research Training in
               Geographic Information Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9870668

Award Number: 9870668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2257436            (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Mark dmark@geog.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barry Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajan Batta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ezra B. W. Zubrow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph F. Atkinson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph V. DePinto  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9870668  Mark       This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training 
              (IGERT) award will support the establishment of a broadly-  based graduate
              training program in geographic information  science, an emerging area of
              research that lies at the  intersection of the cognitive, computational and
              social  sciences.  The program will be a joint effort of 19 faculty  and of 6
              non-academic mentors who will supervise students  during internships in the
              private and public sector.  Participating faculty come from 7 departments and
              the school  of library and information science.  The collaborative  research
              foci of participants range from basic studies the  ontogeny of human
              conceptions of geographic space to applied  research in practical applications
              such as delivery of  governmental services and environmental modeling.  NSF
              support  will provide stipends for 18 graduate students each year, and  for
              related costs of student research training.  Students will  register in and
              satisfy the coursework requirements of any one  of 7 existing departmental
              Ph.D. programs, but will have IGERT-  specific requirements for 4 courses and
              must choose from a  restricted set of elective courses.  Of these required and 
              elective courses, five are to be created specifically for the  IGERT program. 
              As part of their training, students will  complete an internship at a major
              software company or at the  Buffalo police department.       IGERT is a new,
              NSF-wide program whose goal is to sponsor  the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate  programs that will train a diverse group of new
              scientists and  engineers to be well-prepared for varied careers in the 
              private and public sectors.  IGERT provides an opportunity for  the development
              of new, well-focused multidisciplinary  programs that bridge traditional
              organizational barriers,  uniting faculty from several departments or
              institutions to  establish a highly-interactive collaborative environment for 
              both training and research.  In its first year, the p rogram  will provide
              support to 17 institutions for new or nascent  programs that collectively span
              all areas of science,  engineering and mathematics eligible for support by the
              NSF.
