Title       : POWRE: Vocal communication in Cebus Capucinus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9870429

Award Number: 9870429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24992              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan E. Perry sperry@anthro.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1392,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will test experimentally a set of hypotheses about monkeys' social
              knowledge and decisionmaking criteria.  One set of experiments will focus on
              the issue of tactical deception-a phenomenon that has been well documented
              among apes and some Old World monkeys but virtually never reported in New World
              primates.  Specifically, white-faced capuchins, a New World primate species,
              will be tested to see whether they find alarm calls less credible when they
              follow a simulated social situation in which the alarm caller would have a
              motive to deceive-specifically, a motive to distract the attention of
              higher-ranking monkeys engaged in an aggressive coalition against him or her. 
              The other set of experiments will focus on the criteria involved in males'
              decisions about whether to respond aggressively to vocal threats by extra-group
              males.  The project builds on the knowledge that has been gained in
              observational studies by using playbacks of vocalizations.  The investigator
              will spend several months in Costa Rica conducting observations and collecting
              the recordings needed for conducting playback experiments.  The social
              relationships and social cognition of capuchin monkeys are an interesting
              domain of inquiry because of current interest in the evolution of primate
              intelligence.  Capuchins have the largest brains, relative to their bodies, of
              any nonhuman primates and therefore represent a key data point in the debate
              about whether the principal driving force behind primate brain expansion was
              selective pressure for spatial memory and extractive foraging dexterity or for
              the ability to solve complex social problems.  This project will contribute
              valuable data on social cognition and social relationships in New World primate
              species that can be compared to the already extensive array of data on such
              issues in Old World primates.  This award will enable the investigator to learn
              new technical skills, specifically bioacoustic analysis and playback experiment
              protocols.  It will also provide funds for the investigator to conduct
              experiments to test the feasibility of her approach to the study of the
              evolution of intelligence.                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
