Title       : IGERT: Advanced Graduate Training in Photonics Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a9870717

Award Number: 9870717
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2149998            (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Mintmire mintmir@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jin-Joo Song  (Principal Investigator former)
              Nicholas A. Kotov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Soderstrand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerzy S. Krasinski  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              photonics.  This activity is a joint effort of twenty-four scientists and
              engineers from the Departments of Physics, Chemistry, Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, and Engineering Research and the College of Business at Oklahoma
              State; two government laboratories; and six industrial laboratories.  This
              group of scientists and engineers has established research collaborations
              through the Oklahoma State University Center for Laser and Photonics Research
              (CLPR) and the Center for Photonic and Electronic Materials Devices (CPEMD),
              and their collective expertise will provide the intellectual underpinning for
              the training of sixty graduate students over the five-year duration of the
              award.  The curricular platform for this IGERT activity is provided by the
              newly developed multidisciplinary Photonics graduate degree program at Oklahoma
              State that draws upon the extensive infrastructure of the CLPR and the CPEMD. 
              Features of the IGERT activity include a flexible core curriculum with courses
              in physics, chemistry, and electrical engineering; graduate laboratory courses;
              advanced research leading to the PhD in Photonics with specialization in
              nanostructure wide-gap semiconductors, ultrafast techniques, and
              photorefractive phenomena; multidisciplinary technical seminars; a business
              lecture series on technical management, marketing, intellectual property, and
              venture capital; and industrial internships.  The IGERT activity will be
              coordinated and administered through the CLPR.  IGERT is a new, NSF-wide
              program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative, research-based
              graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists and engineers
              to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of career options. 
              IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to develop new,
              well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend organizational
              boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or institutions to
              establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for both training and
              research.  In this first year of the program, support will be provided to
              seventeen institutions for new or nascent programs that collectively span all
              areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
