Title       : POWRE: Physiology of Sex-Specific Neurons in Flies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 14,  1998 
File        : a9870396

Award Number: 9870396
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84376              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Taylor taylorb@cgrb.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1592,5946,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9870396  TAYLOR   Sexual development in the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster,
              is governed by a cascade of sex-determination genes.  This cascade branches
              into three output pathways controlling mating behavior and the formation of the
              relevant sex-specific neurons in males and females.  Each of the output
              branches is headed by a separate regulatory gene, "fruitless" (fru),
              "dissatisfaction" (dsf) or "doublesex" (dsx), which control distinct aspects of
              the sex-specific behavioral repertoire.  fru controls all, or virtually all,
              aspects of male reproductive behaviors and the formation of a male-specific
              motorneuron that induces a sex-specific muscle, the Muscle of Lawrence (MOL). 
              The sex-specific transcripts of the fru gene are expressed in a tiny fraction
              of neurons in the central nervous systems (about 0.5% of 100,000 neurons).  The
              working model of fru action is that the fru-expressing neurons form dedicated
              neural circuits that direct other neurons to produce male-specific behaviors
              such as courtship song and copulation.  The aim of this research is to
              characterize the role of the fru gene in specifying the male-specific
              motorneuron that innervates the MOL.  In males, this neuron induces the
              formation of the male-specific MOL muscle, whereas in fru mutants, the
              motorneuron makes incorrect synapses and the male-specific characteristics of
              the MOL is not induced.
	This POWRE award will allow Dr. Taylor to spend a
              year on sabbatical in the laboratory of Dr. Michael Bate at the University of
              Cambridge.  She plans to investigate sex-specific differences in the physiology
              of the synapse between the MOL motorneuron and its target muscle in males
              versus the homologous synapse in females.  A second goal of the project is to
              determine whether specific electrical activity in the motorneuron is required
              to induce the MOL.  This project is particularly suitable for a POWRE award
              because Dr. Taylor will learn insect neurophysiology at one of the best
              laboratories for such studies.  The introduction of this new approach and
              technical expertise will allow her to make scientific contributions to a wider
              audience than previously, which should, in turn, make her laboratory more
              visible and attractive to graduate students and postdoctoral researchers at a
              crucial point in her career.


