Title       : Instrumentation for the University of Washington's Integrated Airborne
               Atmospheric Research Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  2001   
File        : a9870945

Award Number: 9870945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter V. Hobbs phobbs@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel A. Jaffe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard H. Gammon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1522,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The NSF Major Research Instrumentation Program (MRI) is designed to improve the
              condition of scientific and engineering equipment and facilities for research
              and training in the Nation∆s academic institutions.  For twenty-five years the
              University of Washington (UW) has maintained and utilized a sophisticated
              airborne facility for atmospheric research and for the training of students.
              This facility has been used for a wide range of important (often unique)
              investigations, including studies of the sources and sinks of atmospheric trace
              gases and particles (e.g., volcanoes, biomass burning and various anthropogenic
              sources), the role of clouds in weather and climate (e.g.. clouds as chemical
              processors; the microstructure of clouds; the optical and radiative properties
              of clouds and their effects on climate), and the mesoscale structures of large
              storm systems (e.g., the organization of clouds and precipitation in
              mid-latitude cyclones).
In 1997 the UW acquired a new platform for such
              studies (a twin-engine turboprop Convair 580). which has significantly greater
              performance capabilities than the previous aircraft used by the UW.  This MRI
              award provides for the purchase of a new generation of research instruments to
              be carried on the Convair 580.  These include instruments for measuring several
              trace gases of key importance in atmospheric chemistry, several new instruments
              for measuring the size distributions and concentrations of airborne particles,
              measurements of the size spectra of precipitation particles, measurement of
              three-dimensional air motions, and a new data acquisition system for the
              aircraft.
These instruments will permit investigations of a variety of
              outstanding issues related to the earth's changing atmosphere, weather and
              climate and will aid the formation of new research partnerships.  The new
              integrated research facility will be used also for the enhanced training of
              undergraduate and graduate students in airborne atmospheric research.

