Title       : POWRE: Systematic Investigation of Effects of Media and Change in Social
               Attitudes on Status-Organizing Processes in Task Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9870394

Award Number: 9870394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44851              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Troyer lisa-troyer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1331,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Experimental research on social influence processes has recently revealed lower
              levels of social influence compared to prior research.  This project focuses on
              systematically investigating three sources of this variation: (1) changes in
              cultural attitudes regarding social characteristics that affect influence
              processes, (2) differences in the medium through which experiments studying
              social influence are conducted (i.e., video-mediated vs. computer-mediated
              experiments), and (3) differences in the procedures that experimenters have
              followed.  In this experiment, subjects complete a decisionmaking task,
              ostensibly by working with a partner.  In reality, the partner is emulated via
              computer software or videotape.  The partner's behavior is manipulated,
              introducing disagreements regarding the task solution into the interaction. 
              Influence is assessed by determining how often the subject refuses to comply
              with the position of the partner following the disagreements.  To test gender
              and media effects, a 2 (subject gender: male vs. female) x 2 (partner's gender:
              male vs. female) x 2 (medium: computer vs. video) factorial design is used.  
              This project rests on arguments from Status Characteristics Theory, which
              describes how social attributes (like age, race, and sex) that differentiate
              people correspond to differences in competency expectations that people hold
              for one another and influence behavior.  Competency expectations arise from
              cultural beliefs regarding social characteristics.  Thus, shifts in such
              beliefs may lead to changes in influence processes, accounting for the lower
              influence levels found in recent tests of the theory.  Also, recent experiments
              were conducted in a computerized context, while earlier studies were conducted
              in a video context.  As such, media effects represent an alternative
              explanation for reduced influence levels.  Examination of previous and recent
              experiments on social influence also reveal differences in the protocols that
              were used.  Consequently, it is unclear whether lower influence rates in recent
              research arise from (1) changes in cultural attitidues, (2) media effects,
              and/or (3) variations in the procedures followed in administering the
              experiments.  This project will lead to enhanced understanding of the effect of
              cultural attitudes on interpersonal interaction, as well as the effects of
              communication media on social interaction.  Valuable information on
              computer-mediated experimentation will also be gained.  The investigator has
              been engaged in the development of computer software through which Status
              Characteristics Theory experiments can be conducted.  The articulation of media
              and procedural effects is critical to this work. The effects of media must be
              disentangled from the effects of cultural understandings of social attributes
              before theoretical and empirical advances can be made.  Consequently, this
              exploratory research is critical to the development of the investigator's
              research agenda and scholarly career.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 
