Title       : POWRE: Issues in Condensed Matter Physics: Phase Separation and Solvated Protein
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2001   
File        : a9870464

Award Number: 9870464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149882             (Estimated)
Investigator: Celeste Sagui celeste_sagui@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9870464  Sagui  This project covers two lines of theoretical investigations in 
              Condensed Matter Physics; effects of elastic fields on the  process of phase
              separation in binary alloy and viscoelastic  fluid systems; and issues related
              to the refinement of X-ray data  for structural analysis of proteins in a
              solvated environment.  The kinetics of growth and ordering that take place
              during the  process of phase separation determines much of the important 
              microstructure of materials. In turn, many of the interesting  mechanical,
              electrical and magnetic properties of materials  depend on the microstructure.
              Typically, when a system is rapidly  quenched from the single-phase part of its
              phase diagram to a  point inside its coexistence curve, it orders kinetically.
              A  long-wavelength instability creates an initial droplet-like or 
              interconnected structure, which grows to macroscopic size as time  evolves. It
              has long been realized that the presence of elastic  fields influences the
              process of phase separation in important  ways. For example, in alloy systems
              shape transformations,  ordering of domains, a kinetic slowing down, and
              possibly reverse  coarsening effects have either been observed and/or
              predicted.  However,  theoretical understanding of these effects is at  present
              incomplete, and this project aims to investigate the  effects of elastic field
              on binary alloy systems through  large-scale three-dimensional simulations of
              appropriate Langevin  equations. Elastic effects also play an important role in
               viscoelastic fluids and foams. Viscoelastic fluids such as  various polymer
              melts, are non-Newtonian fluids that are charac  terized by elasticity on
              relatively short time scales, and  fluidity on long time scales. During phase
              separation, these  systems are strongly influenced by the presence of
              long-range,  correlated elastic fields, whose influence on the growth kinetics 
              are presently not understood. The problem of phase separation of  viscoelastic
              fluids will be investigated with numerica l  simulations. The second part of
              the research is aimed at  employing state-of-the art molecular dynamics and
              optimization  techniques as aids in the process of refining X-ray data for 
              protein structure calculations. Proteins are complex,  biologically active
              macromolecules exhibiting a large variety of  different structural and dynamic
              properties. It has long been  known that much of their active biological
              functions are  determined by their three-dimensional structure, which fold so
              as  to produce specific binding sites and/or catalytically active  regions. One
              of the outstanding problems in the field, is the  prediction of protein
              structure from its basic amino acid se  quence. It is in this context that
              structural predictions based  on X-ray data have proven to be of paramount
              importance. The  project aims to move this field forward, through the
              introduction  of newly developed optimization techniques in order to facilitate
               structural predictions. The PI will concentrate specifically on  cases where
              models for the protein structure are ill or poorly  defined, as in the case of
              protein loops in a solvated  environment.  %%%  This is a Visiting
              Professorship grant made under the  Professional Opportunities for Women in
              Research and Education  (POWRE) program, and is co-funded by the MPS Office of 
              Multidisciplinary Activities(OMA). The phase separation  activities are natural
              extensions of the current work of the PI,  while the protein structure research
              will enable the PI to  transition into a new area of research, namely that of
              molecular  biology.
