Title       : RUI: Quaternary Vertebrate Paleontology and Biogeography of Southeast Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9870343

Award Number: 9870343
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy H. Heaton theaton@usd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Dakota
	      414 East Clark Street
	      Vermillion, SD  57069    605/677-5370

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870343
Heaton

Since 1990 Southeast Alaska has become a new frontier for
              American paleontology and archaeology.  Once thought to have been overridden by
              ice and denuded of life during the last Ice Age, it now appears that this
              region contained coastal refugia that were home to isolated populations of land
              mammals, possibly including humans, and may have served as a corridor for
              intercontinental travel.  Scientists including archaeologists,
              sedimentologists, glacial geologists, and geneticists are now working together
              to unravel the complex Quaternary history of this important region.  I have
              been the leader of the paleontological aspect of this research.  With funds
              from the National Geographic Society and support from Tongass National Forest
              and the Tongass Caves Project (a major cave reconnaissance and mapping
              expedition), my assistants and I have located and excavated rich cave deposits
              that have formed the primary data source for this new emerging view of
              Southeast Alaska.  These deposits contain a record of mammals, birds, and
              fishes that span the last 45,000 years.  Our discovery in 1996 of the oldest
              human remains ever found in Alaska or canada brought about a more integrated
              research effort and helped archaeologist and collaborator E. James Dixon of the
              Denver Museum of Natural History to secure NSF funding for an expanded 1997
              excavation.  Our close collaboration continues, but our need for more manpower
              and other support has led us to seek independent funding.

A three-year
              research project is proposed to intensify the excavation and provide for
              adequate laboratroy analyses of cave deposits on Prince of Wales (POW) Island
              and other islands of Alaska's Alexander Archipelago.  At least two summers will
              be spent excavating On Your Knees Cave where the human remains ere found.  this
              cave has a continuous fossil record across the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM) from
              at least 41,600 years BP to the present and is a landmark site for unraveling
              the biochronology of the region (cave deposits previously excavated were
              postglacial: 12,300 BP to present).  This excavation must proceed quickly
              because of agreements with Native tribal organizations to rebury the human
              remains in the cave in a timely fashion.  On Your Knees Cave is a cramped, wet
              cave that pres4ents many special difficulties for excavation, however my
              specialized research team possesses the necessary experience and equipment for
              working in such cave environments.  In our work, all sediments are excavated
              systematically according to a three dimensional grid and are wet screened
              through fine mesh to recover all animal remains.  Specialists in other
              disciplines are consulted at every stage of the work to make sure that no
              crucial information is lost.

Our research has already documented that Ursus
              arctos (brown bear), previously thought never to have inhabited POW Island,
              actually lived there both before and after the LGM and probably inhabited the
              archipelago during the entire LGM.  The most common fossil from the LGM itself
              is Phoca hispida (ringed seal) which currently inhabits only the Arctic region
              and is a climatic indicator of seasonal sea ice.  We have discovered distinct
              suites of rodents before and after the LGM, some of which reflect the climatic
              shift from the alpine conditions of the Ice Age to the dense rainforest that
              now occupies Southeast Alaska.  This research promises to provide a detailed
              biologic and climatic chronology of the region and to resolve longstanding
              controversies among archaeologists about potential routes between Beringia and
              the unglaciated parts of North America.  Our discoveries thus far suggest that
              a detailed human history may also be documented from this cave site.

Our
              past excavations have been of short duration and have been mainly a volunteer
              effort.  Two-month field seasons and extensive laboratory support are now
              needed to adequately complete the current excavationand to expand the research
              to other islands and the nearby mainland where new cave deposits are being
              reported to us.  We also propose to involve undergraduate students from the
              University of South Dakota in all aspects of the work and to have them present
              papers on specialized topics at scientific meetings.  (Dr. Dixon's NSF grant is
              also supporting Tlingit native interns from POW Island in the excavation and
              analysis.)  My colleagues and I believe that this interdisciplinary and
              intercultural research project promises to greatly expand our knowledge of
              American prehistory while providing a unique educational experience for all
              parties involved.
