Title       : POWRE: Constrained Diffusion of an Isolated Colloidal Sphere in Confined
               Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9870437

Award Number: 9870437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74982              (Estimated)
Investigator: Binhua Lin b-lin@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9870437  Lin  This project probes the effects of confined geometry on the 
              diffusion of an isolated colloidal sphere using optical tweezers  combined with
              digital video microscopy. The program is divided  into two distinct groups of
              experiments based on the nature of  the confined geometry. In the first group
              of experiments, the  diffusion of an isolated sphere near one planar wall or
              confined  between two parallel planar walls will be studied. Optical  tweezers
              will be used to manipulate the position and the  diffusion range of the sphere
              with respect to the walls. The main  issue in these experiments involves the
              effective wall drag force  on a neutral or charged sphere from a neutral or
              charged smooth  glass wall or from a "structured wall" such as a 2D colloidal 
              crystalline surface. In a second group of experiments, the  diffusion of a
              sphere trapped in a one-dimensional tunnel or  two-dimensional network of
              tunnels will be studied. The tunnels  or tunnel-network with a well-defined
              spatial structure will be  fabricated by microcontact printing. These
              experiments probe the  correlation of the diffusion of a sphere to the spatial
              structure  of the ambient patterned confined geometry. The issues being 
              addressed are of fundamental interest for understanding colloidal 
              hydrodynamics. The model systems noted above are limiting cases  representing
              problems associated with diffusion of macromolecules  either at interfaces or
              in random porous structures. Examples  include transport processes such as
              "single file diffusion" in  physical mixing processing, electrodiffusion of
              polyelectrolytes  in confined environments (electrophoresis in sequencing large
              DNA  molecues), microbubble diffusion at liquid/crystal interfaces of  a
              growing crystal front, fine particle migration and flow of  stable emulsion
              drops in porous media (relevant to oil recovery  processes).  %%%  This is a
              research enhancement grant made under the Professional  Opportunities for Women
              in Research and Education (POWRE)  program. T he research will contribute new
              materials science  knowledge at a fundamental level.
