Title       : Developmental Regulation of Auxin Biosynthesis in Arabidopsis thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9870798

Award Number: 9870798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Normanly normanly@biochem.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9870798
Normanly
The long range goal of this project is to understand the
              developmental regulation of auxin biosynthesis. Auxin is a key regulator of
              plant growth and development, and it is known that the maintenance of auxin
              levels (auxin homeostasis) in the plant is a dynamic process that responds
              dramatically to developmental as well as environmental cues. The interplay
              between auxin homeostasis and the growth and developmental effects of auxin is
              still unclear since most aspects of auxin biosynthesis, metabolism, and signal
              transduction are poorly defined. The problem of auxin biosynthesis has been
              particularly vexing, and to date, none of the pathways that have been
              postulated for biosynthesis of the primary plant auxin, indole-3-acetic acid
              (IAA), has been proven definitively in any plant species. Arabidopsis thaliana
              is an excellent model system for the study of many aspects of plant growth and
              development and this project employs a combination of genetic, molecular, and
              biochemical techniques to define IAA biosynthesis and characterize its
              developmental regulation in this plant. In vivo labeling techniques will be
              used to determine synthesis and turnover rates for IAA and those compounds that
              are identified as IAA precursors. Additionally, the cellular distribution of
              IAA and precursor pools will be examined.  This basic information will enable
              the investigator to characterize the candidates obtained in genetic screens for
              IAA biosynthetic mutants, as well as other mutants with apparent defects in IAA
              homeostasis. These will be valuable tools with which to define the role of IAA
              biosynthesis in the control of growth and development, and ultimately to
              manipulate IAA biosynthesis in agriculturally useful ways.


There are
              multiple IAA biosynthetic pathways that utilize as a precursor either
              tryptophan  (Trp-dependent pathways) or some other compound (Trp-independent
              pathways). These pathways appear to be utilized differentially during
              development. Since neither the Trp-dependent nor Trp-independent pathway is
              known, the immediate goals of this project are as follows:
1.	Quantify rates
              of IAA synthesis and turnover at different developmental time points and 
              quantify metabolic activity of subcellular precursor and product
              pools.
2.	Establish whether indole-pyruvic acid (IPA) and /or
              indole-3-acetaldehyde (IAAld) are intermediates in IAA
              biosynthesis.
3.	Identify other intermediates in IAA
              biosynthesis.
4.	Initiate a screen for mutants defective in either
              Trp-dependent or Trp-independent IAA biosynthesis.
5.	Screen pools of yeast
              transformed with Arabidopsis cDNAs for indole-metabolizing genes.

			      
              
			

