Title       : Biodiversity of Freshwater Mussel Assemblages and their Associated
               Macroinvertebrate Fauna in Streams of the Ouachita Uplands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a9870092

Award Number: 9870092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caryn C. Vaughn cvaughn@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870092  Vaughn    The freshwater mussel (Bivalvia: Unionidae) fauna of North
              American  streams is the most diverse in the world, but is highly threatened
              and  declining at an alarming rate.  The consequences of this catastrophic 
              decline of an entire fauna go beyond the loss of species, because  mussels
              serve critical roles in the functioning of riverine  ecosystems.  Thus, the
              current decline in mussel species also  represents a loss of critical habitat
              and food resources for the  remaining aquatic fauna, and may alter the
              ecosystem functioning in  many North American rivers. In addition, there are
              likely benthic  macroinvertebrates that have coevolved with mussel assemblages,
              are  specifically dependent on them, and thus may also be declining.  The 
              Ouachita Uplands, in central and western Arkansas and southeastern  Oklahoma,
              U.S., represent one of the last strongholds of freshwater  biodiversity in
              North America and may represent one of the few areas  where conservation of an
              intact mussel fauna may be possible.   Freshwater mussels and associated
              benthic macroinvertebrates will be  surveyed in the major river systems of the
              Ouachita Uplands over a  period of three field seasons.  Mussels and benthic
              macroinvertebrates  will be quantitatively sampled and environmental parameters
              will be  measured at each site.  Mussel and benthic macroinvertebrate voucher 
              specimens will be deposited in the Oklahoma Museum of Natural History  and the
              Illinois Natural History Survey (crayfish).  Mussel tissue  samples will be
              deposited with the U.S.G.S. Leetown Science Center  genetic tissue repository
              and the Texas Parks and Wildlife Heart of  the Hills Research Station.  Mussel
              and benthic macroinvertebrate data  will made available on the internet. The
              data collected will be  applicable to a multitude of conceptual problems in
              biology, many of  which have important conservation implications.  In addition,
              the data  will provide a baseline for monitoring these areas in the future, 
              particularly in response  to the impending zebra mussel invasion.
