Title       : A Faunistic Survey of the Dynastinae (Insecta: Coleoptera: Scarabaeidae) of
               Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9870202

Award Number: 9870202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $292609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett C. Ratcliffe bratcliffe1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald D. Cave  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,9200,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870202  Ratcliffe    Scarab beetles are prominent members of the entomofauna. 
              The Dynastinae is one of the most conspicuous subfamilies of Scarabaeidae
              because of their rich species diversity and often large size.  The Dynastinae
              is comprised of about 1,400 species, and more species are found in the New
              World tropics than in any other realm.        This research will monograph all
              the Dynastinae in Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador. The survey will provide
              the first extensive documentation of the taxonomic, geographic, and temporal
              distribution of dynastine beetles in these countries and will provide the means
              to identify all the taxa.  To accomplish this, dynastines residing in
              systematics research collections in the United States and Canada and those
              small collections in Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador will be intensively
              surveyed in order to gather data on spatial and temporal distribution and life
              history or habitat information associated with the specimens. Extensive
              collecting will be also conducted in Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador. 
              Authoritatively identified collections of Dynastinae (and by extension, other
              Scarabaeidae) will be established at institutions in all three countries. 
              Material will also be deposited in other institutions, including the U.S.
              National Museum and the University of Nebraska State Museum.  The research will
              contribute to the development of computer infrastructure for organizing and
              accessing knowledge about scarab beetles, and it will establish the foundation
              for future work in scarab systematics.   The result will be a monographic
              survey of the Dynastinae of Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador.  Included in
              this treatment will be a brief introduction to the three countries.  Each tribe
              and genus will be characterized and discussed, and taxonomic keys (in English
              and Spanish) will be given for all tribes, genera, and species.  Each species
              account will consist of complete synonymies, descriptions, diagnoses,
              distributional and temporal data, ha bitat and ecological information, and
              larval and life history information. The monograph will be profusely
              illustrated with habitus drawings, line drawings of structures requiring
              clarification, distribution maps, and photographs of principal habitats.  This
              research will create electronic databases of specimen-level information,
              geographic and temporal distributions, catalogs, and images.   Additional
              products resulting from the project will be the establishment of
              authoritatively identified collections in Honduras, Nicaragua, and El Salvador;
              training a PhD student  in systematics and monography; training an apprentice
              curator and a parataxonomist at the Escuela Agricola Panamericana in Honduras,
              and training curators and students at other collections in Honduras, Nicaragua,
              and El Salvador in modern data gathering and dissemination practices as well as
              in curatorial activities that better insure proper conservation and use of
              their collections.
