Title       : Early Steps in the NMD Pathway of Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9870313

Award Number: 9870313
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael R. Culbertson mrculber@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9870313  Michael R. Culbertson : Nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) refers to
              the accelerated rate of decay that occurs when translation of an mRNA
              containing a nonsense mutation is prematurely terminated. mRNAs that
              prematurely terminate are called nonsense mRNAs. NMD serves two important
              purposes in eukaryotic organisms ranging from yeast to humans. It provides a
              mechanism of RNA surveillance to ensure that translation produces full length
              protein products, and it down-regulates the accumulation of some
              naturally-occurring pre-mRNAs and mRNAs by targeting them for rapid
              destruction. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the NMD pathway overrides the global
              default pathway for mRNA decay, which is normally dependent on the rate of mRNA
              deadenylation at the 3' end.   Deadenylation independent decay is achieved
              through the action of three proteins encoded by the UPF1, UPF2, and UPF3 genes.
              Upf1p is an ATP-dependent nucleic acid helicase that most likely acts in a late
              step in the NMD pathway possibly by altering mRNA topology to favor decapping
              and decay.  Upf1p unwinds both RNA and DNA substrates indiscriminately in
              vitro, suggesting that other factors may be required in order to selectively
              unwind only nonsense mRNAs in vivo. The investigator has proposed that Upf2p
              and Upf3p may function in this capacity and may act earlier in the NMD pathway
              than Upf1p. All three of the Upf proteins associate with polyribosomes, but a
              significant fraction of each protein is also detected in a form that is
              dissociated from polyribosomes. Upf1p and Upf3p exhibit a markedly different
              cellular distribution. Upf1p localizes exclusively to the cytoplasm whereas
              Upf3p localizes both to the nucleus and the cytoplasm. Upf3p contains sequence
              elements that direct nuclear import and export. By analyzing mutations in a
              nuclear export sequence element (NES) in Upf3p, genetic evidence was obtained
              suggesting that the export of Upf3p from the nucleus to the cytoplasm is
              required for a functional NMD pathway. The overall objective of this research 
              is to further confirm this finding and to find out why Upf3p, which is believed
              to perform its sole function in the cytoplasm, should enter and exit the
              nucleus as a prerequisite for its ability to function in the cytoplasmic NMD
              pathway. The specific aims of the research are to understand the roles of
              nuclear import, export, and nuclear/cytoplasmic shuttling of Upf3p and the role
              of nuclear pore proteins and exportins in NMD.  The information generated could
              reveal how substrate recognition by the Upf1p helicase can be achieved through
              a cross-compartmental mechanism.    The structures of proteins that catalyze
              steps in metabolism and that orchestrate growth and development are specified
              by the genetic code in DNA. Quality control mechanisms exist at several levels
              to ensure that all proteins are produced exactly according to genetic
              instructions. The genetic code is translated into protein structural
              information through an intermediary called messenger RNA (mRNA), which contains
              a transcript of the information in the gene. A quality control mechanism called
              RNA surveillance has recently been discovered that ensures that all mRNAs
              produce full length, functional proteins. RNA surveillance is accomplished by a
              mechanism that causes the rapid destruction of mRNAs that have mistakes in them
              that prevent their coding of full length proteins.
