Title       : FASEB: Summer Research Conference Folate, B12, and One-Carbon Metabolism to be
               held from August 1-6, 1998 at Snowmass Village, Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9870803

Award Number: 9870803
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean R. Appling   (Principal Investigator current)
              Irwin Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9870803
Appling
This award provides partial support of the Seventh FASEB
              Summer Research Conference on Folic Acid, Vitamin B12 and One Carbon
              Metabolism, to be held under the auspices of the Federation of American
              Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) from August 1-August 6, 1998 at
              Snowmass Village, Colorado. This conference offers a unique opportunity for 
              basic scientists and those involved in science policy from a broad group of
              disciplines with an interest in folic acid, vitamin B12 and one-carbon
              metabolism, to interact both formally and informally. The last five conferences
              have been fully subscribed and participation at this conference will be limited
              to 180 individuals. This award will enable graduate students and postdoctoral
              fellows to attend the meeting. The program includes well-established scientists
              along with those just entering the field. The topics include areas of the most
              sophisticated biochemical and biophysical research. Session topics include the
              enzymology and regulation of one-carbon metabolism; homocysteine metabolism and
              regulation; methionine and folate cofactor synthesis/regulation; methyl
              transfer and DNA repair; cellular and epithelial transport of folate and
              vitamin B12; and folate dependent enzyme reactions. In addition to the formal
              presentations, the program will be complemented with poster sessions and
              workshops. These offer many opportunities for informal discussions and allow
              graduate students and postdoctoral fellows, as well as established scientists,
              an opportunity to present and discuss their work. As in the past, the most
              interesting new research presented at the conference will be disseminated to a
              much wider audience in the form of one or more "state-of-the-art" reviews in
              the FASEB Journal.




