Title       : POWRE: Hydrogeology and Geochemistry of Streambeds in Karst Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1998  
File        : a9870423

Award Number: 9870423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33136              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol M. Wicks wicksc@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870423
Wicks

Based on research in streambed materials underlying rivers,
              distinct zones of hydrogeologic, geochemical, and ecological activities have
              been defined (Rouch, 1988).  The ecotonal assemblage of animals in the
              interstitial space is a function of the hydraulic conductivity of the sediment
              and the dissolved oxygen concentration of the interstitial water.  In cave
              streams, interstitial pores exist within the streambed deposits, yet few
              researchers have investigated the possibility that aquatic troglodytic species
              might reside in these interstitial spaces.
Information is lacking regarding
              the habitat preferences of aquatic troglodytic species.  It is generally
              assumed such species prefer open-water conditions, pools and riffles (Barr,
              1968; Brown and Willis, 1984).  Scientists conducting in-cave organism counts
              have assumed that the number of individuals found during visual stream
              inspections is equal to the number of organisms present.  Schubert (1993) have
              shown that southern cavefish prefer to reside within the interstitial pore
              spaces of streambeds (gravel-sized substrate with interstitial spaces that the
              fish can enter) and not in the water column proper.  If the preferred habitat
              is in interstitial spaces of the streambed, then the number of organisms that
              are counted during visual inspections may markedly underestimate the true
              number of organisms present.  Residing in the interstitial spaces would appear
              to provide shelter from predation, and access to food, as many of the aquatic
              troglodytic species forage.
	This exploratory project asks:
1. What is the
              hydrogeologic setting of the various habitats?  The hydrogeologic setting will
              be characterized by determining the hydraulic conductivity, porosity, and grain
              size distribution of the streambed material and the hydraulic gradient along
              the stream reach.
2. What is the geochemistry of the water in interstitial
              pore space?  The geochemical setting will be characterized by determining the
              concentrations of dissolved oxygen and bicarbonate and by determining the
              temperature, pH, and Eh of the interstitial water as a function of depth.
3.
              What is the exchange rate between the flowing water and the interstitial water?
               The exchange rate between the flowing water and the interstitial water will be
              determined by analyzing the fluctuations in the temperature of the flowing
              water and the interstitial water at one site. 
Understanding where the aquatic
              troglodytic species reside, and the geochemical and hydrogeological regimes of
              those locations, will aid scientists who need to enumerate populations,
              determine habitat requirements, and conserve the biota.  The ability to
              quantify and model sub-channel geochemical and hydrological processes is
              critical to improving our understanding of the habitat requirements of aquatic
              troglodytic species.  This exploratory proposal solicits funding for research
              that will describe the geochemical and hydrological habitat of three karst
              streams, which are the habitats for four aquatic troglodytic species.  This
              research represents a new line of inquiry for the Principal Investigator and a
              first step in determining the geochemical and hydrodynamic environment of
              aquatic troglodytic species.  This exploratory research project is the first
              effort to link the geochemical and hydrodynamic conditions to the habitat
              requirements of aquatic troglodytic species. 

