Title       : POWRE: Development of Tools for the Experimental Evolution of a Floral Trait in
               Antirrhinum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9870405

Award Number: 9870405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristina N. Jones kjones@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1592,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870405  Jones  Selection by pollinators has long beeb thought to drive the
              evolution of showy floral characters, but the action of pollinator-mediated
              selection has proven difficult to demonstrate in the field. Pollinators have
              been shown to influence components of plant reproductive success and mating
              pattern. However, how pollinator selection translates into changes in gene
              frequencies in polymorphic plant populations remains a major challenge. The
              primary objective of this POWRE-funded research is to test whether selection by
              pollinators can be sufficient to drive the evolution of a floral character in
              experimental plant populations. The feasibility of this study is enhanced by
              the use of a particularly appropriate plant-pollinator system. A single gene,
              sulfurea, determines flower color in snapdragons. Bumblebee pollinators have
              been shown to relate this color polymorphism to nectar rewards. By manipulating
              nectar rewards and thus pollinator behavior, replicate experimental plant
              populations will be subjected to selection of varying strength by realistic
              selection agents over many generations. With this model system, fundamental
              questions about the evolution of floral traits will be addressed directly. In
              this research, a reliable method of determining plant genotypes will be
              developed using closely linked polymorphic DNA markers. Also, the fertility
              selection model used to generate predictions for microevolution will be
              explored to guide the collection of pollinator behavior data in the
              experimental populations. This research will bring important tools from
              molecular genetics and computer modeling to bear on a unique investigation in
              the evolutionary biology of plant-pollinator systems.
