Title       : Acquisition of Flow Cytometry and Light Microscopy Facility at the Woods Hole
               Oceanographic Institution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9870994

Award Number: 9870994
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203188             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca J. Gast rgast@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Caron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Dennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1198,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports the acquisition of equipment to  significantly upgrade
              facilities available in the Woods  Hole, Massachusetts scientific community for
              optical  characterization of microbial populations, tissue cultures, 
              microscopic particles, and/or the processes dependent on  visualizing these
              assemblages and constituents.  Funds are  requested for the purchase of a
              Becton Dickinson FACSCalibur  flow cytometer and Zeiss inverted light
              microscope and image  analysis facility.  These instruments are essential and 
              complementary for a wide array of applications among the  scientific staffs of
              the Woods Hole Oceanographic  Institution (WHOI) and the Marine Biological
              Laboratory  (MBL).  The light microscopy facility will include two  condenser
              systems to accommodate a range of magnifications  and specimen holders, a
              temperature-controlled stage for the  examination of specimens and cultures at
              experimental or in-  situ temperatures, a micromanipulation system for 
              establishing cultures and cell lines, cooled CCD camera,  high quality image
              analysis software for documentation of  particle sizes, abundances, and other
              characteristics,  particularly very low fluorescent signals.  The flow 
              cytometer that has been purchased is the latest version of  the `workhorse' of
              the field, known for its reliability and  versatility.  This instrument will be
              equipped with a sorter  that will allow verification sorting of microbial
              groups for  chemical/biological analyses or culture initiation, and a  carousel
              loader to enable multiple sample processing and  mixing.  These specific
              instruments have been chosen because they  combine (1) highly complementary
              measurements of microscopic  organisms or particles, (2) they are major
              advancements over  the present capabilities within the Woods Hole scientific 
              community, (3) they are user-friendly and will therefore  have much wider use
              than more sophisticated but more  specialized equipment of this nature, and (4)
              they are cost-  efficient to run and maintain becaus e of the larger number  of
              potential users.  The microscopy and flow cytometry  facilities will be a
              direct benefit to the research programs  of at least two dozen laboratories
              within WHOI and MBL.  Their availability will address long-standing deficits in
               the common use equipment at WHOI, and they will favorably  affect the
              successful completion of projects totaling more  than 50 federal and other
              grants, contracts, and awards.
