Title       : POWRE: Adaptation and Application of Classical Light Scattering for the
               Nondestructive Evaluation of Art and Historical Objects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9870407

Award Number: 9870407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen M. McNamara mcnamara@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1592,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9870407  Rutledge  This project utilizes angle-resolved light scattering to
              study  materials science aspects of historical and artistic objects.  Light
              scattering is based on the differences in refractive index  of a feature and
              its surrounding matrix. Thus, it is possible to  carry out light scattering
              experiments without staining if  appropriate contrast is present. For the
              materials to be studied,  primarily ancient glasses, these features exist in
              the form of  inclusions, voids, and bubbles. The distribution, size and shape 
              of such defects provide valuable information on the method and  conditions of
              production and processing. In addition, the index  of refraction allows
              identification of impurities, providing  information on materials resources and
              fabrication techniques.  This project will develop and extend this analytical
              tool to  include the study of vitreous materials from the Antioch mosaics  and
              the glass beads of Nippur. A critical part of the project is  modifying,
              analyzing and understanding the data and further  developing the theory of
              light scattering for solid state defects  on the order of a wavelength. These
              extensions of current  capabilities will also be of value in studying more
              traditional  materials, including chemical vapor deposited diamond films, 
              optoelectronic materials and connective tissue. New undergraduate  research
              projects have been initiated, and an undergraduate  program in this area will
              be developed, and offered by Worcester  Polytechnic Institute in conjunction
              with conservation  departments at the Worcester Art Museum and at the
              Conservation  Analytical Laboratory at the Smithsonian Institution.  %%%  This
              is a research enhancement grant made under the Professional  Opportunities for
              Women in Research and Education (POWRE)  program. The project will contribute
              basic materials science  knowledge and materials characterization capabilities
              to the  study of historical and artistic objects.
