Title       : POWRE: Characterization of skm-BOP, A Novel Muscle Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9870591

Award Number: 9870591
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen G. Price mprice@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The recently discovered mouse Bop gene encodes two proteins, which are expressed
              as different isoforms in two different tissues.  One, a 52 kDa protein, t-BOP,
              is expressed in CD8-positive cytotoxic T lymphocytes following surface
              stimulation; the other, a 55 kDa protein, skm-BOP, is expressed in both cardiac
              and skeletal striated muscle.  The tie-in between these two cell types is cell
              motility and contractility.  While actin-myosin based motility and
              contractility is obvious in the case of striated muscle, it is perhaps less
              obvious in T-cells: it is only when T-cells are activated that they assemble
              highly motile projections and move to sites of infection using actin-myosin
              based systems.   The studies in this project will focus on skm-BOP, and
              specifically on characterizing the expression pattern and hypothesized role in
              myogenesis of this novel muscle protein.  The skm-BOP protein has an unusual
              distribution in skeletal muscle, being localized at the mid-A band, in some
              nuclei, and at some neuromuscular junctions.  The mid-A band distribution is
              interesting and unusual for a muscle protein.  The BOP proteins are
              structurally unique, with several domains that are homologous to domains of
              other proteins that are not related to each other.  Thus, the BOP proteins
              contain two zinc finger-like motifs homologous to what are likely to be protein
              interaction domains of several nuclear proteins involved in gene regulation. 
              This domain is followed by a region that is homologous to one of the
              immunoglobulin C2-like motifs in skelemin, a myosin-associated protein of
              striated muscle that is localized to the center of the sarcomere.  The
              carboxyl-terminal half of skm-BOP is unique in the protein database, except for
              a motif related to a region of the kinesin light chain that binds to
              kinesin-transported vesicles and a kinesin light chain-like motif of unknown
              function.  Analysis of the co-purification properties of skm-BOP in skeletal
              muscle showed that skm-BOP occupies several cellular "compartments" - some is
              readily soluble with membrane components, some is co-extracted with the
              majority of myosin, and the rest remains associated with the titin /
              intermediate filament cytoskeleton of myofibrils, to which are attached myosin
              remnants.  One hypothesis for the proposed studies is that the skm-BOP plays a
              role in the assembly of the sarcomere, and that the skm-BOP in the mid-A band
              region is associated with part of the titin molecular filament and/or with part
              of the myosin filament.  Another hypothesis is that a subset of skm-BOP is
              associated with clathrin or a clathrin-related protein.  Such a clathrin-like
              protein has been shown by others to be present in the center of the mid-A band
              (the M band) and to play a role in myogenesis.  If clathrin plays a role in
              sarcomere assembly before it assumes a stable banding pattern in the mature
              sarcomere, then it is possible that skm-BOP plays a clathrin-associated role
              during sarcomere maturation.  This would be consistent with observations from
              the laboratory of Dr. Paul Gottlieb (University of Texas at Austin) that some
              of the T-cell form of BOP protein may be associated with clathrin-coated
              vesicles.   

The specific aims and methods for the 18-month period are:
              

1. Analysis of the expression and localization patterns of skm-BOP in
              skeletal muscle: this will be done using normal myogenic tissue and samples of
              various muscle fiber types, which will be stained with sets of antibodies to
              correlate the expression pattern of skm-BOP with that of other muscle proteins.
               Emphasis will be placed on correlations with the likely putative binding
              partners of skm-BOP, including myosin, titin, and a clathrin-like protein.  The
              expression of skm-BOP along the length of a muscle fiber will be examined to
              gain insight into the physiological significance of skm-BOP.

2.
              Investigation of the requirement for Bop gene expression for myogenesis and
              myofibrillogenesis in vitro:  a skm-BOP anti-sense approach will be used in
              studies of C2C12 cells and primary mouse myocytes.  Myofibrillogenesis will
              also be analyzed in differentiating wild-type ES cells and in skm-BP-negative
              ES cells containing disruptions of both Bop gene copies introduced by
              homologous recombination.

This is a POWRE Award, which will allow Dr. Price
              to resume her pioneering studies on a novel cytoskeleton-related protein,
              skm-BOP.  The significant of the proposed work to the advancement of knowledge
              is that the results of these studies will provide the first insight into the
              function of a new muscle protein and a nearly identical protein that is turned
              on in motile T-lymphocytes.  The significance of this POWRE award to the career
              of the PI is that it will allow her to regain her stature as an independent
              muscle biologist after her career was interrupted.  



