Title       : POWRE: Biostratigraphy, Paleoceanography, and Community Dynamics of Silceous
               Microfossils From The Silurian of The Canadian Arctic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1998 
File        : a9870431

Award Number: 9870431
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paula J. Noble noblepj@unr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870431
Noble

The Silurian is an interesting time in earth's history. 
              Following the end-Ordovician crisis, benthic marine faunas underwent a period
              of community restructuring and diversification.  Plankton likewise underwent
              faunal turnovers and diversification, yet there has been little work on the
              plankton community as a whole and their relationship to changes in the physical
              environment.  One of the least understood groups of Silurian plankton are
              radiolarians.  They are exclusively marine organisms whose highest abundance
              and diversity is usually associated with ocean settings and complex watermass
              structure.  In cherts, they commonly are the bulk constituents in the rock, and
              in distal shelf settings, they can be found intermittently in great abundance. 
              Radiolarians are a potentially valuable resource for understanding the
              paleoceanographic history of early Paleozoic marine basins providing their
              range and distribution can be closely constrained and calibrated with better
              studied fossil groups.

This study proposes to examine radiolarians and
              siliceous sponge spicules from the Cape Phillips Fm., Canadian Arctic, and to
              integrate these data with graptolite biostratigraphy and geochemistry in order
              to get a better picture of the dynamics of Silurian plankton communities.  This
              work may eventually feed into research proposed by Canadian colleagues on the
              organic-walled microfossils and conodonts.  Three specific problems will be
              addressed:
1. Biostratigraphic tool development - The investigator has been
              working towards developing a biostratigraphic scheme for the
              Ordovician-Silurian, but lacks independent age control on Late Silurian
              sections.  The Cape Phillips Fm., has the best preserved Silurian radiolarians
              in the world, its age is well constrained by graptolites, and has the best
              possibility of providing the age control needed.
2. Extinction/diversification
              events - Radiolarian response will be examined across two mid Silurian
              graptolite extinctions and subsequent diversification.  Carbon isotope analysis
              of the non-carbonate fraction will be conducted across the extinctions to look
              for related geochemical signatures.
3. Siliceous spicules in paleoecology -
              The percentage of lithistid to hexactinellid spicules has previously been
              observed to vary with sea level rise in Late Ordovician sections.  Spicules
              will be examined in conjunction with the physical stratigraphy in order to test
              their sensitivity to local sea-level fluctuation.  These data will be tied into
              changes observed in the plankton community and the basin history.

