Title       : IGERT FORMAL PROPOSAL: Integrated Sensing Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9870691

Award Number: 9870691
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2291996            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonidas G. Bachas   (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise Wilson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dibakar Bhattacharyya  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1335,9150,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              integrated chemical sensor design.  This activity is a joint effort of nine
              faculty from the Departments of Chemistry, Chemical and Materials Engineering,
              and Electrical Engineering. This group of scientists and engineers has
              established research collaborations and their collective expertise will provide
              the intellectual underpinning for the training of seventy-five graduate
              students over the five-year duration of the award.  Students will have multiple
              mentors in this cross-disciplinary research setting and their graduate training
              will include multidisciplinary courses, workshops, and seminars; problem-based
              learning; and internships in industrial and government laboratories.  Areas of
              research focus include molecular recognition, polymer design, genetic
              engineering, organized protein assemblies, new transduction principles,
              micromachining, integrated chemical sensor electronics, and signal processing. 
              IGERT students will be recruited nationwide with emphasis placed on identifying
              and recruiting qualified individuals from underrepresented groups in science
              and engineering.  IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a
              diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage
              of a broad spectrum of career options.  IGERT provides doctoral institutions
              with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate
              programs that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from
              several departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive,
              collaborative environment for both training and research.  In this first year
              of the program, support will be provided to seventeen institutions for new or
              nascent programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
