Title       : RUI: Determinants of Homing Endonuclease I-Cre I Function
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1998  
File        : a9870817

Award Number: 9870817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lenny M. Seligman lseligman@pomona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Pomona College
	      Alexander Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/621-8328

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9183,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Seligman  MCB 9870817  1. technical  Homing endonucleases are unique in their
              ability to function autonomously in recognizing and cleaving 12 to 40 bp long
              DNA sequences.  As such, they are ideal tools for the analysis and manipulation
              of complex genomes.  The experiments proposed focus on the homing endonuclease
              I-Cre I, one of only two homing endonucleases for which a three-dimensional
              crystal structure has been reported. Using a series of E. coli based genetic
              assays and guided by structural predictions, a genetic dissection of I-Cre I
              will be undertaken. The relative importance of a series of putative DNA-protein
              contacts will be determined.  Mutant homing sites, altered in positions thought
              to make contacts with I-Cre I, will be isolated and examined. Similarly,
              endonuclease residues thought to contact DNA will be altered, and allowable
              substitutions defined.  A new genetic screen will be used to identify I-Cre I
              derivatives with novel cleavage specificities.  The roles of three putative
              catalytic amino acids will be examined, and models posing one vs. two catalytic
              sites per enzyme tested.  Endonuclease mutations altering residues thought to
              function in dimerization will be isolated and examined.  Dimerization defective
              mutants will be used to identify pairs capable of forming active heterodimers.
              Such heterodimers, if found, would make possible the creation of I-Cre I
              derivatives which cleave novel asymmetric sites.  A better understanding of the
              structural and mechanistic bases of homing endonuclease function, coupled with
              the ability to isolate altered specificity mutants, may enable the eventual
              selection/engineering of derivatives capable of interaction with DNA sequences
              of interest.      2. non-technical    DNA endonucleases can be thought of as
              "molecular scissors" in that they  function by recognizing and cutting specific
              DNA sequences.  It is possible that such enzymes could be used to destroy
              particular deleterious genes in the context of gene therapy.  The main problem
              with suc h an approach lies in the task of designing endonucleases that cleave
              specific DNA sequences of interest.  A family of endonucleases exists which is
              capable of the highly specific DNA recognition required to find and cut a
              single disease gene in the human genome.  Starting with one such protein, the
              homing endonucleases I-Cre I, a series of experiments designed to better
              understand how it recognizes and cuts its natural target DNA sequence will be
              carried out.  Attempts to isolate mutant I-Cre I derivatives capable of cutting
              different DNA sequences will also be made.  The ability to manipulate I-Cre in
              this fashion may be useful to designing derivatives capable of cutting DNA
              sequences of interest..
