Title       : POWRE: Using Soil Profile Spectral Reflectance Patterns in a Field-Based Index
               of Soil Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1998      
File        : a9870410

Award Number: 9870410
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda R. Barrett barrett@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/375-7111

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Soil profiles with distinctive, complex color patterns are characteristic of
              soils undergoing podzolization.  Podzolization, the predominant process of soil
              formation on acid, sandy parent materials under forest vegetation in the
              northern US and Canada, involves the movement of aluminum, organic carbon, and
              often iron from the surface horizon into the B horizon.  Traditional methods
              for evaluating the strength of soil development in these soils are
              labor-intensive, involving extensive laboratory work.  This study will focus on
              developing a simple, field-based method to evaluate strength of soil
              development based on in situ measurement of spectral reflectance patterns in
              the profile.  The project is expected to demonstrate, for the first time, that
              a portable spectrophotometer can be used to provide precise, reliable
              measurements of soil color and spectral reflectance in situ.  This research
              will provide a foundation for the study of soil color in the field that is
              likely to be applicable to a wide variety of soil types.  The resulting index
              of soil development will be useful in many pedological and soil
              geomorphological studies in corresponding parent materials.  Possible
              applications include relating soil development to surface age, using soils to
              provide relative age dating of geomorphological or buried surfaces, and
              evaluating archeological sites.  Furthermore, the relative ease with which
              spectral reflectance data can be obtained will also make investigation of the
              spatial variability of soil development on landforms and within mapping units,
              which requires sampling large numbers of points, possible.  This POWRE award
              will enhance the investigator's career objectives by allowing her to explore a
              novel line of inquiry which applies her understanding of spectral reflectance
              and color, gained in previous remote sensing training, to current research
              interests in soil geomorphology.  The project will significantly enhance the
              investigator's professional standing in the fields of soil geomorphology and
              pedology.  It also will greatly strengthen her overall research agenda, and
              improve her standing with respect to her upcoming tenure review.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
