Title       : Collaborative Research: The Demand for Female Labor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9870980

Award Number: 9870980
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46128              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Hermsen hermsenj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research will compare the effects of the demand for female labor on
              five outcomes for men and women: earnings, economic well-being, occupational
              segregation, labor force participation, and education. The goal is to replicate
              past, individual-level, research for each outcome and then add the labor market
              factors developed in prior research. This multilevel design allows examination
              of the contextual effect of macro-level demand for female labor on gender
              inequality, independent of the known individual-level determinants of that
              inequality. Individual-level data come principally from the Panel Study of
              Income Dynamics and the Census Public Use Microdata Samples. Educational
              outcomes will be investigated with the National Longitudinal Study of Youth.
              Measures of the demand for female and male labor are based on the degree to
              which the occupational structure is skewed towards predominantly female (or
              male) occupations, calculated across 261 metropolitan areas defined from the
              1990 Census. This project advances knowledge in three important ways. First, it
              provides a systematic test of a major macro-level theory explaining gender
              stratification. Second, it is the first comprehensive application of recent
              developments in multilevel statistics to gender stratification research.
              Finally, it links the analysis of both situational opportunities and
              individual-level processes in a single design. Results will have implications
              not only for understanding gender stratification processes, but also to
              differences in economic opportunities based upon other social categories and
              characteristics.
