Title       : Numerical Continuation for Nonlinear Problems with Symmetry Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9870274

Award Number: 9870274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt Georg georg@math.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eugene L. Allgower  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9215,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9870274

Abstract

Numerical Continuation for Nonlinear Problems with
              Symmetry Structures

Kurt Georg and Eugene L. Allgower 

This investigation
              deals with the study and development of numerical
continuation methods which
              intrinsically exploit symmetries. The
integration of techniques for exploiting
              symmetry in the solution of
linear systems, which have recently been developed
              by the
investigators, into a numerical continuation method will provide
              a
practical and efficient tool for detecting symmetry pattern
              breaking
bifurcations while tracing a branch, and for following
              bifurcating
branches for secondary and multiple bifurcations. The
              continuation
methods which will be studied and developed will concentrate upon
              the
handling of large systems of equations such as those stemming
              from
discretizations of systems of partial differential equations
              and
integral  equations.  Several techniques for numerically
              handling
bifurcations will be investigated. These include the normal
              form
equations of center manifold theory and the Lyapunov-Schmidt 
reduction.
              By applying symmetry reduction methods developed by the
investigators, block
              diagonalizations are obtained which greatly
facilitate the bifurcation
              analysis. Among the applications to be
treated will be: nonlinear elliptic
              equations such as those which
model the buckling of shells with symmetries,
              equations for spherical
convection which model planetary atmospheres,
              Ginzburg-Landau
equations modelling the dynamics of travelling waves, and
              nonlinear
boundary integral equations which are discretized via boundary
              element
methods. Integral equations of the latter kind arise in a natural
              way
from exterior boundary value problems. It is anticipated that
              the
programs which will be developed will be disseminated via anonymous
ftp
              in the same manner as the investigator's programs for numerical
continuation
              and symmetry reduction methods have been done.

Numerical continuation for
              large structured systems, which will be
studied in this investigation, has a
              broad  field of important
applications. In particular, numerical continuation
              can be used to
computationally simulate how the variation of inherent
              control
parameters causes qualitative changes in a physical system.
              Such
parameters may represent loading, speed, temperature, viscosity,
aspect
              ratio, etc. The determination and analysis of critical values
of control
              parameters is  of great significance to the scientist and
engineer, because at
              these values decisive phenomena occur: stability
can be lost, structures can
              break or  go into resonance, ingnition
takes place, atmospheric flow patterns
              change, etc. Mathematically,
critical values of control parameters in physical
              models are
characterized by bifurcation points. Numerical continuation
              methods
can be used to detect and calculate bifurcation points.
              The
investigation  will concentrate on phenomena taking place in
              regimes
which have geometric symmetry structures. The consideration of
              such
structures enhances the scientific understanding, but can also
              be
exploited for more precise and efficient calculations. The
              computer
visualization programs which will be developed will assist
              researchers
and students to simulate, study, and gain insights into the
              pattern
changes of physical phenomena under the variation of parameters.

