Title       : Eigenvalue Problems in Mathematical Physics and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9870156

Award Number: 9870156
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Ashbaugh mark@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9870156
Principal Investigator: Mark S. Ashbaugh

Abstract: The
              objective of this research project is to establish bounds on the eigenvalues of
              the partial differential operators which arise in mathematical physics and
              geometry.  The emphasis will be on the eigenvalue problems for the fixed and
              free vibrations of a membrane and for the vibration and buckling of a clamped 
              plate. Concentration will be focused on the following specific problems: (1)
              finding lower bounds for the first, or fundamental, eigenvalues of  these
              problems in terms of geometric quantities; (2) finding  inequalities for ratios
              of low-index eigenvalues and, more generally, inequalities bounding an
              arbitrary eigenvalue in terms of lower eigenvalues; (3) finding comparison
              results relating eigenvalues from two or more of the problems or relating
              eigenvalues for domains in one space to those in some other, perhaps better
              understood, space.  Included in these comparison results would be those where a
              given eigenvalue of one of the problems formulated in an arbitrary Riemannian
              manifold is related back to the  corresponding eigenvalue of a more regular
              problem -- for example, the  corresponding eigenvalue of a ball in a constant
              curvature space  (Euclidean, spherical, or hyperbolic space).  Because of the
              normalizing role they play, much of the effort will be directed at obtaining
              sharp bounds for eigenvalue problems in these basic spaces, and particularly at
               understanding eigenvalue problems for geodesic balls in these  spaces.

The
              main reason for studying the problems described above is that eigenvalues bear
              a simple relation to the characteristic (or natural) frequencies of vibration
              of membranes and plates, as well as to the critical buckling load in the
              buckling problem (i.e., the minimum force that needs to be applied around the
              perimeter of a plate to make it buckle). The importance of such issues for
              physics and engineering cannot be overstated.  Here membranes and plates of
              arbitrary shape are contemplated, and results that control the characteristic
              frequencies and buckling loads in terms of geometric parameters are sought. In
              particular, one is often most interested in the lowest, or so-called
              fundamental, frequency of a membrane or plate, since it is usually the most
              important one physically.  Having a general understanding of how various
              geometrical features affect these  frequencies can be a great aid in the design
              of physical components,  whether the desire is to tune a given natural
              frequency to a  specific value or to suppress vibrations of the component in a
              certain frequency range (to avoid resonance, for example). The  eigenvalue
              problems considered also describe key properties of  waveguides, and as such
              have important implications for fiber optics. Moreover, it ought to be possible
              to establish eigenvalue inequalities of much the same form that apply to more
              general differential operators; e.g., the Schroedinger equation, which is
              fundamental to quantum physics.  

