Title       : Decision Support for Flow in Porous Media: Optimal Sampling for Data
               Assimilation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a9870005

Award Number: 9870005
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182121             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger G. Ghanem ghanem@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This research features a novel concept for addressing environmental engineering
              problems that takes into account the heterogeneous nature of the soil medium. 
              The emphasis of the research is on developing and implementing new simulation
              techniques the output of which can be readily utilized in decision making as
              related to ensuring a sustainable environment.  In particular, the output will
              permit a very efficient simulation of statistically consistent realizations of
              fate of pollutants in the ground.  Additionally, the simulation technique will
              provide the optimal location for the sampling of hydraulic properties in a
              heterogeneous porous medium.  Optimality, in this case, is construed to imply
              good predictive capability of the mathematical model under incomplete
              information.  The concept hinges upon representing uncertain material
              properties as a combination of their various scales multiplied by random
              coefficients. This will be achieved by relying on the Karhunen-Loeve expansion
              that takes into account the probabilistic structure of the field, as well as
              the finite extent of the domain over which the problem is defined.  The
              solution process is represented as a nonlinear functional expansion with
              respect to these scales of heterogeneity.  The coefficients in this expansion
              are calculated by solving a linear system of algebraic equations.  Once this
              expansion is obtained, the sensitivity of the predicted solution will be
              analytically evaluated.  The sensitivity of the solution with respect to the
              values of the random hydraulic parameters at various spatial locations can be
              readily evaluated, and the optimal location of samples identified.  This
              formulation affords a theoretical rigor which is believed to be essential to
              progress in the field of stochastic hydrology and reliability of ground-water
              flow systems.  It permits an optimal representation of the random processes
              involved using a minimum number of random variables.  The research will
              complement current work by the Principal Investigator on stochastic model
              development for ground water flow and extend its applicability to decision
              support.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
