Title       : LEXEN: Oxidative Phosphorylation in Alkaliphilic Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9870861

Award Number: 9870861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313205             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Ivey mivey@mail.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1075,9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Ivey 
     Bacteria that grow best at high pH adapt to the extreme environment
              by acidifying the cytoplasmic compartment. This make it possible for essential
              biochemical reactions inside the cell to proceed, but creates an energetic
              problem due to the resulting low protonmotive force across the cytoplasmic
              membrane.  ATP synthesis in facultative alkaliphiles is coupled to the movement
              of protons, but the path that the protons take through the cytoplasmic membrane
              differs depending on the growth pH. The studies  outlined here seek to
              characterize the two paths of protons using a molecular biological approach.
              Alkaliphiles grown at pH 10.5 have a respiratory chain that is rich in
              cytochromes, with an unusually high ratio of heme a to heme b that seems to be
              important in energy coupling at low protonmotive force. Expression of 
              cytochromes in facultative alkaliphiles varies in response to changing pH, but
              the signal-response network controlling that expression is unknown. The
              alkaliphile ATP synthase shows  unusual biochemical properties, including a
              pH-dependent gating mechanism, and unusual  molecular features in the deduced
              amino acid sequences of subunits. Each of these features -  the pH-dependent
              expression of cytochromes, the high ratio of cytochrome a/b, and the 
              extraordinary properties of the ATP synthase - has been incorporated into a
              localized coupling  model to explain the anomalies of alkaliphile oxidative
              phosphorylation. For that reason, each  of these features is addressed in this
              project. First, site-directed mutagenesis and expression  studies are designed
              to test the importance of the unusual molecular domains of the ATP  synthase,
              both in terms of growth at high pH and in the catalytic mechanism of energy 
              coupling. Second, the prevalence of the molecular domains among the
              alkaliphiles will be  tested by characterizing the amino acid sequence of other
              alkaliphile ATP synthases. This LEXEN  project will include studies of a newly
              isolated alkaliphilic Bacillus. Also included will be a survey of new   extreme
              alkaliphiles, including non-Bacillus bacterial species, which are to be
              isolated from alkaline terrestrial and aquatic environments. Third, dissection
              and manipulation of the regulatory circuit that dictates the ratio of
              cytochrome bc to cytochrome caa3 in the respiratory chain of a new alkaliphile
              isolate will be performed. Together, these studies will investigate
              physiological problems of fundamental biological importance, but from the
              perspective of an organism thriving in an extreme environment. In addition,
              alkaliphilic bacteria have proved  useful in industrial applications, and
              efforts aimed at facilitating the genetic manipulation of  these organisms will
              enhance their importance.

