Title       : Inventory of the Terrestrial Arthropods and Vascular Plants of the Montane,
               Steppe, and Semi-Desert Grasslands of the Kyrgyz Republic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2000       
File        : a9870187

Award Number: 9870187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Page                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276382             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher H. Dietrich dietrich@mail.inhs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5915,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870187  Dietrich    Temperate grasslands are the most threatened of the world's
              ecosystems; thus, efforts to document the biodiversity of those remaining are
              urgently needed.  Among the few remaining unspoiled temperate grasslands, the
              steppes of Central Asia are the least well studied, and scientists in the
              region currently lack the resources necessary to document the fauna
              effectively.  The paucity of specimens from this region in western European and
              U.S. collections continues to impede research on the Holarctic flora and fauna.
               This project is a collaborative effort by U.S., Russian, and Kyrgyz scientists
              to inventory vascular plants and arthropods in the grasslands of Kyrgyzstan, a
              former Soviet Republic situated near the borders of four major desert regions,
              comprising a transition zone between the Palearctic and Oriental realms, and
              encompassing a variety of grassland types arranged along steep
              elevational/climatic gradients. The primary specific goals of the project are:
              (1) to collect specimens of as many species of arthropods and vascular plants
              as possible and estimate the diversity of these groups in Central Asian
              grasslands; (2) to document ecological interactions (e.g., herbivore-host
              plant) among plants and arthropods in this region; and (3) to provide a
              searchable, GIS-linked, Internet-accessible database of the grassland flora and
              arthropod fauna of Kyrgyzstan as well as published checklists and
              identification guides for selected taxa.  The specimens and information
              generated will aid in identifying conservation needs, provide reference data
              for comparison to other grassland regions (particularly the more intensively
              studied Nearctic prairies), and facilitate comprehensive treatments of the
              vascular flora and arthropod fauna of the Holarctic.
