Title       : A Proposal to Investigate Parity Violating Electron Scattering and Hypernuclear
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2001       
File        : a9870278

Award Number: 9870278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298440             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Johnston johnston@phys.latech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neven Simicevic  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Tech University
	      P O BOX 3168 TECH STATION
	      Ruston, LA  71272    318/257-0211

NSF Program : 1232      INTERMEDIATE ENERGY NUCLEAR SC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***
9870278
Johnston
The research program of the Louisiana Tech University
              Particle Physics Group includes studies of parity violating electron scattering
              reactions, hypernuclear physics studies, electroweak interactions, and an
              educational outreach program designed to include undergraduate students from
              several disciplines, engineers, science teachers, and high school students in
              forefront physics research projects.
In the TJNAF PAC approved G0 experiment,
              a series of electron proton elastic parity violating asymmetry measurements
              will be performed at both the backward and forward electron scattering angles,
              from which the nucleon strange electric and magnetic form factors can be
              determined separately. The Louisiana Tech Particle Physics Group will extend
              parity violation measurements beyond the elastic channel by including a
              measurement of the parity violating asymmetry in the N to Delta transition,
              TJNAF E97-104. Due to the pure isovector nature of this transition, the parity
              violating asymmetry for this resonance consists of contributions depending only
              on standard model parameters, known electromagnetic transition form factors,
              and the poorly known axial transition form factor.  These measurements provide
              direct access to this form factor, and represent the first measurement of this
              quantity in the neutral current sector of the weak interaction. Building two
              sets of detectors is required for both the elastic and inelastic channel
              measurements.
This proposal outlines the group's TJNAF based nuclear and
              particle physics program in detail, and the impact these activities have had at
              Louisiana Tech.  The scope of the projects selected are consistent with the
              group's size and expertise, and have maximized all of the available facilities
              and funding thus far received.  Funding of this proposal will allow the
              Particle Physics Group at Louisiana Tech to continue to make major
              contributions to physics research, and enhance the educational opportunities
              for undergraduate students and local high school students and
              teachers.
***



