Title       : IGERT: Multidisciplinary Training at the Interface of Biology, Mathematics and
               Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9870659

Award Number: 9870659
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1962552            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Tabor tabor@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie P. Tolbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neil H. Mendelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy W. Secomb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond E. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9870659  Tabor       This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training
               (IGERT) award will support the establishment of a broadly-  based graduate
              training program at the interface of the  biological, mathematical and physical
              sciences.  The program,  a joint effort of 21 faculty drawn from 9 departments
              and 2  national laboratories, will emphasize collaborative research  on
              problems where the joining of mathematical and physical  modeling with hands-on
              laboratory experimentation holds great  promise.  Particular areas of interest
              include arthropod  evolution and population biology, cardiovascular physiology,
               image analysis, bacterial motion, physics of cell structures,  and olfaction. 
              Students enrolled in any of seven existing  Ph.D. programs, will participate in
              a combination of existing  and new courses, including a new three semester
              biomathematics  seminar that will combine literature research, faculty-student 
              group discussions and seminars by outside experts to explore  topical problems.
               A new, biological physics laboratory course  covering Brownian motion,
              membranes, biopolymers, chemotaxis  and fluid dynamics will be required of all
              students.  Students  will be recruited through existing departmentally-based 
              strategies, as well as special efforts sponsored directly by  the graduate
              college.       IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program whose goal is to sponsor  the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate  programs that will train
              a diverse group of new scientists and  engineers to be well-prepared for varied
              careers in the  private and public sectors.  IGERT provides an opportunity for 
              the development of new, well-focused multidisciplinary  programs that bridge
              traditional organizational barriers,  uniting faculty from several departments
              or institutions to  establish a highly-interactive collaborative environment
              for  both training and research.  In its first year, the program  will provide
              support to 17 institutions for new or nascent  programs that collectively s pan
              all areas of science,  engineering and mathematics eligible for support by the
              NSF.
