Title       : IGERT FORMAL PROPOSAL:Smart Sensors and Integrated Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9870720

Award Number: 9870720
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2667004            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Auner gauner@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pepe Siy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ratna Naik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gang-Yu Liu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lowell E. Wenger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              research and development of specialized sensors and integrated devices.  This
              activity is a joint effort of nineteen faculty from six departments in the
              College of Engineering, the College of Science, and the College of Medicine at
              Wayne State University, and of three scientists from Ford Motor Company
              Research Laboratories and the General Motors Research and Development
              Laboratory.  The expertise of this group of scientists and engineers provides
              the intellectual underpinning for the training of seventy-two graduate students
              over the five-year duration of the award.  Operating in a team research
              setting, IGERT students will focus on the development of `smart` sensors for
              applications in the strategically important areas of automotive systems,
              aircraft and spacecraft systems, enabling technology systems, biomedical
              systems, and energy systems.  Active research programs in developing
              wide-bandgap semiconductors, organic film devices, graded pyroelectrics, thin
              film magnetic devices, and integration technology will be incorporated into a
              new comprehensive multidisciplinary graduate curriculum for IGERT students that
              will include a series of `hands-on` lecture and laboratory courses and seminars
              developed by participating academic and industrial scientists and engineers. 
              IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of
              innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of
              scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad
              spectrum of career options.  IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an
              opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs
              that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several
              departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative
              environment for both training and research.  In this first year of the program,
              support will be provided to seventeen institutions for new or nascent programs
              that collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                      
