Title       : Evolutionary Genetics of Self-Recognition Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2000  
File        : a9870766

Award Number: 9870766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam D. Richman arichman@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870766  Richman             Self-recognition systems including the immune
              system in vertebrates  and the self-incompatibility locus in flowering plants
              exhibit spectacular   genetic polymorphism maintained by selection. The
              proposed work will test   recent models of self-recognition genes which predict
              that more distantly   related alleles will be favored by selection. This
              prediction will be   examined in island populations of both animals and plants
              which have   undergone a dramatic reduction in population size following
              isolation of   islands from the mainland due to post-Pleistocene sea level
              rise. The   premise for studying island populations is that non-random loss of
              alleles   will be most evident when the strength of diversifying selection is  
              reduced, as expected for newly isolated populations which will lose genetic  
              variation over time. If relatively distantly related alleles are favored  
              during subsequent reduction in allelic variation, this will be detected by  
              comparison of allelic genealogies for island and mainland populations.   If
              more divergent alleles are favored by selection this has  implications for both
              models of the evolution of the immune system and   recognition of disease
              antigens, and for evolutionary studies which attempt   to infer the history of
              populations from the diversity of self-recognition   genes. For example,
              preservation of divergent alleles by selection supports   models of the immune
              system that predict more divergent alleles are able to   present a wider
              variety of potential disease antigens to the immune system,   conferring
              enhanced resistance to the host. This result would also have   important
              implications for recent studies of self-recognition genes in   humans which
              conclude that population size has been large over the history   of
              diversification of the primate lineage. If more divergent allelic  
              specificities are preferentially maintained, these studies will tend to  
              overestimate the size of populations. Since these estimates are present ed as  
              lower limits on population effective size, this potential bias may  
              substantially alter the conclusions reached.
