Title       : IGERT: Graduate Training in Optical Science and Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  2002   
File        : a9870665

Award Number: 9870665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2742001            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana Z. Anderson Dana@JILA.Colorado.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl E. Wieman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kristina M. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1335,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              optical sciences and engineering that will prepare PhD students for a variety
              of careers in academic and industrial environments.  This activity is a joint
              effort of twenty-six scientists and engineers from the Departments of
              Chemistry, Physics, and Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University
              of Colorado, and two affiliated institutes, the National Institute for
              Standards and Technology (NIST) and the Joint Institute for Laboratory
              Astrophysics (JILA).  This group of scientists and engineers has established
              research collaborations and their collective expertise will provide the
              intellectual underpinning for the training of a diverse cadre of some ninety
              graduate students over the five-year tenure of the award.  Optical science and
              engineering is particularly well-suited integrative research theme because its
              diverse components are extremely important in both basic research and
              industrial applications.  The program's research components are clustered in
              three areas: optical control and manipulation of fundamental systems, optical
              metrology, and optical processing of information.  Within these clusters, PhD
              training will address the unmet need for advanced degree graduates who possess
              the `Employable Quintet` of technical knowledge in depth, problem solving
              ability in a laboratory setting, flexibility in learning and working, the
              ability to work in teams, and clarity in oral and written communication.  Ten
              percent of the IGERT traineeship positions will support students in an
              experimental Professional Masters Degree program that will include all aspects
              of the doctoral program except the dissertation project.  IGERT is a new,
              NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists
              and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of
              career options.  IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to
              develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend
              organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or
              institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for
              both training and research.  In this first year of the program, support will be
              provided to seventeen institutions for new or nascent programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
