Title       : Generation of Microcellular Materials via Polymerization in Carbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9870925

Award Number: 9870925
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Beckman beckman@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. Enick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Abstract - Beckman - 9870925    Aerogels are crosslinked materials which
              exhibit both very low bulk density (less than 100 kg/m3) and very small average
              pore size (less than 1 nanometer).  They have been proposed for use as a
              catalyst supports (specific surface area can top 1000 m2/g), highly efficient
              insulation, and as membranes.  While they exhibit fascinating physical and
              chemical properties, aerogels are relatively time-consuming to produce and the
              silica-based versions (the most prevalent type) are quite brittle.  In summary,
              aerogels are of interest because the small pore size and high pore density
              gives very high specific surface area, while the low bulk density allows for
              efficient use of materials.  It would be interesting and useful to explore more
              efficient means by which aerogels can be produced, and to expand the range of
              physical properties available to them.  A number of researchers have explored
              generation of microcellular organic polymers via phase separation (induced by
              temperature, non-solvent addition, crosslinking, etc.) in both liquids and
              supercritical fluids, yet production of materials with both small pores and low
              foam density (reduction of over 90% compared to the bulk polymer) has not been
              achieved.    Given this background, the PI's plan to generate low density,
              microcellular materials via a non-linear polymerization in a dilute carbon
              dioxide (CO2) solution where premature precipitation of the polymer is
              prevented via the use of the highly CO2 -soluble reactive precursors.  To
              overvcome the low rate of reaction inherent to dilute reactant concentration,
              they plan to generate precursors where the reactive end groups tend to
              aggregate in carbon dioxide, thus generating local concentrations significantly
              higher than the nominal, mean field composition.  They plan to synthesize and
              characterize CO2-philic reactive oligomers with CO2-phobic end groups, confirm
              that the model reactive oligomers are miscible with carbon dioxide, generate
              porous materials via reaction  of model oligomers in CO2 followed by solvent
              removal above 31C, and explore changes in cellular microstructure as the
              molecular weight between crosslinks, and the identity of the CO2-philic and
              CO2-phobic groups is varied.  Preliminary work with crosslinked polyurethanes
              in carbon dioxide has shown that they can indeed design a crosslinked polymer
              system that exhibits a single phase (swollen  network without without an excess
              CO2 phase) in the presence of high pressure CO2.  Further, using reactive
              polymer systems in liquids, they have shown that use of precursors with
              solvent-philic repeat units and solvent-phobic reactive end groups enhances the
              rate of reaction in dilute solution through aggregation of end groups.
