Title       : HyperCast - Highly Scalable Multicast Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9870336

Award Number: 9870336
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorg Liebeherr jl3k@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Web page: http://www.cs.virginia.edu/~jorg/research/hypercast/     One of the
              biggest challenges in computer networking is to meet the demand for advanced
              multicast services in support of large-scale multicast applications in
              wide-area   networks.  Numerous applications demand the availability of a
              scalable multicast service, including electronic software distribution,
              collaboration tools, multi-party video games,   and distributed simulations. A
              major impediment for scalability of multicast applications is the need of
              multicast group members to exchange control information with each other.   In
              this research project, a novel approach to the problem of scalable multicast is
              proposed where members of a multicast group are organized using a logical
              control structure with strong symmetrical properties, e.g., an n-dimensional
              hypercube. By exploiting the   symmetry properties of the control structure,
              operations that require an exchange of feedback information between multicast
              group members can be efficiently implemented. The goal of the proposed project
              is to improve the scalability of multicast communications, and demonstrate that
              the feasibility to accommodate group sizes of several thousandmembers.    
              Using analytical techniques, simulations, and measurement experiments, the
              fundamental limits and practical trade-offs of different approaches to
              structure large multicast groups will be investigated.  A protocol prototype,
              called the HyperCast protocol, that maintains a logical hypercube in a packet
              switching network will be designed and implemented.     If successful, the
              project will influence the currently ongoing research efforts   on designing
              scalable multicast protocols. The solutions developed in this project   will be
              applicable in many areas of computer science and engineering which require  
              multicast communications, including parallel and distributed simulations,
              distributed   information systems, global virtual databases, and meta-computing
              environments.
