Title       : IGERT: Environmental Manufacturing Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9870646

Award Number: 9870646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1991201            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Holsen holsen@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Theis  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              Environmental Manufacturing Management at Clarkson University.  The goal of
              this program is to equip graduate students with strong technical skills and
              provide them with extensive exposure to the environmental, managerial,
              economic, policy, and communication aspects essential to progress in this
              complex field.  This activity is a joint effort of sixteen scientists and
              engineers from the Schools of Engineering, Science, Business, and Liberal Arts
              at Clarkson University.  Members of this group of scholars have established
              research collaborations and their collective expertise will provide the
              intellectual underpinning for the training of a diverse cadre of some
              forty-eight graduate students over the five-year tenure of the award.  Students
              admitted each year will progress through the program as a cohort comprised of
              teams of doctoral students in science and engineering and masters students in
              management systems.  Interaction among the faculty mentors will be enhanced
              through seminars and retreats.  Research will take a systems approach. 
              Integral to the program are industrial internships wherein research teams will
              interact with manufacturing personnel.  A unique feature of this IGERT setting
              will be a new pilot manufacturing testing facility that will be used to
              evaluate technical, operational, and managerial alternatives to the
              manufacturing processes under study during the internships at a scale
              sufficient to obtain realistic performance and cost data.    IGERT is a new,
              NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of scientists
              and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad spectrum of
              career options.  IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an opportunity to
              develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs that transcend
              organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several departments or
              institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative environment for
              both training and research.  In this first year of the program, support will be
              provided to seventeen institutions for new or nascent programs that
              collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
