Title       : Virtual Signals/Controls Laboratory for Distance Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1998     
File        : a9870257

Award Number: 9870257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ibrahim H. Nisanci                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce L. Walcott   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Marra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  Dr. Bruce L. Walcott and Dr. Michael A. Marra recognize that the traditional
               engineering student is no longer the tradition. At the University of Kentucky,
              more than half of the  undergraduate population falls under the category of
              non-traditional (i.e., students who have prior or  current work experience, who
              may have families, who rnay commute). This trend has steadily  increased over
              the past ten years and will more than likely continue through the next
              millenium. Also,  physically handicapped and place bound students do not share
              equal access to education/laboratory  experiences as do their non-handicapped
              counterparts.    Dr. Walcott and Dr. Marra have already developed autonomous
              laboratory experiments to enhance  their undergraduate signals/systems and
              controls courses at the University of Kentucky. However,  these experiments
              still require for the student to be physically present in the laboratory. With
              many  state governors (including Kentucky's) and the President espousing the
              virtues of virtual universities, it  is important that the faculty make efforts
              to create the necessary infrastructure to enable effective low-  cost education
              via the Intemet or intranets. Consequently, this proposal seeks the funds to
              enable  signals/systems and controls experiments to be conducted via the
              Internet. The successful  implementation of this system will enable Drs.
              Walcott and Marra to give their  engineering/science/math High School seminars
              at any school that has access to a browser and the  Internet, thereby
              stimulating the interest of future engineers and future engineering educators.
