Title       : Lower Intestinal and Renal Transport of Ammonia and Amino Acids in Birds: A Test
               of the Nitrogen Recycling Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1999     
File        : a9870810

Award Number: 9870810
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95444              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary H. Laverty laverty@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9870810  Laverty  This proposal will seek to test some of the predictions of
              a postulated nitrogen recycling system between the lower intestine (colon and
              ceca) and kidney of birds.  This study will examine the aspects specifically
              related to lower intestinal and renal transport of ammoniagenic substrates, as
              well as renal ammoniagenesis and secretion.  Renal transport properties and
              ammoniagenesis will be studied by similar techniques, using a recently
              developed primary cell culture model of the avian renal proximal tubule.  This
              culture system results in flat, confluent monolayers of proximal cells on
              permeable filter supports, which display morphological, enzymatic and transport
              characteristics typical of vertebrate proximal tubules.  The actual mechanism
              of ammonia release (tubular secretion) from these cells will be examined, since
              avian proximal tubules, unlike their mammalian counterparts, do not generate pH
              gradients across the tubule epithelium.  In addition amino acid uptake and
              ammoniagenesis will be measured under simulated acidotic conditions, y exposing
              these cell cultures to an acidic environment.  These studies will not only test
              aspects of the nitrogen recycling system, but will also provide new information
              on avian lower intestinal substrate transport, renal amino acid transport and
              renal ammoniagenesis, secretion and adaptation to acidosis.  The proposed work
              will be important in furthering an understanding of avian lower intestinal
              function, renal gluconeogenesis and renal acid-base physiology.
