Title       : POWRE: Development of Fiber Optic Sensors For Biogeochemical Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9870371

Award Number: 9870371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74958              (Estimated)
Investigator: Josephine Y. Aller jyaller@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870371
Aller 

	Diagenetic reactions in surface sediments are sensitive
              indicators of changes in reactive particulate matter and the resulting balances
              between microbial remineralization pathway.  The principal objective of this
              POWRE program proposal is to learn the necessary skills to take advantage of
              recent advances in the development of chemical fiberoptic sensors for
              biomedical, industrial and environmental remediation applications to adapt and
              optimize the technology for making analyte-specific sensors for biogeochemical
              processes studies.  My ultimate goal is to be able to utilize the capabilities
              of fiber-optic chemical analyte sensors for monitoring in situ, pore-water
              solute concentrations and fluxes resulting from sedimentary microbial
              activities, and to biogeochemically detail microenvironments associated with
              redox boundaries (i.e. around biogenic structures).  The application of sensor
              technology for such studies has tremendous potential for increasing sampling
              resolution, for increasing the number of simultaneous measurements that can be
              made, and for reducing sample processing time from hours or days, to minutes. 
              I initially intend to utilize the sensors developed in a series of laboratory
              experiments which will monitor bacterial activities and remineralization
              processes within sediments by directly measuring changes in solute fluxes and
              pore-water concentrations of O2, ÕCO2, NH4+. Fortunately, there are several
              renowned experts in engineering, marine biogeochemistry, and high-pressure
              geochemistry at SUNY Stony Brook with whom I can work and collaborate.  This is
              an ideal situation that will allow me to meet my teaching and family
              obligations while enabling me to develop new skills and methodologies.  I
              expect that the new skills and the collaborative relationships forged during
              this project will have a critical impact on my academic career by allowing me
              to expand my expertise technologically, increase my competitiveness for
              funding, and enable me to make a contribution to biogeochemical process
              studies..

