Title       : Visual Processing in Deaf Subjects: Effects of Auditory Deprivation and
               Experience with a Visual Language
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9870897

Award Number: 9870897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen R. Dobkins kdobkins@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project investigates the perceptual consequences of altered sensory input
              early in development, by studying visual perception in deaf adults who have
              been auditorily deprived since birth and who have acquired a visual language
              (American Sign Language, ASL) for communication.  It has long been thought
              (mostly through anecdotal evidence) that the deaf `see` better (and that the
              blind `hear` better); however, only a handful of studies have attempted to
              characterize systematically the visual capacity of deaf signers. To investigate
              this issue, deaf and hearing subjects will be tested on a variety of visual
              tasks.    In particular, visual motion processing will be assessed for several
              reasons. One, motion is a fundamental aspect of visual processing and much is
              known about its neural basis.  Two, results from animal studies suggest that
              the motion system may be especially susceptible to changes following altered
              sensory input.  Three, motion of the hands is an integral part of the
              acquisition and comprehension of ASL, and thus there is reason to believe that
              the increased reliance on such motion cues may enhance and/or alter motion
              perception in the deaf.  Visual perceptual experiments will involve testing
              various dimensions of motion (and other visual) processing capabilities, in
              order to elucidate which specific aspects of visual processing are altered in
              the deaf.    Once the types of visual stimuli/tasks yielding the greatest
              perceptual differences between hearing and deaf subjects have been determined,
              human brain imaging techniques (such as functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging
              or  Magnetic Source Imaging) will be employed to localize neural areas or
              structures underlying the perceptual differences.  In addition, brain imaging
              studies may reveal differences across specific brain areas in susceptibility
              to, and ability to compensate for, early sensory deprivation.  These
              experiments will advance our knowledge regarding the degree to which developing
              sensory areas of the brain can reorganize themselves in response to altered
              sensory input, with implications for principles of visual development in
              general.  Moreover, the experiments should shed light on the processing levels
              at which neural responsivity and connectivity are influenced by input from the
              sensory environment.   The results may also be useful in designing compensatory
              programs for sensory-deprived persons, who could be trained to exploit those
              aspects of sensory processing that are most adaptive in response to altered
              early sensory input.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
