Title       : Global Boundary Value Problems With Minimal Smoothness Assumptions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9870018

Award Number: 9870018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70299              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marius Mitrea marius@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The proposed research is concerned with the treatment of general,   variable
              coefficient systems of equations of elliptic and parabolic type.   Special
              attention will be paid to several key features of the theory.   First, a strong
              emphasis is placed on problems having a global character.  In particular, the
              topology of the underlying manifold is expected to play   a significant role.
              Also, global integral representation formulas (in terms   of multi-layer type
              operators) for the solution are sought.  Second, minimal smoothness assumptions
              are to be made on the  analytical and geometrical structures involved. In this
              context, a symbolic   calculus is no longer readily available and, hence, the
              nature of the   problems at hand is significantly altered.  The overall
              objective is to undertake a systematic study of such problems  via the modern
              tools of harmonic analysis and partial differential equations.    Such problems
              are not only of a purely academic interest. Besides the mere   understanding of
              the natural limits of the theory, this study is also   motivated by real-life
              problems (like those involving domains with edges,   corners or cracks,
              discontinuous coefficients and/or boundary data,   non-homogeneous and/or
              anisotropic media) where non-smooth problems  are considerably more abundant
              than smooth ones.  Indeed, any realistic application, such as calculating the  
              scattered wave from the body of an airplane, will have to confront   some kind
              of roughness such as domains with non-smooth  boundaries. Formulating the
              theory which ultimately allows for the   design of efficient numerical
              algorithms for such problems will be one   of the main goals of the proposed
              research.
