Title       : Numerical Solution of Differential Equations in Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9870399

Award Number: 9870399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas N. Arnold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9870399 
Arnold

The investigator will devise, improve, and analyze methods
              for the numerical simulation of complex physical phenomena modeled by partial
              differential equations.  Three major areas of application will be studied, each
              requiring special methods: computational relativity, certain important classes
              of differential equations arising from incompressible fluid flow and from
              electromagnetism, and linearly elastic plates.

In the area of computational
              relativity, the work is motivated by the search for gravitational radiation
              using the LIGO detector, presently under construction.  LIGO is the prime
              example of a new generation of gravitational wave detectors, and is being
              designed to detect gravity waves (which have hitherto escaped detection due to
              their small amplitude).  If the detected wave can be analyzed to determine the
              nature of the massive but distant astronomical event which gave birth to it
              (e.g., the spiraling coalescence of a pair of black holes), then LIGO will
              become mankind's first window on the universe that can "see" beyond the
              electromagnetic spectrum (light and radio signals).  The proposed project is to
              devise efficient algorithms to enable such analyses to be performed on high
              performance computers.  These algorithms are based on Einstein's equations
              underlying general relativity.  The investigator will both extend and apply
              already completed computer codes for the constraint equations, purely spatial
              partial differential equations arising from the Einstein equations, and will
              also study the problem of numerically solving the Einstein evolution equations.
               This is highly interdisciplinary work, involving extensive collaboration
              between the investigator, a mathematician, and his group, and physicists and
              astronomers.

The second area of study concerns the developments of multigrid
              algorithms and supporting theory for solving certain sorts of differential
              equations which have hitherto resisted such approaches.  Multigrid algorithms,
              which exploit a decomposition of the desired solution into components on many
              different scales, are among the most efficient algorithms invented for solving
              many sorts of differential equations.  However for an important class of
              problems arising from incompressible continua and another group of problems
              arising from Maxwell's equations of electromagnetism, new multigrid approaches
              are required.

Finally the investigator will collaborate on a monograph on
              the theory of elastic plates, including modeling, analysis, and numerical
              simulation.  There has been extensive progress in these areas over the past
              decade, and the book will serve as both a reference for workers in the field
              and in the active field of elastic shell modeling, and as an introduction for
              researchers new to the area.

