Title       : POWRE: An Examination of Patience and Impatience in Social Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1998      
File        : a9870586

Award Number: 9870586
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49610              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sally Blount   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1321,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a pilot study for an innovative, new research stream
              studying what makes people patient and impatient.  The investigator begins with
              the observation that people have goals both for attaining concrete outcomes and
              for the pace at which they attain them.  In interdependent contexts, people
              must cope with competing pacing demands.  Sometimes another person's pace is
              slower; sometimes, it is faster.  In studying patience and impatience, she
              seeks to understand how people respond when someone else's pace is too slow,
              relative to their desires or expectations; i.e. how do people cope when their
              temporal goals are blocked in interdependent contexts?  Holding the length of
              delay constant, the investigator suggests that there will be variability in the
              extent to which people experience such delays patiently or impatiently, and
              that this variability matters.  If social life involves a sequence of delays
              and interactions, every delay is typically accompanied by a subsequent social
              interaction.  How people respond to a given delay affects the subsequent
              interaction.  Overall, it is suggested that patient responses to delays will
              lead to better interpersonal outcomes than impatient responses.  Thus, the goal
              is to better understand the nature of patient and impatient responses in social
              delay contexts; namely, what are they as constructs, what are their
              antecedents, and what are their effects?  During the award period, the
              investigator will conduct the pilot research and then prepare a large,
              multi-year grant proposal to support this research area in the future.  The
              POWRE award is particularly appropriate for her because she has two years
              before tenure evaluation.  Currently, less than 10% of the tenured professors
              at the Graduate Business School at University of Chicago are women.  It is also
              appropriate because the investigator has been pursuing her career goals amid
              several challenging life transitions.  The award will provide timely funding at
              a critical point in her research and professional development.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
