Title       : Archaeological Survey in the Central Mixteca Alta, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9870749

Award Number: 9870749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77676              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Kowalewski skowalew@arches.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Balkansky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Stephen Kowalewski, Andrew
              Balkansky and their collaborators will conduct an archaeological survey of an
              800 km. square region of mostly mountainous terrain in the Mixteca Alta
              highlands in the state of Oaxaca Mexico. Prior research indicates that the
              region has been continuously occupied since at least 1,300 BC and thus
              documents the rise of Central Mexican states and their expansion in the
              Postclassic period. While today the region is eroded and poor, the Spanish
              conquerors in the sixteenth century described the Mixteca Alta as a
              well-populated, rich and prosperous land. Oaxaca was a focal area throughout
              much of Middle American prehistory. Monte Alban emerged as one of the major
              prehistoric states and at ca. 1,000 AD developed into a Mixtec Kingdom whose
              influence extended well beyond Oaxaca. However, at the same time smaller
              apparently semi-independent centers of power existed within this region and
              archaeologists wish to understand the complicated relationships and changing
              balances between centralized authority and smaller partially autonomous
              regions. Researchers have come to realize that to gain insight into the
              organization of technologically simple prehistoric states and empires it is
              necessary to adopt a very broad regional approach and set individual major
              sites within this broader framework. Dr. Kowalewski's research is directed
              towards this goal.  The team will conduct a systematic foot survey over 100% of
              the habitable area in the Achiutla region. Two person teams will walk
              systematically over all ridge crests and larger stream bottoms. All
              archaeological materials and features such as buildings and terraces will be
              noted and mapped. Surface materials, which consist largely of ceramics, will be
              collected. Because design styles change over time, pottery provides a sensitive
              time indicator and through its use it will be possible to plot changing site
              location and population density and distribution over time. These data will
              then be interpreted in an environmental context.  The Achiutla study will fill
              an important survey gap in Oaxaca. When the project is completed,
              archaeologists will have information on a ca 140 km. contiguous area and this
              provides a unique opportunity which allows detailed examination of human
              behavior at a large regional scale. The work has the potential to provide a
              unique insight into how Mesoamerican states and empires developed and were
              maintained.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
