Title       : The Transfer of Effects from Conflicting First- and Second-Order Expectations
               across Interaction Settings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1998 
File        : a9870788

Award Number: 9870788
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa Troyer lisa-troyer@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is an experimental study of second-order expectations in social
              interaction.  Second-order expectations are the beliefs an individual holds
              regarding the expectations others have for the individual in the interaction
              (e.g., expectations regarding the individual's competence at a task). Often,
              individuals realize that others' expectations for them are not consistent with
              what the individuals expect of themselves.  That is, expectations held by a
              person and others in a social setting often conflict.  For instance, an
              individual may view herself/himself as a very competent student, but may
              discover that another person views her/him as not very competent.  The focus of
              this project is on (1) how individuals resolve conflict between their own
              expectations and those they believe others hold for them, and (2) what the
              consequences of the resolution are for subsequent interaction. The research
              draws heavily on expectation states research, which indicates that individuals
              may adjust their own expectations to correspond to those they believe others
              hold for them.  Two experiments explore how such a resolution might affect
              subsequent interaction.  The first experiment examines whether effects
              resulting from interaction under conflicting expectations transfer to
              situations in which the person is engaged in a different type of task than a
              prior one (in which there were conflicting expectations). The second experiment
              explores whether effects from interaction under conflicting expectations
              transfer to situations in which the person is interacting with another person
              (i.e., a different person than the person with whom one's expectations
              initially conflicted).    This project tests hypotheses derived from an
              existing program of research and theorizing on status generalization processes.
              It will offer new insight on how expectations regarding one's competence are
              affected by conflicting social expectations. Competence expectations, in turn,
              may have a powerful effect on a person's assertiveness and particip ation in
              problem solving groups.
