Title       : Multi-Scale Heterogeneity of the Stream-Dominated Alluvial Fan: New Perspective
               and Implications for Transport
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2000      
File        : a9870342

Award Number: 9870342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham E. Fogg gefogg@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey F. Mount  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Singer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth L. Verosub  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870342
Fogg

Though stream-dominated alluvial fans comprise a large
              percentage of important aquifer systems, detailed three-dimensional
              characterizations of these deposits are notably lacking in the literature. 
              Successful application of sequence stratigraphic concepts in petroleum research
              to predict subsurface facies distributions strongly suggests that, when
              modified for purely continental strata, sequence stratigraphy can be applied to
              characterize alluvial fan systems.  This project involves the fusion of several
              disciplines, including hydrology, geology, geophysics, and soil science, to
              develop a sequence stratigraphic framework from which a more advanced,
              tractable model of heterogeneity can be produced for typical, stream-dominated
              alluvial fans.  Significance of this research is three-fold.  First, it will
              create some needed "order" in our understanding of heterogeneity in many
              alluvial fan groundwater systems through development of continental sequence
              stratigraphic concepts.  Second, the research will provide a method to
              incorporate geostatistical simulation into a sequence stratigraphic framework,
              thus providing a detailed characterization of the aquifer system.  Finally, the
              research will provide a large step forward in our ability to characterize and
              model regional groundwater flow and transport in many types of alluvial
              deposits.  Such an advance is sorely needed for estimating long-term impacts of
              agricultural and urban pollution on sustainability of groundwater
              quality.

Central to the proposed research is the recognition of sequences,
              related to Quaternary climate cycles, bounded by laterally extensive, mature
              paleosols.  These paleosols mark fan exposure during interglacial periods, and
              form laterally extensive aquitards in the aquifer system.  Strata within the
              sequences represents deposition that occurred on the fan during glacial
              episodes, when accommodation space was made available by increased discharge
              and sediment supply.  Within these sequences, systems tracts (e.g., linked
              assemblage of lithofacies deposited during one time period of the climatic
              cycle) have also been recognized in core, driller's logs, and geomorphic
              mapping of the Kings River fan.  It is proposed that additional continuous core
              will be collected specific systems tracts (e.g., incised valley fill deposits)
              to examine these differences.  The systems tracts will be compared through use
              of environmental magnetism, facies morphology, and petrographic analysis. 
              Calibration of relatively abundant drillers logs to the core data, already
              successfully accomplished in other portions of the Kings River alluvial fan,
              will provide a means to define systems tract geometry in the subsurface.  A new
              Markov-chain technique for geostatistical modeling of spatial distribution in
              sedimentary units with greater geologic rigor (Carle and Fogg, 1996a, 1997)
              will be used to produce stochastic simulations of textural units within the
              sequence stratigraphic framework. 

