Title       : POWRE: Predicting the Accuracy of Interpersonal Compatibility Judgements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a9870452

Award Number: 9870452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49874              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea E. Chapdelaine andreac@joe.alb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albright College
	      13th & Exeter Sts.
	      Reading, PA  19604    215/921-2381

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to assess triadic accuracy in interpersonal
              perception and, more specifically, in social compatibility judgments.  First,
              the investigator will assess triadic accuracy - an individual's ability to
              predict how much two unacquainted persons will like or dislike each other. 
              Second, the investigator will identify personality and situational factors
              which enhance a person's triadic accuracy.  In achieving these goals,
              statistical techniques required to adequately analyze triadic perceptions will
              be further developed.  Our impressions of others are fundamental to our daily
              life.  The accuracy of these impressions enables us to understand and predict
              our social world, thereby enhancing the quality of our social interactions. 
              Given this central importance of interpersonal perception accuracy, it is not
              surprising that this topic has long been a central issue in the field of social
              psychology.  The majority of the work has examined our ability to accurately
              perceive one other person or another person's view of ourselves.  Despite the
              apparent importance of triadic accuracy to social functioning, almost no
              research has examined these perceptual judgments.  Thus, the results of this
              project will enhance understanding of interpersonal perception as well as
              expand the field in an important new direction.  This POWRE award will
              facilitate the consolidation of the investigator's long-term research area. 
              She has had two non-tenure-track Assistant Professor positions in colleges with
              very high teaching loads.  This pursuit of a unique approach within the field
              of interpersonal perception and the further development of sophisticated
              statistical techniques should aid the investigator in securing a tenure-track
              position.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
