Title       : Relationship Between Variation and Evolution in Fossil Stickleback Fish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2000     
File        : a9870337

Award Number: 9870337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11784              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Bell mabell@life.bio.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. James Rohlf  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870337
Bell

It has long been known that patterns of phenotypic variation
              within and among related populations or species are similar.  This observation
              has sometimes been interpreted to mean that evolutionary change is biased
              toward the direction of greatest variation.  An alternative explanation is that
              the same factors that favor evolution in a certain direction also shape
              patterns of variation within populations.  There has never been a satisfactory
              answer to the question of how Gmax, the multivariate direction of greatest
              additive genetic variance within populations, and Z, the direction of
              multivariate evolution between them, become oriented in the same
              direction.

This problem has puzzled workers in fields ranging from
              quantitative genetics to paleontology since.  The proposed research will
              exploit the element of time in the fossil record to help resolve this stubborn
              problem.  The basis for this study is an extraordinary deposit of fossil
              threespine stickleback fish, Gasterosteus doryssus, from the late middle
              Miocene, middle member of the Truckee Formation is west-central Nevada. 
              Abundant, beautifully-preserved specimens exhibit striking patterns of
              stratigraphic variation for size, armor, and fin ray number in a quarry that
              has been used in several previous studies by the Principal Investigator.  The
              deposit itself has special properties that offer ideal conditions to make large
              stickleback samples at regular time intervals over thousands of years.  Not the
              least important of these properties is the presence of uninterrupted annual
              laminations (varves).  Furthermore, paleoecological evidence and analogy with
              extant threespine stickleback show that samples from the fossil sequence
              represent populations with ancestor-descendant relationships (i.e., a lineage).
               This is exactly what is needed to examine the link between variation within
              populations and the direction of evolution.

Morphometric data obtained from
              this fossil lineage will be used to examine the relationship between the
              multivariate direction of greatest phenotypic variance within fossil samples,
              P, and the direction of multivariate evolution, Z, between successive samples. 
              The directions of P and Z will be estimated using the morphometric data from 11
              to 24 large samples spaced at 1000-year intervals.  Angeles between P and Z
              will be compared to see if P within a sample tends to bias the direction of
              evolution (Z) between it and the next sample, or whether P tends to swing
              around to match the direction of Z between it and the previous sample.  Both
              effects may occur.

Use of a fossil lineage will allow a critical analysis of
              the cause for the often-observed similarity between the direction of variation
              within and among populations.  The proposed research will be the first such
              analysis that utilizes the crucial element of time provided by the fossil
              record.  Not only will the proposed research be the first such analysis, but it
              will also contribute to methodological developments in morphometrics and the
              growing literature on stickleback evolution.

