Title       : Collaborative Web-Based Tools for Learning to Integrate Scientific Results Into
               Social Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9870934

Award Number: 9870934
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89338              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ray E. Habermann haber@ngdc.noaa.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1078,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870934
Haberman

This project blends an award-winning middle school science
              project with community mentors representing those perspectives in an innovative
              World Wide Web environment for doing just that.  The science project involves
              testing the effectiveness of several types of artificial wetlands in abating
              the negative chemical effects of drainage from an abandoned mine in the Rocky
              Mountains.  Over the last five years students identified those effects and
              their source, researched methods for abating the effects, and participated in
              the design and construction of the artificial wetlands.  They are ready to
              tackle the next obstacle: integrating those results into an action plan that
              considers the needs of the communities with stakes in that plan.  Students will
              form teams corresponding to each of these groups.  They will research their
              team's perspective individually with guidance from the teacher and from
              representatives of those communities that have agreed to act as mentors.  They
              will then bring together their individual results into a team perspective and
              the perspectives of all of the teams will be considered in the action plan. 
              The teamwork processes required for these two phases is directly supported by
              the technology that will be used.  The technological framework is expressed in
              a tool called WebGuide.  This tool allows individuals to record and annotate
              their research into "perspectives".  It then provides tools that support
              collaborative processes: proposing ideas, comparing and assessing ideas,
              negotiating, and reaching consensus.  It provides an ideal environment in which
              students can actually practice these processes, observe how to do them well,
              and improve their skills.  It also allows the community mentors to directly
              observe and facilitate these processes from their offices or homes.  This is
              fundamentally different than throwing a group of students into a room with
              instructions like "do a team project".  It actually provides an electronic
              venue in which they learn how to do team projects.  Not only is the technology
              of this project ideally suited, the school is as well.  The Logan School for
              Creative Learning is centered around a strong individually oriented and project
              based curricular approach.  The project will clearly fit in to this situation;
              it will receive the support that it needs to flourish.  This project will have
              an impact on advancing knowledge and building an important human resource for
              the Geoscience community.  The approach will be guided by a specific case, but
              the system can work in many environments including K-16 classrooms, university
              research centers, government agencies, and NGO's.  All of these groups have
              stakes in the environmental decisions of the future.  This project will build
              the Web into a venue for sharing the information required to inform those
              decisions on whatever spatial scale required.

