Title       : Acquisition of Materials Characterization Instrumentation for a Central
               Materials Analysis Facility at CSU
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1998     
File        : a9870997

Award Number: 9870997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter K. Dorhout pkd@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Grainger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9870997
Dorhout
The Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University (CSU)
              will acquire, in this project funded by the Major Research Instrumentation
              program, three complementary instruments for materials characterization:
              thermal analysis, vibrational spectroscopy, and spectroscopic ellipsometry. 
              The requested instruments will augment existing instrumentation to build the
              important interdisciplinary core facility supporting teaching and research
              called the Central Materials Analysis Facility (CMAF).  The facility will
              support the Department's strong commitment to teaching and research in
              materials chemistry.  The facility will also serve materials research needs in
              other departments at CSU, at nearby institutions, and in local industry.   The
              thermal analysis equipment will be used in undergraduate and graduate teaching,
              as well as research involving polymers, colloidal phases, and solid-state
              inorganic materials and will affect the research of nine identified user
              groups.  Vibrational spectroscopy equipment will be used by eleven identified
              interdisciplinary research groups.  The surface characterization capabilities
              are essential for existing undergraduate and graduate analytical chemistry
              courses as well as research.  The spectroscopic ellipsometer will be used in
              graduate teaching and by seven interdisciplinary research teams on campus for
              determination of thickness and optical properties of thin film polymer, metal,
              semiconductor and ceramic materials.  
%%%
This set of instruments, to be
              acquired through the National Science Foundation's Major Research
              Instrumentation program, will significantly expand the teaching, analytical and
              research capabilities in the department's Central Materials Analysis Facility. 
              This project will have a strong impact upon a large group of interdisciplinary
              faculty and materials researchers within the Department of Chemistry, Colorado
              State University, and surrounding institutions and industry.
***

