Title       : Terahertz Charge Dynamics in Oxide Films and Heterostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2002   
File        : a9870258

Award Number: 9870258
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Orenstein joeo@mh1.lbl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                       w:\awards\awards96\*.doc  9870258 
              Orenstein    This  experimental research project focuses powerful new  methods 
              of  time-domain  terahertz spectroscopy on  questions  of  charge  dynamics  in
               oxide  thin  films.  The  physics  associated  with  collossal
              magetoresistance and with cuprate superconductivity are  two  thrusts  of the
              work. The thin film samples are prepared  by  several  collaborators, with
              state-of-the-art  synthesis  methods  including  reactive  electron-beam
              coevaporation,  molecular-beam  epitaxy,    and    ultra-high   vacuum   pulsed
                laser-ablation.  Measurements  of the real and imaginary parts of  the 
              electrical  conductivity  will  be made in the range from 100-3000GHz,  which 
              lies  in  a gap between ranges accessible by microwave  and  FTIR  methods.  A 
              further  aspect  of the work  involves  bilayers  of  magnetic   (M)  and 
              superconducting  (S)  oxides,  and  trilayer  configurations  in  which M and S
              layers are  separated  by  thin  insulating  layers.  The ultimate goal  of 
              the  research  is  to  understand  and control electronic transport in
              designed-to-order  multilayer thin films. This research program is
              interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  involves one or more postdoctoral  and 
              graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent training  in  preparation  for 
              careers in industry, government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This 
              experimental research project focuses powerful new  optical  pulse  methods  to
               clarify the motions  of  charge  carriers  in  certain types of oxide thin
              films. The oxides under investigation  show  great  promise  for  applications
              as  magnetic  sensors  or  electron  devices,  or as superconducting elements 
              in  a  future  electronics.  The fundamental physics associated  with 
              collossal  magetoresistance  and  with  cuprate  superconductivity  are  two 
              thrusts  of  the  work.  The thin film samples  are  prepared  by  several 
              collaborators, with state-of-the-art  synthesis  methods  i ncluding  reactive 
              electron-beam coevaporation,  molecular-beam  epitaxy,    and    ultra-high  
              vacuum   pulsed   laser-ablation.  Measurements of the electrical conductivity
              will be made  in  the  range  from  100-3000GHz,  which lies in  a  gap 
              between  ranges  accessible by microwave and Fourier-transform infrared  
              methods.  A  further  aspect of the work involves bilayers of magnetic  (M) 
              and  superconducting (S) oxides, and trilayer  configurations  in  which M and
              S layers are separated by thin insulating layers. The  ultimate  goal  of  the 
              research is to  understand  and  control  electronic transport in
              designed-to-order multilayer thin  films.  This research program is
              interdisciplinary in nature and involves  one  or  more  postdoctoral and
              graduate  students,  who  receive  excellent  training  in  preparation  for 
              careers  in  industry,  government laboratories or academia.  ***
