Title       : IGERT: A New Pathway for Multi-Disciplinary Graduate Education in Optical
               Molecular Bio-engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a9870653

Award Number: 9870653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2498744            (Estimated)
Investigator: Rebecca Richards-Kortum kortum@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              Optical Bio-Molecular Engineering (OBE) that melds the more traditional areas
              of optical engineering, biological chemistry, and molecular biology.  This
              activity is a joint effort of fourteen scientists and engineers from the
              Departments of Botany, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Physics, and Zoology.  This group of
              scientists and engineers has established research collaborations and has
              interacted extensively through the existing Graduate Programs in Molecular
              Biology and Biomedical Engineering at the University of Texas.  Their
              collective expertise will provide the intellectual underpinning for the
              training of a diverse cadre of some seventy graduate students over the
              five-year tenure of the award. This IGERT activity in OBE draws upon recent
              advances in optical technologies that enable dynamic visualization and
              manipulation of processes within single cells and tissues with nanoscale
              resolution.  Important features of the program include broad exposure of
              doctoral students to the field through research internships and seminars;
              interdisciplinary doctoral research guided by multiple mentors; and new courses
              that provide the multidisciplinary perspective necessary for the design and use
              of optical instrumentation for visualization and manipulation of tissues and
              cells.  IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a
              diverse group of scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage
              of a broad spectrum of career options.  IGERT provides doctoral institutions
              with an opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate
              programs that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from
              several departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive,
              collaborative environment for both training and research.  In this first year
              of the program, support will be provided to seventeen institutions for new or
              nascent programs that collectively span all areas of science and engineering
              supported by NSF.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                           
