Title       : IGERT FORMAL PROPOSAL: Graduate Research Training in Bioinformatics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  2002    
File        : a9870710

Award Number: 9870710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2348084            (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles DeLisi delisi@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles R. Cantor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Tullius  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey M. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1339,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9870710  DeLisi       This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training 
              (IGERT) award will support the establishment of a broadly-  based graduate
              training program in computational science and  bioinformatics that emphasizes
              computational approaches to  diverse biological problems, including functional
              and  structural genomics, bioinformatics, neuroscience and cell  motility. The
              program will be a joint effort of 26 faculty  drawn from the Departments of
              Biology, Biomedical Engineering,  Chemistry, Electrical and Computer
              Engineering, Mathematics  and Pharmacology, whose research interests reflect
              skill in  both mathematics and experimental science.  NSF support will  provide
              stipends for 14 graduate students each year, and for  related costs of student
              research training.  Educational  opportunities will require that the graduate
              students have or  acquire basic knowledge of molecular biology and
              biochemistry,  developmental biology, computation and databases.  Advanced 
              coursework will be offered in areas as varied as molecular  evolution,
              biomechanics and engineering systems analysis.  Short tutorials will train
              students in the use and  modification of computer software and hardware needed
              for data  visualization and analysis.  The training program will offer  weekly
              seminars and evening research discussions, and will  host two national
              workshops devoted to leading edge scientific  or technological issues in
              computational biology. The training  program will include thesis research
              supervised by two  mentors, training in written and oral communication, visits
              to  industrial research labs and opportunities for extended  industrial
              internships.  Students will be recruited through  varied efforts including, in
              addition to standard avenues, the  use of the Science Engineering and Math
              Academic Support  Network of the New England Board of Higher Education and the 
              hosting of an annual, week-long workshop in databases and  software for
              teachers from 15-20 small colleges and  universities.  Th e progress of the
              program will be monitored  by an external advisory committee of distinguished
              industrial  and academic scientists that meets annually.       IGERT is a new,
              NSF-wide program whose goal is to sponsor  the establishment of innovative,
              research-based graduate  programs that will train a diverse group of new
              scientists and  engineers to be well-prepared for varied careers in the 
              private and public sectors.  IGERT provides an opportunity for  the development
              of new, well-focused multidisciplinary  programs that bridge traditional
              organizational barriers,  uniting faculty from several departments or
              institutions to  establish a highly-interactive collaborative environment for 
              both training and research.  In its first year, the program  will provide
              support to 17 institutions for new or nascent  programs that collectively span
              all areas of science,  engineering and mathematics eligible for support by the
              NSF.
