Title       : ROBUST DECENTRALIZED CONTROL OF POWER SYSTEMS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1998    
File        : a9870041

Award Number: 9870041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229462             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ali Feliachi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Asad Davari  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9870041  Feliachi    The objective of this proposal is to investigate and
              develop analysis and control strategies for the operation of electric power
              systems in a deregulated environment.  Currently, the electric power industry
              is in transition from large, vertically integrated utilities providing power at
              regulated rates to an industry that will incorporate competitive companies
              selling unbundled power at possibly lower rates.  Ultimately, consumers might
              benefit from lower rates expected as a result of serious competitive bulk power
              markets.  With this new structure, that might include separate generation,
              distribution, and transmission companies with an open access policy, comes the
              need for novel control and operation strategies to maintain the level of
              reliability that consumers not only have taken for granted but expect.  Control
              actions can be taken at any of the following locations: generation,
              distribution, transmission companies and/or demanded by an independent system
              operator.  Their design and coordination is a formidable national and local
              grid problem for which analysis, synthesis and control algorithms and tools
              (e.g. software) must be developed before the rapid dynamics of the competitive
              market require their implementation to ensure an acceptable level of
              reliability and quality of electric power.  The controllers will have different
              objectives and effects and, therefore their dynamical behavior, interactions
              and coordination become crucial in overall system operation.  This proposal
              will focus only on analysis and design of reliable and robust controllers for
              low frequency oscillations in power systems under an open access environment. 
              Control of transmission systems through FACTS (Flexible AC Transmission
              Systems) devices and control of generators will play an important role in the
              operation of the system of the future.  First, the control issues that result
              from deregulation need to be understood.  It is proposed to investigate and
              present different scenarios with diffe rent responsibilities and alternative
              strategies.  Second, the research will seek methods for (1) analysis and
              classification of oscillation modes as either local or inter-area, (2)
              identification of effective decentralized or almost decentralized controllers
              and their appropriate feedback signals, and (3) design of feasible, robust,
              reliable and distributed controllers using the proposed design algorithms and
              comparing them with well known intelligent control design schemes that will be
              pursued.  Several test systems and FACTS controllers will be investigated to
              demonstrate the proposed methodologies.  Issues such as model uncertainties and
              structural changes, nonlinearities, distributed controller and information
              structures, and computational efficiency will be the focus of the proposed
              research.  The success of this research will have an impact on understanding
              and designing controllers to reduce low frequency oscillations in electric
              power systems in a deregulated environment.  The analytical contributions will
              be useful to many other interconnected, large scale, dynamic systems.
