Title       : IGERT: Transportation Technology and Policy Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a9870682

Award Number: 9870682
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2662901            (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia L. Mokhtarian plmokhtarian@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. G. Flocchini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Sperling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Johnston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven A. Velinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training (IGERT) award will
              support the establishment of a multidisciplinary graduate training program in
              Transportation Technology and Policy that offers a new pedagogical perspective
              embracing both the physical sciences and engineering and the behavioral
              sciences to illuminate the human side of adopting and dealing with the impacts
              of transportation technology.  This activity is a joint effort of twenty-five
              scientists and engineers with backgrounds in mechanical and aeronautical
              engineering, statistics, management, transportation, civil and environmental
              engineering, chemical engineering and materials science, environmental science
              policy, natural resources, chemistry, and applied science.  This group of
              scientists and engineers has established research collaborations and their
              collective expertise will provide the intellectual underpinning for the
              training of a diverse cadre of some seventy-five graduate students over the
              five-year tenure of the award.  This IGERT activity in transportation education
              creates new courses, recruits non-traditional students, and offers new academic
              minors in traditional disciplinary departments.  The anticipated outcome is an
              increase in the number, and in the quality of preparation, of transportation
              PhD's who are equipped to contribute to solving pressing and complex problems
              of the future.  Other components of this multidisciplinary doctoral training
              program include fellowships, internships, seminar series, and conferences. 
              IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program intended to facilitate the establishment of
              innovative, research-based graduate programs that will train a diverse group of
              scientists and engineers to be well-prepared to take advantage of a broad
              spectrum of career options.  IGERT provides doctoral institutions with an
              opportunity to develop new, well-focussed multidisciplinary graduate programs
              that transcend organizational boundaries and unite faculty from several
              departments or institutions to establish a highly interactive, collaborative
              environment for both training and research.  In this first year of the program,
              support will be provided to seventeen institutions for new or nascent programs
              that collectively span all areas of science and engineering supported by NSF.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
