Title       : Analysis of Fluid Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1999  
File        : a9870091

Award Number: 9870091
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Thomas Beale beale@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9870091  J. Thomas Beale    Abstract     The purpose of the proposed work is
              to analyze the errors in  numerical methods for the time-dependent motion of
              water waves,  to design improved methods, and to verify the reliability of the 
              proposed methods with error estimates, convergence proofs, and  computational
              tests.  The methods of interest are called boundary  integral methods.  They
              have been widely used in ocean engineering  as well as in applied mathematics. 
              The motion of the water surface  is tracked by markers representing material
              particles which are moved  according to a velocity field computed from
              quantities on the surface.    The velocity is expressed in terms of singular
              integrals, since the  governing equations are formulated through potential
              theory.  The  evolution has the character of nonlinear, nonlocal wave motion on
               the boundary.  Numerical instabilities have long been observed in  such
              methods, but analysis of the two-dimensional case has shown  that they can be
              ruled out by proper design.  The first goal of the  proposed research is to
              develop stable, convergent numerical methods  for the simulation of exact,
              time-dependent, three-dimensional water  wave motion which is periodic in the
              horizontal directions.  Thus the  full nonlinear motion will be dealt with, but
              interactions with solid  objects will be neglected.  The method of calculation
              of the singular  integrals is a primary issue, one which may have relevance to
              other  problems.  A second goal is to deal with the errors from edges where  a
              solid object meets the water surface.    Practical predictions of the motion of
              fluids and solids  are often made by numerical solution of the equations  which
              express the basic physical laws of the motion.  Methods of the type studied
              here have been used in  ocean engineering in order to predict the motion of 
              large water waves, the interaction of water waves with  ships or stationary
              objects, and the force exerted by  a wave on a wall or object.  Calculations of
              these probl ems  and others have encountered numerical instabilities; that is, 
              because of the numerical approximation, small scales may  grow in a way
              unrelated to the physical problem.  Mathematical analysis can be used to
              understand such  errors and to design improved methods.  Previous  work for
              two-dimensional waves (those not varying in  the third direction) has
              identified the sources of errors  for this special case.  The purpose of the
              present  work is to carry out such analysis in more  difficult and realistic
              cases where the sources of  errors are likely to be more serious.  It is hoped
              that  improvements in the numerical methods could contribute  to reliable
              predictions of water wave motion.
