Title       : Recursive Bayesian Optical Tomography for Imaging Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2000    
File        : a9870779

Award Number: 9870779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290043             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret J. Eppstein eppstein@emba.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David E. Dougherty  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9150,9184,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                A new method of optical tomography is developed for noninvasive photon 
              migration imaging of biological tissues. Major objectives of the project  are
              to adapt methods devised for geophysical applications to optical  imaging,
              investigate the? effects of a priori assumptions on convergence  behavior, and
              extend the resulting methods to three dimensions. The method  produces
              estimates of the number, geometry, value, and covariance of  spatially
              distributed parameters, such as absorption and scattering  coefficients, that
              are correlated with biological structure and function.           The new
              inverse method incorporates Bayesian statistics, unlike other state- 
              of-the-art photon migration imaging methods.  An approximate extended  Kahman
              filter is used, in which the inverse of an a priori estimate of the  parameter
              error covariance matrix regularizes the system and the weighting  matrix
              includes the inverse of the measurement error covariance. The  efficiency of
              the extended Kalman filter is improved by approximations that  significantly
              reduce computational requirements without compromising the  accuracy of the
              filter estimates.  In addition, the recursive nature of the  filter is
              exploited to keep the size of required matrix inversions low by  processing
              data from separate source-emission events sequentially.  Automatic
              parameterization is alternated with data conditioning to  dynamically determine
              the number and geometry of spatially distributed  parameters.  The
              dimensionality of the parameter space is kept high where  there are adequate
              data to warrant high resolution, while the computational  efficiency and
              regularizing effects of low dimensionality are exploited in  regions where data
              are sparser.
