Title       : Mathematical Problems in Polymer Rheology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9870220

Award Number: 9870220
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Renardy renardym@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research addresses fundamental mathematical issues in polymer
              rheology and continuum mechanics. One area of research is the study of high
              Weissenberg number asymptotics of viscoelastic flows. This concerns the limit
              when elastic effects are strong. In this case, the mathematical solutions of
              the equations often show singular features such as singularities at corners and
              boundary layers at walls and separating streamlines. Failure to resolve these
              singularities continues to be one of the major impediments towards successful
              numerical simulation of viscoelastic flows. The proposed research will explore
              the application of asymptotic methods in this field to clarify the analytical
              nature of the solution. A second area of the proposed research concerns flow
              instabilities. Specific problems to be studied are the process of fiber
              spinning, and the related problems of film casting and film blowing. One aspect
              of these flows which has received only scant attention in theoretical studies
              is the liquid to solid transition and the associated dynamics of the freezing
              point. The proposed research will study this problem with the objective of
              elucidating stability boundaries and qualitative dynamics as well as basic
              mathematical issues such as the well-posedness of the free boundary value
              problem and the relation between stability and spectral properties. Another
              topic of the proposal is the investigation of the nature of the spectrum which
              arises in studying the linearized stability of viscoelastic shear flows.
              Finally, the proposal addresses a question in control of linear elastic solids
              by imbedded actuators, namely the question which configurations of the boundary
              can be achieved with certain types of controls. This work is joint with David
              Russell.               The proposed research in fluid dynamics has significant
              implications for materials science. In the processing of polymeric liquids,
              e.g. the manufacture of plastics, the flow of the liquid during processing
              conditions often has a major impact on the quality and properties of the
              product. The understanding and simulation of these flows is therefore of
              importance. The proposal addresses mathematical singularities in the high
              elasticity limit which pose a major challenge to numerical simulations and need
              to be resolved at a fundamental level if further progress is to be made.
              Another aspect of the proposal is the study of flow instabilities. Such
              instabilities can arise in processing operations where they often lead to
              unacceptable products. Finally, the proposal addresses new mathematical
              questions which arises in the study of "smart" materials.
