Title       : Developing Digital Paleontological Collections: Searching, Visualizing, and
               Measuring Virtual Specimens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  2002     
File        : a9870856

Award Number: 9870856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $571597             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth McGwire kenm@dri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephanie D. Livingston  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Desert Res Ins
	      2215 Raggio Parkway
	      Reno, NV  895121095    775/673-7381

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Accessing paleontological specimens curated at facilities  throughout the
              world increases both the cost and time required  for research in evolutionary
              biology. Although a number of  electronic databases currently name the facility
              where  specimens and/or assemblages of North American vertebrate  collections
              are housed (e.g. FAUNMAP)* no existing database  yet contains detailed
              descriptive information on individual  specimens. Published data for fossil
              specimens varies greatly  from specimen to specimen. depending on the nature of
              the  publication and the research interests of the investigator.  Other
              researchers addressing different issues cannot  necessarily find published data
              that is comparable to their  own data and specimens. The proposed effort will
              address these  problems in biological research by developing:      methods for
              collecting or compiling digital representations  of paleontological samples.  
              database methods for efficiently  storing and cataloging these digital
              representations      a search-engine for locating specimens in a distributed 
              network of digital archives. and      interactive  visualization and
              measurement of these  digital    representations across the internet.    A
              variety of techniques exists for creating digital  representations of physical
              objects that could allow  simultaneous access and interactive measurements of
              specimens  from collections throughout the World. Such representations  may
              range from simple photography with selected perspective  views to full
              volumetric representations created by a medical  imaging CT scanner. Each
              method will have unique  characteristics in terms of the nature and accuracy of
              their  spatial representation. as well as cost. The proposed effort  will
              develop standardized digitizing methods for  paleontological samples and
              appropriate models for estimating  the uncertainty of measurements derived from
              these various  types of digital representations.    Efficient access to these
              digital representations will require  the appli cation of database methods that
              cover the traditional  needs for cataloging physical specimens as well as
              capturing  relevant aspects of the methods by which the sample was  digitized.
              This effort will emphasize the development of a  scalable architecture that
              will allow the implementation to  vary among a number of distributed
              institutions, in order to  accommodate their available resources. These
              distributed  databases will be accessed through an intemet search engine 
              front-end. Specimens in these databases can then be selected  and
              object-oriented programming methods will be used to  provide interactive
              visualization and measurements that are  appropriate for the given type of
              digital representation.  Interactive measurements will be supplemented with
              estimates  of spatial uncertainty derived from models of geometric error. 
              These models will be parameterized by database records  describing the methods
              and circumstances of data capture for  each item.    Abslxact              
              July 25, 1998                       1    This system will be developed in
              direct collaboration with  paleontological researchers and will be developed
              and tested  using dental specimens of various species of mammoth from Anzo 
              Borrego National Park and the Burke Museum at the University  of Washington.
              Seattle. The ability to rapidly relate newly  recovered specimens to objective,
              exhaustive and publicly  accessible digital representations from archives
              around the  wo~d would support a vast array of scientific investigations  in
              biology, as well as other disciplines like archeology. In  addition. this
              capability will prove invaluable to museums,  libraries, and K= 12 education.  
               Abstract               July 25, 1998                        2
