Title       : Aquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9870995

Award Number: 9870995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lawrence M. Fritz                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115422             (Estimated)
Investigator: William D. Eldred eldred@bio.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1189      MAJOR RESEARCH INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This proposal to the Major Research Instrumentation Program  requests funds
              for the purchase of an Olympus Fluoview laser-  scanning confocal microscope
              system to be shared by  researchers in several departments at the Charles River
               Campus of Boston University. This confocal microscope will  extend the
              research of several Users who are experienced  with confocal microscopy, and it
              will allow the initiation  of many new research efforts using confocal
              microscopy by 12  principal investigators and over 70 postdoctoral fellows, 
              graduate students and undergraduates. The research projects  of the Users cover
              a wide range of microscopic applications  including the following:
              visualization of basic cellular  events, the analysis of neuronal and synaptic
              anatomy and  function, the subcellular localization of cellular  components,
              the study of development, and cell-specific gene  expression. In addition to
              research, this microscope will be  used in a wide variety of research training
              at all  educational levels, especially the training of graduate  students and
              postdoctoral fellows in the laboratories of the  Users. At the undergraduate
              level, this microscope will  facilitate the research of many students doing
              honors  research in the Users laboratories, the students doing  projects funded
              by the NSF Research Experience for  Undergraduates (NSF-REU) program and the
              students doing  Howard Hughes Medical Institute-sponsored summer research.  As
              part of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute-sponsored  Frontiers in Biology for
              High School Teacher Summer  Research, a number of local high school teachers
              will also  use the microscope.    The use of a confocal microscope is critical
              for studies  which require high resolution light microscopic images of 
              fluorescent markers, particularly in thick or living  specimens. The use of
              photomultiplier detection in this  confocal scope greatly enhances the
              detection of faint  images and allows the accurate quantitative measurement of 
              colocalization of fluorescent labe ls at the limits of  resolution of the light
              microscope. The requested equipment  includes an Olympus Fluoview Confocal
              Imaging System  integrated with an Olympus BX50 light microscope. The  Fluoview
              confocal microscope can achieve excellent  performance at a relatively low
              cost, because the Fluoview  confocal system has been optically integrated
              directly to  the Olympus BX50 using optimized hard optics. It will allow 
              single- and double-label imaging, along with both  transmitted (Nomarski) and
              reflected imaging modes. The two  lasers we are requesting (an argon ion and a
              dual-line  krypton ion laser) provide three widely-spaced excitation 
              wavelengths to allow the use of the broad range of  fluorochromes needed for
              optimal multiple-labeling. The  emission filters can be easily changed by the
              users to  accommodate any future developments in fluorescent probes.  The
              Fluoview software is intuitively organized and well  suited for a multi-user
              facility, as all of the microscope  settings are graphically illustrated for
              specific labeling  techniques. This software provides strong support for the 
              optical sectioning, 3-D reconstruction and rotation, and  kinetic analysis
              requirements of the users. The BX50 Olympus  microscope provides excellent
              optical performance at a  reasonable price. It incorporates the latest infinity
               corrected optics using universal high numerical aperture  objective lenses
              that can be used for all techniques  including fluorescence and Nomarski
              optics. The  ergonometrics of this microscope are excellent and it allows  the
              use of three fluorescent wavelengths plus transmitted  light. The mechanical
              stability of this microscope provides  an excellent base for the attachment of
              the Fluoview  confocal scanning unit. In summary, this request for a high 
              performance confocal microscope will broadly benefit both  research and
              research training at the Charles River Campus  of Boston University.
