Title       : Inequalities in Probability and Harmonic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2001      
File        : a9870026

Award Number: 9870026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79716              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen J. Montgomery-Smith stephen@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9870026  Principal Investigator: Stephen J. Montgomery-Smith   
              Abstract: This proposal contains two projects. First, the principal
              investigator plans to investigate tail distributions of sums of random
              variables. Most results in the past have focused on asymptotic answers, that
              is, they obtain formulae that are valid, for example, when the number of
              variables summed is very large (the Law of Large Numbers, or the Central Limit
              Theorem). It is intended to find formulae that work in all situations. The
              second project concerns obtaining an inequality in which we wish to show that
              rank-one functions are quasi-convex. This would have profound consequences in
              harmonic analysis and the study quasi-conformal functions. It would settle the
              conjecture of Iwaniec concerning the best constant for the norm of the
              Beurling-Ahlfors Operator. It also has possible consequences in obtaining weak
              type estimates for singular integrals independent of dimension, which would be
              something quite unexpected in harmonic analysis. Finally, the research would
              find applications in applied mathematics, in problems dealing with
              homogenization of non-linear dielectrics.    The first project deals with the
              following problem. If we are given a number of random quanitities, what can we
              say about their sum? For example, what can we say about the average height of
              ten people picked randomly from the population? This problem is fundamental in
              probability theory, tracing its historical roots back to the very beginnings of
              the discipline. There are still many unanswered problems in this area. The
              second project studies the nature of the concept of convexity. This is a
              cornerstone property of much mathematics, and it has been used in many areas of
              science, such as physics and engineering. This particular project studies
              quasi-convexity, a notion that emerged out of attempts to understand how
              elastic bodies are distorted under various forces and stresses. The principal
              investigator (along with D. Talbot) has already used t hese ideas to study
              problems of a different kind - namely, problems in electrostatics.
