Title       : POWRE: Establishing Lateral Variability of Geotechnical Sites Using Seismic
               Surface Water
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1999   
File        : a9870358

Award Number: 9870358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara A. Luke bluke@ce.unlv.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Las Vegas
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Las Vegas, NV  891541037    702/895-1357

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,1592,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              A POWRE award supports the development of a geophysical method  for geotechnical
              site characterization.  Field experiments and analyses will be performed to
              develop a technique for establishing the lateral variability of geotechnical
              sites using seismic surface waves.  The speed with which seismic waves travel
              through the earth is a function of the stiffness of the earth.  By measuring
              the variability of seismic wave velocity through the earth, the  variability 
              of stiffness can be inferred.  Surface waves are a type of seismic wave which
              propagate along the ground surface.  In a layered medium, their propagation
              velocity varies with wavelength.  This dispersive characteristic enables
              non-intrusive measurements of the variation of the earth's stiffness with
              depth.  Surface waves are currently being employed in geotechnical engineering
              an geophysics to establish the variability of a site with depth.  With further
              study, the method can be expanded to address lateral variations in stiffness as
              well.  The POWRE award will help to bring about the involvement of a graduate
              student or post-doctorate researcher with complementary skills outside of
              geotechnical engineering.  This will broaden the research base by developing
              its multidisciplinary aspects and will support development of partnerships
              between the Principal Investigator and experts in relevant fields, such as
              digital signal processing, statistical analysis of spatially correlated data,
              and geophysics.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
