Title       : POWRE: The Inhomogeneity of Stratocumulus Cloud Microstructure and Its Effect on
               Cloud Radiative Parameters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9870492

Award Number: 9870492
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63142              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zena Kogan zkogan@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9870492
Kogan
Under the Professional Opportunities for Women in Research and
              Education (POWRE) Program, the Principal Investigator will investigate the
              dependence of the stratocumulus cloud layer radiative parameters on cloud
              inhomogeneity.  Radiative properties of clouds is a factor very important to a
              variety of meteorological processes that range from local weather to climate
              issues.  Current knowledge of these radiative characteristics, however, is
              somewhat lacking.
The Principal Investigator∆s first task is to evaluate the
              accuracy of cloud optical depth parameterizations that are most commonly used
              in various applications and satellite retrievals.  The evaluation will be based
              on simulations with an advanced research numerical model which includes
              explicit formulation of cloud microphysics.  The observations from the Atlantic
              Stratocumulus Experiment, Southern Ocean Cloud Experiment, and Monterey Area
              Ship Track Experiment will provide the data for the initialization of the
              numerical model.  The exact solution based on the known drop size distributions
              will be compared with parameterizations based on bulk parameters.  It is
              expected that the study will result in a better understanding of the effect of
              cloud inhomogeneity on cloud radiative parameters and improvement of their
              formulation in large-scale models that cannot accommodate explicit treatment of
              cloud microphysics.
The second task win be to investigate quantitatively how
              the bias introduced by the plane-parallel or independent pixel approximation
              depends on the statistical parameters describing the cloud microphysical
              inhomogeneity.  The parameters characterizing the spatial inhomogeneity will be
              related to the bias introduced by plane-parallel and independent pixel
              approximations.  The correction of the bias will increase the accuracy of the
              radiative transfer calculations in the stratocumulus boundary layer
              clouds.
This research under the NSF POWRE Program will also help the Principal
              Investigator to gain new expertise in the state of the art numerical modeling
              and observations related to the radiative transfer problems.


