Title       : Twisted Sums and Unconditional Structure for Banach Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a9870027

Award Number: 9870027
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Juan J. Manfredi                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186302             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel J. Kalton nigel@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-9870027  Principal Investigator: Nigel J. Kalton    Abstract:   
              The aim of  this proposal is  to study a  number of problems related to the
              notion of an extension of one Banach space by another,  and  the  relationships
               between  extensions   and unconditional  structure.   It  is  proposed  to
              attempt to resolve the conjecture that if every minimal extension of  a Banach
              space is  trivial then the space has finite cotype, and  to  attempt  a 
              classification  of those spaces so that every extension by a Hilbert  space is
              trivial. Both  these problems can be reformulated  in other terms and  would
              have considerable  significance  independent  of  the  theory  of extensions. 
              The proposer will also work on the fundamental problem in the theory of
              unconditional structure of  whether every  complemented   subspace  of   a 
              Banach   space  with unconditional basis also has an unconditional basis.   
              The theory of extensions can be considered in the following terms.  Suppose we
              are given a centrally symmetric solid  in three or more dimensions and we are
              allowed only to  compute its  cross-section  by  a  slice  in some directions
              and the shadow cast  by the  body in  the perpendicular  directions. This 
              allows  us  to  compute  certain information about the solid, but  not to
              reconstruct it  completely.  The aim of this project  is to obtain more 
              complete information about the body under certain additional conditions. It
              turns  out that many questions of importance in mathematical analysis and
              applications, although not  expressed in this form, can be visualized as
              problems of this nature, perhaps  involving infinite dimensions. An
              unconditional basis in a particular class of  functions  is  a collection of
              relatively simple functions with which we can approximate every member of  the
              class;  such  approximations  are  very  important  for many practical 
              situations,    for  example   in  engineering applications. One of the aims of
              this project is to decide general conditions under w hich  a basis can be
              constructed. There is interaction between the theory of extensions and of
              unconditional bases which this project will explore further.
