Title       : Evolution of Unique Desaturases in Moth Sex Pheromone Glands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9870669

Award Number: 9870669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $263000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendell L. Roelofs wlr1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9870669  Roelofs  Sex pheromone systems in insects have had considerable
              attention because the species-specific attractant chemicals used for attracting
              mates can be exploited for monitoring and insect management strategies.  Also,
              the critical use of these signals in maintaining the integrity of a species
              supports the idea that the evolution of the specific signals is directly
              involved in the speciation process.  Although much is now known about how the
              chemical signals are biosynthesized in the pheromone gland of female moths,
              there remain many questions about how these chemical communication systems have
              evolved to use different blends and chemical compositions in related moth
              species.    Dr. Roelofs has found that a family of unique enzymes have evolved
              in the moth pheromone gland to produce unsaturated compounds possessing double
              bonds in locations not normally found in other animals.  The PI hypothesizes
              that these unique desaturases evolved from the common delta9 desaturase that is
              found in all animals to make compounds such as oleic acid (unsaturation at
              carbon 9).  The characterization of the genes for some of the unique
              desaturases would provide the possibility of conducting a comparison of
              desaturase genes from primitive and advanced species to the common delta9
              desaturase gene to understand better the speciation process.  The project is
              now at a stage of characterizing a gene for a desaturase that produces an E
              configuration double bond - a gene that has not been identified in any plant or
              animal.  An understanding of the unique desaturases from moth glands and how
              they insert double bonds, in addition to its huge contribution to the
              fundamental knowledge about these enzymes and to the specification process,
              could lead to the development of commercial processes for producing valuable
              raw materials for the pharmaceuticals, food or chemical industries.
