Title       : Bird and Mammal Diversity in Northwestern Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1999     
File        : a9870184

Award Number: 9870184
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $115000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Mares mamares@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet K. Braun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870184  Mares      A 12-month survey of the birds and mammals of the Andean and
              pre-Andean provinces (Jujuy, Salta, Tucum n, and northern Catamarca) of
              northwestern Argentina will be conducted. The conservation status of the region
              has been defined as "Vulnerable," its biological distinctiveness as "Regionally
              Outstanding," and it has been assigned a Biodiversity Priority Status of Level
              1 (Highest Priority at Regional Scale). This biogeographically significant
              region remains largely unexplored biologically. Several of South America's
              major habitats occur here, including the Yungas forest, puna, prepuna, montane
              grasslands, chaco, montane chaco, and Monte desert. Microhabitat diversity is
              high, and numerous isolated valleys and montane islands exist. The area is a
              corridor for the north-south migration of biota, and has been suggested as a
              center of diversity for many taxa. The entire region is an ideal area for
              geographic isolation and subsequent speciation.   Birds and mammals will be
              surveyed at ~20 localities. Specimens, including genetic data, will be
              collected and deposited in museum collections. Data on habitat use, habits,
              molting, reproduction, and natural history will be recorded. Faunal surveys,
              checklists, and identification keys will be produced both in print and
              electronic format. Research will involve descriptions of new genera and
              species, leading to research on systematic and phylogenetic relationships,
              biogeography, and conservation. Data will aid in choosing sites for
              preservation and will be baseline data on habitat selection, reproduction, and
              species composition for major habitats in this threatened region. Collaboration
              will involve individuals from six organizations in the United States,
              Argentina, and Canada. Argentine and US students will be supported and trained
              both in the field and in the laboratory.
