Title       : Experimental Software Systems: Dynamic Resource Management for a Network-Centric
               Operating System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2000      
File        : a9870736

Award Number: 9870736
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $960000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy H. Campbell rhc@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              M. D. Mickunas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klara Nahrstedt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9870736
Campbell, Roy H.
Mickunas, Dennis M.
University of Illinois at
              Urbana-Champaign

Experimental Software Systems: Dynamic Resource Management
              for a Network-Centric Operating System

This project researches the operating
              system and resource management concerns for next generation network-centric,
              user- and application-oriented distributed systems that accommodate frequent
              change.  The rapid growth and change of computing and digital communication
              taxes scientific and engineering endeavors involving computation.  The research
              builds upon an innovative service model in which the distributed system
              customizes itself to better the fulfillment of user and application
              requirements.  In this model, a user is no longer an entity that is local to
              one specific machine -- each user is a machine-independent entity that exists
              in the network and can transparently carry its profile across different
              hardware and software.  A network-centric operating system manages and
              allocates the resources to support the user on heterogeneous platforms. 
              Resource management encompasses a framework for architecture-awareness.  This
              forms the basis for adaptable quality of service, dynamic security, and
              self-configuration.  The approach supports distributed desktops, mobile
              workspaces, and legacy applications across a spectrum of resources including
              mobile Personal Digital Assistants (PDAs), embedded systems, workstations, and
              supercomputers using wired and wireless communications media.  Simply put, the
              goal is to manage the overhead associated with computer technological advances
              by factoring adaptive dynamics and reconfiguration into the resource management
              mechanisms and algorithms of distributed operating systems.
