Title       : POWRE: Full Circle: Filling in the Gaps
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1998       
File        : a9870444

Award Number: 9870444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janie E. Seat seat@tennessee.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Proposal Title: POWRE: Full Circle: Filling in the Gaps  PI: Janie
              E. Seat  Institution: University of Tennessee Knoxville    This project is to
              support a visiting professor position from which the professor 1) continues the
              refinement and expansion of pilot engineering curriculum designed to enhance
              performance of technical students and 2) developments and implements an
              Engineer Minor in Human Performance that adds complementary individual
              performance skills to the "hard" science skills typically learned in the
              mathematics, engineering, and science curriculum.  The minor requires four
              additional specialized courses in Applied Performance, Politics of Technology,
              Critical Analysis, and a concluding supervised Practicum in a soft skill role. 
                 Assessment techniques are developed that allow measurement of performance
              instead of outcomes to judge the value added of the interventions.  These
              activities are designed to work at other institutions, and the interventions
              are transferable to industry.  Assessment is used to determine appropriate
              interventions and to measure change as a result of interventions.     The PI's
              career objectives are to take her industry experience and research background
              to develop a unique program that directly attacks the issues of how technical
              problem solvers use their abilities to contribute to a better world. The
              problem is usually not in deficient technical skills, but in how information is
              gathered and solutions are expressed.  The PI's intention is to use the
              opportunity of Visiting Professor to gain the necessary teaching experience and
              research credentials to begin a career in academe.    The College of
              Engineering at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville has piloted courses for
              the past two years with the Counselor Education/Counselor Psychology Department
              aimed at improving the team experience of senior engineering students in a
              capstone project.  This pilot has lead to the offering of two formal classes
              this academic year.  A new freshman curric ulum is being piloted this fall, and
              includes activities that are based on the previous work in the pilot programs.
