Title       : IGERT: Integrative Graduate Training of Neuroscientists and
               Computational/Physical Scientists
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a9870633

Award Number: 9870633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2446896            (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Ebner ebner001@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yousef Saad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald G. Truhlar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 1339,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9870633  Ebner       This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training 
              (IGERT) award will support the establishment of a broadly-  based graduate
              training program that will equip students to  use relevant the technologies and
              insights of computational  and physical science in investigation of fundamental
              problems  in neuroscience.  The project will be a joint effort of 24  faculty
              from 8 departments, with collaborative research  interests ranging from use of
              numerical methods in modeling of  limb motor control to modeling of synaptic
              communication in  the retina and to 3-dimensional representation of 
              neurophysiological data such as those derived from functional  magnetic
              resonance imaging. NSF support will provide stipends  for 13 graduate students
              each year who will enroll in either  the neuroscience or scientific computation
              Ph.D. programs.  Educational opportunities include required six-week summer 
              course in cell and molecular neurobiology, a new year-long  course in
              scientific computation, and a new seminar series in  computational neuroscience
              that will bring 12 speakers from  academia and industry to the campus each
              year.  After  completing short projects in the research groups of three 
              participating faculty (lab rotations), students will choose  two mentors for
              their thesis research, one from the 12  participating neuroscience faculty, the
              other from among the  12 computational science faculty.  In addition to use of 
              existing and separate recruitment efforts of the two Ph.D.  programs, the
              IGERT-sponsored program will benefit from joint  efforts of participating
              faculty and an ongoing collaborative  effort with the Florida A&M University.  
                  IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program whose goal is to sponsor  the
              establishment of innovative, research-based graduate  programs that will train
              a diverse group of new scientists and  engineers to be well-prepared for varied
              careers in the  private and public sectors.  IGERT provides an opportunity for 
              the development of new, well-focuse d multidisciplinary  programs that bridge
              traditional organizational barriers,  uniting faculty from several departments
              or institutions to  establish a highly-interactive collaborative environment
              for  both training and research.  In its first year, the program  will provide
              support to 17 institutions for new or nascent  programs that collectively span
              all areas of science,  engineering and mathematics eligible for support by the
              NSF.
