Title       : High Dimensional Statistical Problems: Theory and Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2000 
File        : a9870193

Award Number: 9870193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $278307             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce G. Lindsay bgl@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9870193
Lindsay

The research will be directed toward the broad theme of
              recovering statistical information about variation of interest in the presence
              of confounding variation in high dimensions.  The initial work involves
              developing new tools for the methodology of Generalized Estimating Equations
              (GEE) based on two new ideas:  first, the investigator will develop a maximum
              information approach to the estimation of nuisance correlation parameters in
              GEE,  and second, he will develop a quadratic inference methodology as an
              alternative to the point estimator/standard error approach.  The first
              enhancement has been found to increase efficiency under covariance
              misspecification.  The second allows one to develop ANOVA like model selection
              techniques for the estimating equation framework while automatically meeting
              the maximum information criterion.  These new tools will then be used in a
              wider range of challenging applications involving high dimensional correlated
              data.  An additional theme of the research is the development of more widely
              consistent nonparametric estimators for situations in which maximum likelihood
              fails.

Modern statistics is faced with an explosion of increasing complex
              and sophisticated scientific data.  One of the key features of such data is
              that it is high-dimensional.  It is also characterized by having high degrees
              of interdependence between observations.  The goal of the research is to
              enhance our ability to separate the effects of this interdependence from the
              features of the data that we are most interested in.  The initial focus of this
              research is on a popular method of dealing with longitudinal data, an example
              of which would be response variables that are measured repeatedly over time on
              a group of patients.  The structure of the interdependence of observations
              within a patient is then a nuisance feature which we must adapt to if we wish
              to learn how the response variables are affected by explanatory variables.  New
              methods will be developed that are more efficient and reliable for this
              setting, and they will then be extended to other problems with correlated
              structures.

