Title       : Influence of Climate and Environmental Factors on the Thermal and Moisture
               Regimes of the Layer and Permafrost
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1999     
File        : a9870635

Award Number: 9870635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir E. Romanovsky   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas E. Osterkamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alaska Fairbanks
	      109 ASC
	      Fairbanks, AK  99775    907/474-7314

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Recent unexpected and unexplained discoveries of a large amplitude temperature
              cycle in the active layer and permafrost from Prudhoe Bay to the Brooks Range,
              Alaska have been identified.  Observations include large and systematic changes
              in the active layer, a large amount of unfrozen water in the frozen active
              layer, near-surface permafrost at some sites, and large spatial gradients in
              the active layer and permafrost surface temperatures.  These changes indicate
              that the current understanding of climate-active layer interactions are not
              well understood.  Warmer temperatures from increased greenhouse gases have been
              predicted in the Arctic.  These temperature changes  could cause permafrost to
              thaw as the active layer becomes thicker.  A better understanding of the
              relationships among the atmosphere, soil surface active layer, and permafrost
              is required to interpret the rate and extent of permafrost degradation,
              modifications to its regime, release of carbon and trace gases by thawing
              permafrost, changes in soil moisture, and the hydrological cycle. 

This
              proposed research contains field and laboratory measurements, and analyses and
              interpretations of the data which will be obtained from six long-term study
              sites along a transect from Prudhoe Bay across the coastal plain and to the
              foothills of the Brooks Range.  These sites are in undisturbed areas and span a
              wide range of permafrost, climatic, and environmental conditions.  They have a
              relatively long term data base (since 1983).  This research will investigate
              how the active layer and continuous permafrost, in a variety of climatic and
              environmental regimes, has responded and continues to respond to climatic
              change.


