Title       : Species Concepts and Phylogeny in a Genus of Fungal Plant Pathogens,
               Ceratocystis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1999        
File        : a9870675

Award Number: 9870675
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211250             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Harrington tcharrin@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Harrington  DEB9870675    Recognition of fungal species and a better
              understanding of their evolution are needed.  For example humans move plant
              pathogenic fungi around the world on their crops and plant products, often with
              devastating consequences.  Introductions of new pathogens and changes in fungal
              populations frequently frustrate disease control strategies, reduce food and
              fiber productivity, and threaten forest ecosystems.  In fact human dispersal
              even may be greatly accelerating the rate of evolution of many plant pathogens.
              Ceratocystis species, which are primarily found in the Americas, have been
              particularly damaging when introduced into new ecosystems or when introduced
              plant hosts come into contact with indigenous pathogen populations.  The
              limited morphological variation within Ceratocystis may reflect constraints
              associated with dependency on non-specific insects for dissemination, and
              physiological adaptation to new hosts may have been the driving force in
              speciation of these fungi.  Dr. Harrington, a recognized expert on the group
              will delimit species within the genus using a broader array of criteria than
              traditionally has been used: morphology, interfertility tests, physiology, and
              phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences of ribosomal and mating type genes.  
              Nuclear and mitochondrial DNA fingerprinting will be used to identify genetic
              diversity of populations and distinguish indigenous populations (high
              diversity) from introduced populations (limited diversity due to genetic
              bottlenecks).  In addition Ceratocystis has many different reproductive
              strategies, perhaps the most complex array identified in a fungal group, and
              work on the molecular basis of the mating systems will continue.  Evolution of
              mating systems and host specialization will be traced through the phylogenetic
              schemes developed through DNA sequence analysis.  These works will build a
              foundation for systematic treatment of this ecologically important genus and
              allow for a more practical definition of species in t he fungi.
