Title       : Factors Influencing Response Strength
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2000      
File        : a9870900

Award Number: 9870900
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund J. Fantino efantino@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research explores factors influencing choice between reward outcomes.
              Delay-reduction theory, developed with NSF funding, states that the value of a
              chosen outcome is best assessed by calculating the degree of improvement the
              outcome represents when compared with the average value of the situation. This
              quantitative theory of choice has implications for decisions made by animals
              foraging for food and for people making economic decisions. It will be further
              evaluated and extended in experiments using controlled behavioral choice
              methodology with pigeons as subjects. These experiments should: help clarify
              the precise role of time constraints (temporal context) in decision making, for
              example, the impact of specified degrees of moving closer in time to reward
              ("delay-reduction"); further assess the finding that choice between two
              outcomes depends on the difference in their delays to reward and not on the
              ratio of their delays, a finding not predicted by most theories of how we
              respond to reward delays; and explore the effects of economic context, for
              example wealth and income flow, on "risky choice" (choice between a certain
              modest payoff versus an uncertain larger one).

Why and how organisms choose
              is a fundamental problem in comparative animal psychology. Delay-reduction
              theory has proven a fruitful approach to learning how choices are determined
              for both human and non-human subjects. The present research should further
              illuminate the roles played by time and economics in decisions animals make,
              including those involving risk.

