Title       : Learning and Action in the Face of Uncertainty: Cognitive, Computational and
               Statistical Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a9870676

Award Number: 9870676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2741849            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Johnson mj@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas L. Dean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Mumford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 8888,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9870676  Johnson       This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training
               (IGERT) award will support the establishment of a broadly-  based graduate
              training program in mathematical, cognitive and  computational approaches to
              understanding how diverse  cognitive processes, including language, movement
              and  reasoning, are learned.  The basic phenomena to be addressed  are of
              significant commercial as well as scientific importance  because, for example,
              they form the basis for design of speech  and pattern recognition software, and
              for the design of  robotic systems.   The program is a joint effort of 13
              faculty  from the Departments of  Applied Mathematics, Cognitive and 
              Linguistic Sciences, and Computer Science. In combination with  institutional
              resources, NSF funds will provide stipends for  12 graduate students, 2
              postdoctoral students and 9  undergraduate students each year, as well as for
              related costs  of  student research training. Graduate students will be
              required  to satisfy existing coursework requirements of their home 
              departments and to take at least three new IGERT advanced  topics courses meant
              to span the three participating  disciplines.  During the first two years of
              graduate school,  each student will complete an interdisciplinary research 
              project before beginning thesis research.  All IGERT graduate  trainees and
              faculty will also participate in a weekly  research seminar, biannual retreats,
              a yearly week-long mini-  course lead by a visiting researcher and a national
              conference  to be organized during the second year of the project. 
              Postdoctoral fellows will jointly organize one of the advanced  topics courses
              and will themselves receive additional training  to complement that received
              during their own graduate studies.  Undergraduate students will become involved
              through active  involvement in summer research projects in the groups of 
              participating faculty.       IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program whose goal is to
              sponsor  the establishment of innovative, researc h-based graduate  programs
              that will train a diverse group of new scientists and  engineers to be
              well-prepared for varied careers in the  private and public sectors.  IGERT
              provides an opportunity for  the development of new, well-focused
              multidisciplinary  programs that bridge traditional organizational barriers, 
              uniting faculty from several departments or institutions to  establish a
              highly-interactive collaborative environment for  both training and research. 
              In its first year, the program  will provide support to 17 institutions for new
              or nascent  programs that collectively span all areas of science,  engineering
              and mathematics eligible for support by the NSF.
