Title       : POWRE: School-Work Connections: Generalizing Mathematics Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1998      
File        : a9870559

Award Number: 9870559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74854              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joanne E. Lobato   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A central aim of school instruction is to facilitate the generalization or
              transfer of knowledge beyond the initial learning context to new circumstances.
               Recent concerns over the adequacy of school mathematics to prepare students
              for the workplaces of tomorrow give the transfer of learning new relevancy. 
              However, transfer research has floundered in recent years due to findings that
              transfer is difficult to engineer in the laboratory.  Furthermore two
              controversies in the literature indicate theoretical problems with the
              construct of transfer.    The research study proposed here extends the work
              that the principal investigator has already begun in building a new theoretical
              approach to transfer, through the following research and educational
              activities:  1) identifying how a particular mathematical concept (namely,
              slope) is used in tow work or everyday settings; 2) working with a high school
              teacher to design a unit instruction that implements suggestions from prior
              research and from the ethnographies; 3) identifying the types of relations of
              similarity (or general knowledge) that students construct across school and
              non-school settings; and 4) developing instructional recommendations that can
              be incorporated in the mathematics courses that the principal investigator
              teaches for prospective teachers.    Several methods of analysis will be
              employed.  The first study involves ethnographic analysis of the use of
              mathematical concepts in work or everyday settings.  The second study involves
              the video-taped data of students solving problems in interviews and of students
              learning about slope concepts in high school classrooms.  The analyses are
              largely qualitative, based on methodological techniques for fine-grained
              analyses of videotapes and will follow interpretive techniques used in the
              development of grounded theory.
