Title       : POWRE: The Role of Working Memory in The Generation of Stressful Life Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9870460

Award Number: 9870460
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine W. Klein kwk@poe.coe.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of two longitudinal studies to examine the extent to which
              working memory (WM) capacity is involved first in the production and
              maintenance of life event stress, and second in the effectiveness of an
              intervention that has been shown to reduce the negative consequences of such
              stress.  The first study tests the hypothesis that naturally occurring changes
              in life stress levels will predict subsequent inverse changes in WM capacity
              and that these variations in WM capacity will affect subsequent life stress
              levels.  Life stress will be measured with a self-report checklist.  Working
              memory span will be measured with an operation-word span task designed to
              measure the amount of activation available on a `moment-to-moment basis.`  The
              second study is designed to test the hypothesis that people who write briefly
              about a stressful life event will enjoy increases in WM capacity and that this
              increase will be greatest for people whose essays show increases in linguistic
              categories indicating cause and insight.  In previous research people who wrote
              brief essays about a stressful topic experienced improvements in long term
              health, behavior and affect compared to people who wrote about a trivial topic.
               Recent reviews indicate that these benefits are linked to the development of a
              coherent narrative but it is not known how these linguistic changes affect
              health.  It is proposed that narrative coherence reflects the development of a
              mental model of the stressful event that consumes fewer WM resources than the
              original cognitive representation, making more WM resources available to
              anticipate and cope with aversive life events.  The scientific significance of
              the work is its potential to isolate working memory, a process critical to
              problem solving skills, as a factor in both the generation of stressful life
              events and the beneficial effects of expressive writing about stressful
              experiences.  There is evidence that people with high life event stress do have
              lower working memory (WM) capacity compared to people reporting fewer negative
              events, but it is not known whether WM deficits and associated impairments in
              problem solving contribute to life event stress nor whether WM is affected by
              writing about such experiences.  The present work presumes that cognitive
              representations of stressful life events are stored in large poorly organized
              networks that compete for WM resources, leaving highly stressed individuals
              with fewer resources for problem solving.  If writing about aversive life
              events produces improvements in WM capacity that subsequently affect problem
              solving ability, an important link between cognition and health will be
              established.  This project fits the POWRE criteria in that the application of
              cognitive models to the area of life stress is a new line of inquiry.  The
              investigator will gain new skills, particularly the application of structural
              equation modeling to longitudinal data and the utilization of the text analysis
              program that will benefit her research program and contribute directly to her
              career objectives.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
