Title       : Mammals, Birds, and their Parasites Along an Elevational Gradient in
               Southeastern Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a9870191

Award Number: 9870191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Patterson bpatterson@fmnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas F. Stotz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. William O. Ballard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5926,9169,9200,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870191  Patterson    We propose to expand on-going surveys of mammals and birds
              in Peru's Manu Park and Biosphere Reserve to include collection and study of
              their associated parasites.  These diverse but under-studied organisms will be
              surveyed through a collaboration of vertebrate and invertebrate zoologists. 
              Over three field seasons, we will sample nine evenly-spaced elevations, from
              400 to 3600 m, using opportunistic sampling to document as many species as
              possible at each elevation.  This part of our program relies heavily on diverse
              methodologies and extensive field experience of our field team.  We will also
              employ standardized sampling to provide information on relative abundance of
              vertebrates at each level.  Vertebrates obtained in both sampling programs will
              be prepared and preserved in ways that maximize their usefulness to both
              vertebrate and parasite systematics, biogeography, and ecology.  Internet
              access to database records will expedite communication between vertebrate and
              parasite researchers, as well as with outside scientists.  Participation of a
              US graduate student in field, museum, and laboratory work on these collections
              will afford him/her unique career training on these poorly known invertebrate
              groups.  Executing this project will also contribute to key training of
              Peruvian scientists and the sustainable development of their biodiversity
              resources.           Immediate results should include: (1) uniquely
              comprehensive collections of vertebrates and their parasite faunas from three
              distinct Neotropical subregions; (2) numerous new species and genera of various
              parasites, as well as highly probable discoveries of new mammal and bird
              species; (3) documentation of distributional, ecological, and host records of
              both vertebrates and parasites; and (4) baseline inventories for multiple
              groups in a globally significant biosphere reserve. The collections and 
              associated information on both vertebrates and parasites will be available
              within a year of collection for various deri vative studies, including: (5)
              parasite phylogenetics and biogeography, as well as systematics of their
              vertebrate hosts; (6) taxonomic congruence among elevational diversity
              gradients and regions of endemism; and (7) coevolutionary relationships.
