Title       : Collaborative Project: Star Formation Processes in Irregular Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a9870112

Award Number: 9870112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vernon Pankonin                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21443              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce G. Elmegreen bge@watson.ibm.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IBM T J Watson Res Ctr
	      
	      Yorktown Heights, NY  10598    /   -

NSF Program : 1217      EXTRAGALACTIC ASTRON & COSMOLO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1206,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                AST-98-70112  Bruce Elmegreen    Irregular galaxies are the most common type
              of galaxy in the Universe.  Because they have evolved relatively slowly over
              time, they chemically resemble the outer parts of present day spirals and young
              galaxies seen at large look-back times.  Unlike spirals, however, irregulars
              have no density waves and less shear in their interstellar media. Yet, most
              irregulars have on-going star formation.  Therefore, non-interacting irregular
              galaxies give us the opportunity to examine processes of star formation in the
              absence of spiral density waves and external perturbations.  These processes
              may play an important role in spiral galaxies too, but there they are masked by
              the consequences of the density wave.    Dr. Elmegreen is collaborating with
              Dr. Hunter to answer the question: What regulates the star formation activity
              in irregular galaxies on global and local scales?  They are proceeding (1) to
              quantify the nature and distribution of the star formation activity, (2) to
              characterize the interstellar medium out of which clouds and stars form, and
              (3) to combine the observations with models to develop a realistic picture for
              the onset of star formation in these systems.      The observations probe star
              formation on three timescales: H a images trace the most recent star formation,
              UBV images integrate the star formation over the past Gyr, and JHK images
              integrate the star formation over the lifetime of the galaxy.  To characterize
              the interstellar medium, the team is using radio interferometer maps of HI line
              emission and absorption.  ***
