Title       : Passive Control of Mechanical Systems with Coordination Requirements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a9870013

Award Number: 9870013
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Perry Y. Li pli@me.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9870013  Li  The objectives of this research project is to further  develop
              a recently proposed passive velocity field control  (PVFC) paradigm for the
              control of mechanical systems,  through the application to two concrete
              domains; robotic  debarring and teleoperarted manipulator. The new control 
              paradigm has two unique features, namely that i) it makes  explicit any
              coordinate requirements of the task for the  system, and ii) it aims to
              preserve the passivity property  of the closed loop system. Most previous
              strategies involve  the decomposition of the control task into the design of a 
              timed trajectory, and the design of a controller to track  the trajectory at
              each instant in time. This paradigm is  expected to be suited for applications
              where there is a  strong coordination requirement and where the stable and 
              intimate interactions with uncertain physical environment  are needed for safe
              operation. Since the robotic debarring  and teleoperated manipulation
              applications share these  salient features, these will be suited
              simultaneously. In  robotic debarring, the coordination requirement requirement
               is imposed by the constraint that the tool must follow  precisely the
              prescribed tool path to avoid unintended  material removals.. Moreover, the
              debarring tool must  interact with the work piece to be debarred. Inappropriate
               interaction between the tool and the work can lead to  instability, damage to
              the tool, and poor debarring quality.  On the other hand, the coordination
              requirement for  teleoperated manipulator systems is imposed by the fact that 
              the motions of both the manipulator that interacts with the  human and of the
              manipulator performing the actual  manipulation must  mimic each other. In
              addition, a  teleoperated manipulator must physically  interact with both  the
              human operator and the work environment. A combine  theoretical and
              experimental approach will be taken in this  project.***
