Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Shear-Thickening in Associating Polymer
               Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9870128

Award Number: 9870128
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Pine pine@engineering.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Deming  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glenn H. Fredrickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9870128  Pine    The objective of this research is to develop a fundamental 
              understanding of shear thickening and flow-induced gelation in  associating
              polymer solutions.  A coordinated, three-pronged  approach is proposed which
              involves the synthesis of new  functionalized polymers, measurements of
              rheological and shear-  induced structural changes, and theory.  Highly
              monodisperse  polymers, with well defined molecular weights, will be 
              synthesized and will be quantitatively end-capped with functional  groups
              designed to promote associations between polymers.  The  functional groups will
              be placed in one of four configurations:  (1) at one end of each chain or (2)
              at both ends of the chains or  (3) halfway along the backbone of the chains or
              (4) at both ends  and halfway along the chain length.  The degree of branching
              at  the physical crosslinks will be controlled using metal ions with  different
              coordination numbers.  The degree of the association  (or lifetime of
              associations) will be controlled by the addition  of cosolvents which serve as
              "poisons" for the associating  groups.  In addition to extensive rheological
              measurements of  shear and normal stresses, in situ direct measurements of the 
              degree of association will be performed as a function of shear  rate using
              uv/vis absorption spectroscopy.  In situ measurements  of flow-induced
              alignment of polymers will be performed using  birefringence.  Small and large
              angle light scattering  measurements of the static structure factor S(q) as a
              function of  shear rate will be used to follow flow-induced structural 
              changes.  The growth of the shear-induced gel under shear flow  will be
              followed using the newly developed light scattering  microscopy technique.  The
              experimental work will be closely  coordinated with an intensive program of
              theoretical research.  Theoretical and experimental studies will commence with
              work on a  model polymer solution in which each chain contains a single, 
              terminally-attached sticker and progress towards more  complex  sticker
              placement as well as issues of network formation and  gelation.  %%% 
              Associating polymer solutions find wide use in industrial  applications as
              viscosity modifiers, anti-misting or anti-  splatter agents, coagulants in
              coatings, and blocking agents in  oil recovery.  The utility of these systems
              stems from a number  of important physical properties, including their ability
              to  significantly enhance solution viscosity with the addition of  very small
              amounts of polymer, their ability to control and even  reverse the reduction of
              viscosity with temperature (this  capability is important for many lubricants),
              their ability to  suppress misting and splatter, and their ability to gel under
               certain conditions.  The purpose of this research program is to  develop an
              understanding of the molecular factors which determine  the physical properties
              of these systems in order to engineer  these systems for practical industrial
              applications.  ***
