Title       : IGERT: Human Dimensions of Social and Aquatic System Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a9870703

Award Number: 9870703
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2604352            (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Nowak pnowak@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Carpenter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1335      IGERT FULL PROPOSALS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9870703  Nowak       This Integrative Graduate Education and Research Training 
              (IGERT) award will support the establishment of a broadly-  based graduate
              training program that will equip students to  combine the social, economic and
              biological sciences in the  study of environmental problems presented by
              freshwater  ecosystems. Problem areas to be emphasized will include  studies of
              the economic value of environmental resources, the  role of humans in the
              vulnerability of ecosystems to natural  change, the impact of irreversible
              environmental changes, and  the effect of ecosystem features on societal
              interactions.  The project is a joint effort of 20 faculty from the 
              Departments of Agriculture and Applied Economics, Civil and  Environmental
              Engineering, Forest Ecology and Management,  Limnology, Rural Sociology, Soil
              Science and Zoology.  NSF  support will provide stipends for 14 graduate
              students each  year, for one postdoctoral student and for related costs of 
              student research training.  Educational opportunities will  center on three
              required IGERT seminar courses, one on  selected topics related to current
              IGERT faculty research, one  on relevant research methods, and one on team
              research during  which student teams will test hypotheses generated from the 
              topics and methods seminars.  Students will also spend at  least three months
              as an intern in a Federal or Wisconsin  State natural resources management
              agency.  The postdoctoral  student will both participate in and help organize
              the IGERT  training activities, including an annual retreat for  participating
              faculty and students.  In addition to its  education and research initiatives,
              the program plans a  continuos self-evaluation effort led by a faculty member
              from  the School of Education.    IGERT is a new, NSF-wide program whose goal
              is to sponsor the  establishment of innovative, research-based graduate
              programs  that will train a diverse group of new scientists and  engineers to
              be well-prepared for varied careers in the  private  and public sectors.  IGERT
              provides an opportunity for  the development of new, well-focused
              multidisciplinary ograms  that bridge traditional organizational barriers,
              uniting  faculty from several departments or institutions to establish  a
              highly-interactive collaborative environment for both  training and research. 
              In its first year, the program will  provide support to 17 institutions for new
              or nascent programs  that collectively span all areas of science, engineering
              and  mathematics eligible for support by the NSF.
