Title       : POWRE: How Race Matters: Global Perspectives on Ethnicity and Economic
               Inequality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9870459

Award Number: 9870459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49901              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rhonda M. Williams rwilliams@aasp.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1320,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports exploratory and pilot work for a multi-year and
              multi-disciplinary project entitled `How Race Matters:...` (HRM) The project
              seeks to facilitate a significant national re-thinking of racism's economic
              legacies and policy implications.  It draws life from the belief that a
              substantive reassessment of racism's economic history is a necessary component
              of the ongoing effort to address the nation's unfinished racial business.  The
              HRM initiative will document and clarify how race and ethnicity have mediated
              the workings of national economies, starting with the United States.  Because
              it will critically engage the often ignored scholarship of African-American,
              Latino, and Asian-American economists, the HRM initiative will deepen the
              knowledge base available to scholars, policy makers and activists grappling
              with matters of race, policy, and political economy.  The research team also
              will draw critically from multiple intellectual traditions within the social
              sciences.  The investigator intends that the research and analysis produced
              will be made available and accessible to policy makers, social justice
              advocates, teachers, and academics.  The project will foster the political
              consensus needed to establish social policies that will sustain humane
              communities in the transnational economy of the twenty-first century.  This
              POWRE award is an exploratory effort designed to bring the project closer to
              full fruition.  During the year of POWRE funding, the investigator will begin
              the compilation of a first draft of the bibliography for the 'race and public
              policy' subcommittee.  She also will finalize the committee membership and the
              team of scholar consultants.  If additional funds become available, she will
              begin organizing a first 'mini-retreat' for this subcommittee.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
