Title       : A Flora of the Benthic Marine Algae of Alaska: Phase 1, An Inventory of the
               Existing Collections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a9870215

Award Number: 9870215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Norman  Platnick                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222520             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gayle I. Hansen gayle.hansen@hmsc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sandra C. Lindstrom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9870215  Hansen    Alaska has a coastline that extends 47,000 miles, longer than
              that of the rest of the United States combined.  Its highly diverse coastal
              areas support a rich variety of marine organisms.  Because of the extent and
              remoteness of most of the coastline and the severity of the weather, Alaska's
              marine biota has never been adequately inventoried.  In particular, the benthic
              marine algae or "seaweeds" have never been treated systematically, and Alaska
              remains the last major region of the United States for which no marine Flora
              has ever been written.  However, Alaska's marine algae are not entirely
              unknown.  Naturalists and others have been making collections there for about
              200 years.  Some of these collections have been documented in publications, but
              by far the majority remain unreported in the scientific literature.  Most of
              these collections, including those previously published, need re-examination in
              light of current systematic thought.   As a first phase in the production of a
              Flora of the Benthic Marine Algae of Alaska, the authors will complete a
              comprehensive inventory of the existing collections of Alaskan benthic marine
              algae.  Specimen information will be recorded in a relational database, errors
              in identification will be corrected, and nomenclature will be updated. 
              Coordinates and other geographic data, missing from herbarium labels, will be
              incorporated into the database, and files containing descriptions and images of
              the species will be established in order to assure uniformity in
              identification.  Completed products will include an Internet-accessible
              database on the benthic marine algae of Alaska, including the records of all
              known herbarium specimens collected in Alaska, and a checklist of the species,
              giving their geographic ranges within the state.  These publications will form
              the foundation for our Flora; they also will provide essential ingredients for
              future studies on boreal seaweeds, contribute critical resource material to
              multiple users, and substantia lly increase our baseline knowledge of the
              Alaskan marine environment.
