Title       : Investigating the Relationship between DNA Replication and Chromosome Pairing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2000  
File        : a9870780

Award Number: 9870780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1999   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299973             (Estimated)
Investigator: JoAnne Engebrecht Joanne@pharm.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              High fidelity meiotic chromosome segregation is required for the propagation of
              sexually reproducing organisms.  Meiosis is fundamentally the same in species
              as divergent as the yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and humans.  Studies in
              yeast have provided general insights into the mechanisms of meiosis and will
              continue to build a framework for understanding this fundamental process. 
              Earlier studies have indicated that there is a link between meiotic DNA
              synthesis and homologous chromosome pairing.  This project is aimed at
              elucidating the relationship between these critical meiotic processes.  The
              yeast MUM2 gene was identified in a genetic screen for meiotic mutants
              proficient for the induction of meiotic recombination.  Analyses of mum2
              mutants indicate that MUM2 is essential for both meiotic DNA synthesis and
              homologous chromosome interactions.  The specific role of the MUM2 gene will be
              investigated by analyzing the Mum2 protein using cell biological and
              biochemical approaches.  These studies will help define the function of this
              protein in meiotic chromosome metabolism.  Meiotic DNA synthesis and homologous
              chromosome interactions will also be assessed in mutants defective at various
              stages of mitotic DNA replication.  This will determine whether mum2 mutants
              define a unique aspect of,  or reveal a previously uncharacterized role for,
              meiotic DNA synthesis.  Finally, genetic approaches will be used to identify
              additional genes important for meiotic DNA replication and homologous
              chromosome interactions.  These studies should provide valuable new information
              about the role of these processes in ensuring proper chromosome segregation
              during meiosis.

