Title       : Project T.E.P.S. (Teaching Elementary Physical Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1991      
File        : a9054964

Award Number: 9054964
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $726044             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold Feldman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The goal of this three year project is to provide each                         
              isolated school district of Hawaii with teachers who are                       
              capable of supporting the teaching of hands-on inquiry based                   
              physical science units.  Resource Teachers, who are high                       
              school teachers with excellent science backgrounds and an                      
              interest in working with young children, will be identified.                   
              They will be educated over a two year period on how young                      
              children learn science and the new curricular materials that                   
              are available to support instruction.  During two consultive                   
              summers these Resource Teachers, supported by the project                      
              staff, will conduct five weeks of inservice training with                      
              elementary school teachers who have been identified as leaders                 
              in their schools.  They will also support these teachers as                    
              they practice the new methodology in special summer science                    
              camp settings.  During the school year these elementary Lead                   
              Teachers, with support from the Resource Teachers, will                        
              practice the new units of instruction.  In the second and                      
              third year of the grant, supported by the Resource Teachers,                   
              the Lead Teachers will teach their colleagues about the new                    
              units.  As a result, by the end of the grant period, each                      
              cluster of schools will contain one high school science                        
              teacher who can function as a Resource Teacher for all of the                  
              elementary school teachers in the district and two Lead                        
              Teachers per building who can provide special support for the                  
              other elementary school teachers in their building.                            
                                                                                             
              The cost sharing will be 38% of the NSF portion.
