Title       : Critical Thinking and Problem Solving in the Foundations of Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  1990  
File        : a9054175

Award Number: 9054175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1991    
Expires     : December 31,  1991   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45455              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Henderson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan C. Tucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Ferguson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              This workshop focuses on approaches to developing thinking and                 
              problem solving skills in introductory level courses by integrating            
              problem solving, mathematics, and computer science.                            
              Educators in both the mathematics and computer science disciplines             
              have observed and commented on the weaknesses of entering students.            
              Students are unable to solve problems and lack mathematical                    
              maturity.  Such weaknesses should be addressed early in the                    
              curriculum.    Mathematics and computer science are closely related            
              disciplines with one drawing upon the other.  This relationship is             
              utilized to encourage students to learn to use mathematics as a                
              problem solving tool for computer science, and how mathematics can             
              be used to motivate an understanding of concepts fundamental to                
              computer science.  Mathematics and computer science faculty with               
              a better understanding of these important relationships will be                
              more effective teachers.                                                       
                                                                                             
              The target audience is faculty who are actively engaged in teaching            
              undergraduate mathematics and computer science courses.  Minority              
              and women, groups underrepresented in mathematics and computer                 
              science education will be encouraged to participate.  The  two week            
              intensive program introduces them to new approaches for integrating            
              mathematics and problem solving into computer science courses, and             
              using mathematics concepts to motivate a better understanding of               
              computer science concepts.  //
