Title       : NCTM Standards Research Catalyst Conference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1991 
File        : a9054960

Award Number: 9054960
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia F. Campbell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn L. Hala  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Council Tchrs of Math
	      
	      Reston, VA  22091    703/620-9840

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The research advisory committee of the National Council of                     
              Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) will sponsor a NCTM STANDARDS                   
              Research Catalyst Conference in March, 1991.  The purpose of                   
              this working conference is to define and stimulate research                    
              on the perspectives envisioned by the CURRICULUM AND                           
              EVALUATION STANDARDS FOR SCHOOL MATHEMATICS and to monitor                     
              the implementation of the STANDARDS within school settings.                    
              Without a collaborative research and monitoring effort,                        
              policy actions, curriculum development, assessment reform,                     
              and pedagogical innovation may proceed without the feedback                    
              necessary for systematic modification and informed decision-                   
              making.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              This conference will serve to set a research agenda and to                     
              catalyze research, development, and monitoring efforts that                    
              examine intended and implemented mathematics curriculum and                    
              assessment reform across the nation by stimulating                             
              complementary study within six focus areas are:  assessment,                   
              curriculum change, communication, policy, secondary core                       
              curriculum, and representation tools and models.  Conference                   
              attendance will be selected by application.  Special efforts                   
              will be made to include minorities, new researchers in                         
              mathematics education, mathematicians, and school                              
              practitioners in research teams directed by established                        
              leaders in mathematics education.  These leaders will serve                    
              as mentors who will organize the framework and the                             
              background papers of studies to be conducted by the                            
              participants and a research agenda monograph to be                             
              distributed by NCTM.  Long-term outcomes include research                      
              reporting presentations at the 1991 and 1992 NCTM Research                     
              Presessions and an interim summary of the resulting research                   
              and monitoring activities.
