Title       : Interfacing Microcomputers to Chemical Instrumentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1991   
File        : a9054221

Award Number: 9054221
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 15,  1991   
Expires     : June 30,  1992       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64744              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael W. Schuyler schuylem@ccmail.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Ingle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward H. Piepmeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 7430      UNDERGRAD FACULTY ENHANC PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9268,
Abstract    :
              This project introduces faculty in the physical and life sciences              
              teaching at two- and four-year colleges to the use of computers in             
              experimental work.  The emphasis is on learning how computers can              
              be interfaced to instruments and experimental apparatus for the                
              purposes of experimental control and data acquisition.  The                    
              activity involves both lecture and laboratory work over a four week            
              period.  After an introduction to fundamentals of digital                      
              electronics, signal conditioning, personal computer architecture,              
              and programming, participants will focus on such applications as               
              developing a digital oscilloscope and interfacing personal                     
              computers to spectrometers and titration apparatus. Topics include             
              serial and parallel data transfer, analog sampling principles, and             
              integrated circuit timers. After the instructional phase of the                
              course, participants will select among a number of specific                    
              applications for further study.  Included among these are                      
              interfaces to spectrometers, a flow injection analysis application             
              featuring computer-controlled valve manipulation, and two                      
              undergraduate chemistry experiments which use computers to improve             
              the quality of the data being collected. Time will also be                     
              available to investigate applications of unique interest to each               
              applicant.  The program is intended for faculty who wish to                    
              incorporate computer interfacing into their own teaching of                    
              experimental science.//
