Title       : U.S. National Committee for Rock Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2000 
File        : a0073615

Award Number: 0073615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Feary dfeary@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      2001 Wisconsin Ave.
	      Washington, DC  20007    202/393-8100

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS0073615
PI: David Feary
Institution: National Academy of Sciences
"U.S.
              National Committee for Rock Mechanics"


Abstract:

The U.S. National
              Committee for Rock Mechanics (USNC/RM) is the focal point for rock mechanics
              and other geotechnical activities within the National Research Council (NRC). 
              The USNC/RM provides (1) scientific and technical input to programs within the
              federal agencies and (2) U.S. participation and adherence to the International
              Society for Rock Mechanics (ISRM).  The USNC/RM operates under the auspices of
              the NRC's Board on Earth Sciences and Resources.

Research and engineering
              developments in rock mechanics are driven by concerns for the natural and built
              environment (including radioactive and hazardous waste isolation and
              remediation and mitigation), mitigation of natural hazards such as earthquakes
              and landslides, environmentally sound recovery of natural resources, and
              interest in defense structures in rock.  The technological, economic, social,
              and political impact of these issues engage the attention of many government
              agencies, business corporations, and public interest groups and posits the need
              for the USNC/RM.

The expertise, judgement, and strategic perspective of the
              USNC/RM serves to define and help initiate sponsored studies and other
              activities with respect to major areas of national interest or concern in which
              rock mechanics problems represent critical or limiting factors. In this regard,
              the committee offers a forum for meetings with federal agency liaison
              representative and other interested organizations to exchange ideas and
              information on important topics that may merit inquiry through the National
              Research Council.

The USNC/RM is the official representative of the United
              States on the International Society for Rock Mechanics.  This role of the
              committee is particularly important in today's global technical and economic
              environment for close scientific and technical interaction with the
              international rock mechanics community.


