Title       : Excavation at Pech de l'Aze IV (Dordogne, France)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0073856

Award Number: 0073856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold L. Dibble hdibble@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shannon P. McPherron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Harold Dibble and Shannon
              McPherron will conduct four seasons of archaeological excavation and analysis
              at the site of Pech de l'Aze IV located in the Dordogne region of France. First
              excavated by the (now deceased) French archaeologist, Francois Bordes, the site
              has played a major role in controversies surrounding the development of human
              culture in Western Europe. The site contains multiple levels of Mousterian
              materials which include abundant lithic and faunal remains. Attributable to
              Neanderthal people, the site documents behavioral variation over a significant
              period of the Upper Pleistocene and numerous researchers have attempted to
              interpret this variability in terms of tribal movement, activity
              differentiation and directional change over time. This debate is important
              because of divergent scientific views on the basic cognitive abilities, the
              social organization and ultimately the fate of European Neanderthal peoples.
              While the Bordes' excavated material is massive in amount and well documented -
              an excavation of similar scale today would likely be prohibitively expensive
              today - relevant stratigraphic and environmental data were not collected. Drs.
              Dibble and McPherron have analyzed the excavated materials and shall now return
              to the site to collect the necessary remaining information. Through carefully
              controlled excavations, they will collect fresh dating samples, undertake full
              sedimentological and geophysical studies, asses site formation processes and
              possible post-depositional disturbances and also evaluate the nature and degree
              of possible excavator bias during recovery. They will use the information
              collected not only to provide a richer contextual setting for the original
              materials but also to answer specific research questions: what is the nature of
              Mousterian assemblage variability and what factors explain the changes observed
              over time? What is the role of raw materials on Mousterian assemblage
              variability? What is the nature of Mousterian subsistence economy?

This
              research will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and shed light on
              the early prehistory of Europe.

