Title       : Digital Cancellation of Analog Mismatch Noise in Pipelined ADCs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2002      
File        : a0073552

Award Number: 0073552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272395             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Galton galton@ece.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to extend the present performance limits of
              pipelined analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) through the development of a
              digital signal processing technique that corrects for analog circuit
              mismatches.  With recent trends toward software reconfigurability and digital
              signal processing, pipelined ADCs have become widely used in applications such
              as cellular telephone base-stations and wideband wireline modems.  However,
              analog component mismatches have limited the accuracy achieved by present
              fabricated pipelined ADCs to levels below those desirable in many
              communications applications.  For example, the accuracy ceiling imposed by
              analog component mismatches in present pipelined ADCs with conversion rates at
              or above 10MHz is approximately 75dB peak signal-to-noise-and-distortion
              (SINAD).  Several distinct mismatch calibration techniques have been proposed
              in recent years to address the mismatch problem, but so far they have not made
              it possible to break through the above-mentioned 75dB SINAD ceiling.  The
              problem is that the calibration techniques proposed to date are ultimately
              limited by the precision of their analog components, which tends to decrease as
              the conversion rate is increased.  This research involves the development of a
              new pipelined ADC mismatch calibration technique that avoids this problem. The
              new technique differs from other mismatch calibration schemes in that it
              continuously measures and cancels noise in the ADC output arising from
              component mismatches during normal operation of the ADC; no special calibration
              signals or auto-calibration phase are required prior to A/D conversion.  Both
              the measurement and cancellation of mismatch noise are performed entirely using
              digital logic, but unlike previously proposed digital calibration techniques
              the technique does not require additional pipeline stages or bits per stage.
              The objectives of the research are to 1) refine the technique, 2) quantify its
              performance limits through simulation and theoretical analyses, and 3) develop
              a CMOS pipelined ADC prototype that achieves record-setting performance enabled
              by the technique as a proof-of-principle.

