Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Genetic Diversity in Different Forms of Rarity: Computer
               Models and Empirical Data from Lomatium (Apiaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a0073137

Award Number: 0073137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7505               (Estimated)
Investigator: Pamela S. Soltis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0073137 
Soltis and Gitzendanner

Recent estimates indicate that over 33,000
              plant species (approx. 1/8 of the Earth's flora) are rare, and this number will
              certainly increase as human activities continue to erode habitat.  In the U.S.,
              one quarter of all plant species are considered rare.  Most conservation
              efforts treat rare species similarly, assuming similar genetic and ecological
              characteristics.  This view of rarity masks biological differences among rare
              species, prevents the emergence of general principles about rarity, and may
              hinder conservation efforts.  Some researchers have instead recognized
              different forms of rarity, based on geographic range, population size in each
              location, and specific habitat requirements.  For example, a species that
              occurs on a rare soil type scattered infrequently from Washington to California
              may be considered "rare", despite the fact that its range spans more than 1000
              miles; in contrast, a species that occurs at five sites along a ridge top in
              central Oregon, with thousands of individuals at each site, is also considered
              "rare."  This research is a study of the genetic differences among different
              forms of rare species, using both computer simulations and data from the plant
              genus Lomatium (desert parsley), of the parsley and carrot family.  Leaf
              samples of different types of rare species and of related widespread species
              will be collected from natural habitats.  These samples will be analyzed using
              a variety of genetic markers and statistical analyses.

The research
              addresses the immediate conservation needs of several State- and
              Federally-listed rare plant species and will provide genetic data for use in
              managing these species.  More importantly, the work will improve biologists'
              understanding of rare species, formulate generalizations about the genetic
              features of different types of rare species, make conservation biology more
              predictive, and contribute to improved conservation and management plans for
              other rare species.





