Title       : Numerical Scale-Up of Two-Phase Flows in Strongly Heterogeneous Media.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0073916

Award Number: 0073916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145501             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Y. Hou hou@ama.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Subject: NSF proposal: DMS-0073916
Principal Investigator: Thomas Y.
              Hou

Abstract:

We propose to develop an innovative numerical coarse grid
              model for two-phase flows in strongly heterogeneous media.  The development of
              this coarse grid model consists of two steps.  The first one is to develop a
              PDE-based adaptive mesh strategy to capture the dominating flow features using
              an adaptive coarse grid mesh. Using the adaptive mesh, the dominating flow
              features such as high velocity flow and strong shear flow can be accurately
              captured.  The second step is to use the multiscale finite element method to
              model the effect of small scale components.  The main idea of our multiple
              scale finite element method consists of the construction of finite element base
              functions which contain the small scale information within each element.  In
              fact, we construct the base functions from the leading order differential
              operator of the governing equation.  An important feature of the multiscale
              finite element method is that they can be used to reconstruct locally the small
              scale velocity within each coarse grid block.  Since the dominating flow
              structures are already well captured by the adaptive coarse grid solution, the
              remaining small scale components are relatively small in amplitude. And we can
              effectively model the effect of these small scales by incorporating averages of
              high order moments.  This gives rise to a robust coarse grid model for
              two-phase flows in strongly heterogeneous media.  Generalization of this idea
              to the Navier-Stokes equations will also be considered.

Many problems of
              fundamental and practical importance contain multiple scale solutions.  The
              direct numerical solution of the above multiple scale problems is difficult
              even with the advent of modern super computers.  The major difficulty of direct
              solutions is due to the scale of computation.  To get an accurate solution, all
              scales contained in the problem need to be resolved.  Therefore, tremendous
              amount of computer memory and CPU time are required.  The requirement can
              easily exceed the limit of today's computing resources.  On the other hand,
              from an engineering perspective, it is often sufficient to predict the
              macroscopic properties of the physical systems and to capture the averaged
              effect of small (and random) scales on the large ones.  Therefore, it is
              desirable to develop a method that can capture the small scale effect on the
              large scales using a relatively coarse grid.  If this can be done, this can
              lead to enormous economy saving. The factor of saving could be as high as ten
              thousands.  This would enable us to perform many simulations very efficiently. 
              The proposed research is to develop such a coarse grid model by incorporating
              the small scale features in the underlying physical problem to construct
              multiscale building blocks (bases).  These multiscale building blocks (bases)
              capture the effect of small scales on the large scales locally.  In order to
              increase the robustness of the multiscale modeling, we propose to introduce an
              automatic (PDE-based) adaptive mesh generator to generate the underlying coarse
              grid. The adaptivity is controlled by the local flow rate, using a finer mesh
              in high flow region.  The idea of combining adaptivity with multiscale modeling
              may have a significant impact on a number of applications which go beyond the
              scope of this proposed study.
 

