Title       : Support for U.S. Participation in International Meetings of the International
               Geographical Union, Republic of Korea (2000) and South Africa (2002)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0073344

Award Number: 0073344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald F. Abler rabler@aag.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc of Amer Geographers
	      1710 16th St. NW
	      Washington, DC  20036    202/234-1450

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In geography as in all other scientific disciplines, advances in research and
              education increasingly rely on the development of international collaborations
              that bring together skilled scholars and educators from many different nations.
               International contacts and collaborations develop through many different
              means, but one of the most successful has been periodic meetings of the
              International Geographical Union (IGU) .  The IGU has functioned since 1871,
              conducting major congresses every four years, more focused meetings as needed,
              and facilitating collaborative inquiries among geographers from dozens of
              countries through the operation of committees, commissions, and study groups. 
              Over recent decades, the IGU has emerged as one of the most active and
              successful unions participating in the International Council for Science
              (ICSU).  Throughout its history, the U.S. has played an active role in the IGU,
              and American geographers have assumed critical leadership roles, especially
              over the last half century.  To facilitate the continued involvement of U.S.
              scientists in IGU affairs and to facilitate the involvement of more Americans
              in international networks at early stages of their careers, this award will
              provide group-travel support for two upcoming IGU meetings. T he first meeting
              will be the 29th International Geographical Congress in Seoul, Republic of
              Korea, in August 2000.  The second meeting will be an IGU Regional Conference
              in Durban, South Africa, in August 2002.  Funds will be distributed to American
              geographers whose applications are evaluated using a number of criteria
              associated with active participation in the meeting.  Larger travel grants will
              be given to more junior scientists in order to encourage their participation in
              international discussions and communications.  This award will foster greater
              participation by U.S. scientists in the truly global fora of the International
              Geographical Union.  As has been demonstrated in follow-up reports from
              Americans who have been supported with previous travel grants to IGU meetings,
              opportunities abound for meeting professional colleagues from many other
              nations, for hearing ideas and information from a broad range of different
              perspectives, and for participating in discussions that frequently result in
              successful research collaborations.

