Title       : Dissipation of Thermal and Chemical Disequilibrium in Hot Springs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a0073963

Award Number: 0073963
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98294              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Schoonen mschoonen@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Schoonen
EAR-0073963

Hot springs are environments characterized by thermal
              and chemical disequilibrium.  The purpose of the proposed study is to determine
              the rates and mechanisms of abiotic processes by which the thermal and chemical
              disequilibrium is dissipated.  The objective of this study is to obtain these
              rates through field studies of hot springs in Yellowstone National Park and
              possibly Lassen Volcanic National Park, complemented by a few laboratory
              experiments.    As water flows away from the orifice or pool of hot spring,
              four types of interrelated abiotic processes take place.  These are a) fluid
              flow b) cooling, c) gas transfer (e.g., O2 in gassing, H2, CO2 and H2S
              outgassing) , and d) chemical reactions in the water (e.g., travetine
              deposition, and hydrogen sulfide oxidation).  A research strategy has been
              developed to obtain rates of these processes through detailed measurements of
              flow regimes (linear velocity and a measure of turbulence) in the drainages
              coupled with detailed temperature measurements to obtain cooling rates and
              chemical analyses to obtain the chemical evolution of the water as it flows
              away.   The chemical analyses involve a determination of the concentration of
              dissolved gases (He, H2, Ar, O2, CO2, and H2S) and dissolved major ionic
              species.  From the temperature profiles and concentration profiles the heat
              transfer coefficients and gas transfer coefficients can be derived.  Because
              the determination of the gas transfer coefficients is crucial, a series of
              laboratory experiments is proposed in which the gas exchange coefficient of CO2
              is derived by conducting a degassing experiment in a simple artificial channel
              with a flow regime similar to the drainages studied in Yellowstone.  To keep
              these experiments simple they will be conducted at room temperature, but gas
              transfer theory is sufficiently well developed to allow extrapolation to higher
              temperature.  The laboratory experiments will be conducted by undergraduate
              students.  


