Title       : Advanced Internet Satellite Extension Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0073240

Award Number: 0073240
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4039173            (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet K. Poley jpoley@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dan C. Cotton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald R. Riley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dale M. Finkelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valorie McAlpin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : ADEC/AgSAT
	      C218 Aninal Science
	      Lincoln, NE  685050952    /   -

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1087,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The "Internet Satellite Project" will develop and deploy advanced Internet
              services and technologies over satellite infrastructure for purposes of
              enhancing research, instruction and learning in a diverse set of institutions
              of higher education.

A combined effort by the American Distance Education
              Consortium (ADEC) and Tachyon, Inc. will extend the benefits of Internet2 to a
              broader set of institutions and provide experience with advanced
              satellite-based Internet technology.  The project will be managed by ADEC and
              led by a core set of ADEC member institutions engaged in the Internet2 project.
               ADEC bridges the Internet2 community to an extended set of diverse
              institutions of higher education.  Tachyon provides technology capable of
              connecting the Internet2 community to institutions unable to access the
              Internet2 backbone network because of geographical disadvantage.

This
              project focuses on bringing advanced networking applications to geographically
              remote campuses.  These capabilities will be applied to the areas of research,
              instruction and learning.  By engaging previously unreachable campuses or parts
              of campuses and remote learning centers, this will enable a broader community
              of scholars to engage in research; greater access by scholars both at Internet1
              institutions as well as at the previously unreachable institutions to remote
              instruments and data sources; the increased availability of instructional and
              learning resources shared among a more diverse student population; and access
              by the research university community to cultural and human resources from
              otherwise inaccessible institutions and extension offices.
