Title       : Dissertation Research: Historical Biogeography and Molecular Phylogenetics of
               Chamaeleonidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a0073323

Award Number: 0073323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9770               (Estimated)
Investigator: Allan Larson larson@wustlb.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073323
Larson and Townsend
	The distribution of animal and plant species over
              the earth has long puzzled biologists, as it often appears that closely related
              species are found in geographically separated areas while intervening regions
              are devoid of members of the same group. With the advent of plate tectonic
              theory, new ideas about species distributions based on continental drift could
              be formulated, and these hypotheses could ideally be tested if a reliably
              supported phylogeny (evolutionary genealogy) of the group in question were
              available. With the modern tools of DNA sequencing now available to
              systematists, well supported phylogenies can be obtained for numerous groups of
              animals and plants, providing opportunities to test proposed patterns of
              distribution resulting from plate tectonic events.
	The primary goal of work
              by graduate student Ted Townsend, with guidance from faculty adviser Allan
              Larson, is to construct a phylogenetic hypothesis for the lizard family
              Chamaeleonidae using DNA sequence data, and then to use this phylogeny to test
              various biogeographic hypotheses about the group. Chamaeleons include about 130
              species of easily recognizable lizards, distributed in Africa, Madagascar, and
              India, with a few species ranging into southernmost Europe. The first three
              landmasses are remnants of the southern supercontinent of Gondwana which,
              according to plate tectonic theory, began its breakup about 140 million years
              ago. A reliable phylogeny of chamaeleons would allow tests of historical
              patterns of migration and of lineage splitting, which has so far not been
              possible on the basis of morphological studies of traditional taxonomic
              characters. New evidence from mitochondrial gene sequences and from two
              potential nuclear genes will help construct a phylogenetic framework for the
              group, based on field collected materials from Africa and Madagascar and from
              samples provided by colleagues and museum holdings. 

