Title       : Architectures and Algorithms to Exploit Probe-Based Storage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0073509

Award Number: 0073509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345191             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell Long darrell@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott A. Brandt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tara M. Madhyastha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The storage density of rotating magnetic recording is approaching
              its
theoretical maximum.  Magnetic probe-based technology avoids these
              limitations by using techniques such as orthogonal recording which promise very
              high density storage within the next five to ten years.  Probe-based storage
              devices promise improved access times, enormous potential parallelism gains,
              and remarkable storage densities.  However, because of the unique
              characteristics of these devices there is a high
probability that existing
              file system architectures and algorithms will be suboptimal.  By reexamining
              these basic structures in the context of probe-based storage, it is likely that
              significant performance gains can be achieved.

The proposed work comprises
              fundamental research in four areas: simulation of probe-based storage devices,
              architectural issues such as parallelism and caching, storage allocation and
              file layout, and request scheduling.  In reexamining these basic issues for
              this new technology, this research creates a body of work that will lead the
              way in the development of secondary storage systems for such devices.  This
              research is likely to result in a better understanding of the implementation
              details associated with probe-based storage devices to provide a set of
              algorithms and structures that can be used in systems implementations employing
              them.


