Title       : Electromechanical Wave Propagation in Large Electric Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0073832

Award Number: 0073832
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arun G. Phadke aphadke@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal was jointly assessed with  the EPDT Program Director Dr. James
              Mink as truly Integrative Systems in nature. It draws on the ideas from the
              electromechanical wave propagation for a novel approach to the transient
              stability analysis problem in large-scale electric power systems. The proposal
              deals with development of a macro-scale analytical tool for electromechanical
              wave propagation phenomena in electric networks. The proposal and the activity
              proposed are based on the assumption that their previous research on the wave
              propagation theory is valid and accepted for power system transient analysis.
              

The problem addressed in these proposals is that of developing efficient
              models for the study of electromechanical wave propagation on very large scale,
              extensive networks.  This phenomenon is poorly understood, but could have
              significant harmful effects on the national power system in the future.  The
              PIs draw on their extensive relevant experience to outline a comprehensive
              novel approach to modeling and studying of the problem.  The proposal is to
              study the network as a continuum in which sources and sinks with their
              pertinent; physical characteristics are located at specific points. Tools
              developed in other fields, such as wave propagation in plasmas, are utilized,
              along with the availability of data from synchronized satellite-based
              simultaneous measurement of rotor angles over wide areas. Work on this project
              has been underway for several years, in which time techniques have been
              developed for obtaining the continuum model from real time system data.  The
              proposed methodology could turn out to be widely applicable and of significant
              usefulness as restructuring advances toward much more complex operation than
              has ever been envisioned in the past.

