Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics, Origin, and Conservation of the
               Hawaiian Damselfly Genus Megalagrion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0073314

Award Number: 0073314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine M. Simon csimon@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073314
Simon and Jordan
	Hawaii's active and colorful Megalagrion damselflies
              (pinao  'ula) have always been among the most beautiful and conspicuous 
              insects in the islands.  The roughly 23 species are unusual in that they are
              thought to be descended from a single colonizing ancestor that has given rise
              to descendants that now occupy as many different kinds of larval habitats as
              all other damselflies in the world put together, from swift streams, upland
              bogs, ponds and brackish pools, to plant leaf bases and damp leaf litter
              beneath fern banks.  During this century, many species of Megalagrion have
              become locally scarce due to human disturbance.  Some lowland species are no
              longer found on certain  islands.  Six species or subspecies are currently
              candidates for listing as threatened or endangered under the Endangered Species
              Act. 
	The genealogical relationships of the species of Megalagrion have long
              been debated and are problematic because of their highly variable morphological
              features and probable ongoing speciation.  Graduate student Stephen Jordan,
              under the direction of Dr. Christine Simon, is studying the phylogenetic
              relationships of species of Megalagrion and its closest presumed relatives in
              the Pacific region, in relation to island geography and larval habitats. In
              this study, he will gather nuclear and mitochondrial DNA sequence data for
              comparative measures of mutational differences among these and other Pacific
              area damselflies. A large body of work has accumulated concerning the use of
              molecular and systematic data in conservation biology.  This literature and the
              new results will provide a basis for recommendations to resource managers
              working to conserve these  important and vulnerable members of Hawaii's
              freshwater ecosystems. 

