Title       : Biphasic Poroviscoelastic Behavior of Articular Cartilage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0073565

Award Number: 0073565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Leon Esterowitz                         
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $237118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun-Kyo F. Suh fsuh@tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0073565
Suh
Articular cartilage, consisting of proteoglycan (PG) molecules and
              collagen fibrils as well as interstitial fluid, is a soft tissue covering the
              articulating surfaces of bones in diarthrodial joints.  It plays a vital role
              in joint articulation by providing a nearly frictionless bearing mechanism with
              excellent mechanical durability, which can be attributed to the tissue's
              viscoelastic characteristics.  It has been well documented that abnormal
              mechanical stresses in diarthrodial joints can cause mechanical damage in the
              structural integrity of articular cartilage.  Once mechanically damaged, the
              cartilage usually fails to heal and recover its mechanical function due to a
              lack of a primary spontaneous repair mechanism, thus leading to degenerative
              joint disease or osteoarthritis (OA).  An indication of such degenerative
              disease is usually manifested by a rupture of the dense collagen meshwork, a
              decrease in PG content of the tissue, and an increase in interstitial water
              content.  As a result, articular cartilage becomes softer and loses its normal
              mechanical properties, resulting in further deterioration.  Understanding the
              mechanical characteristics of articular cartilage is critically important in
              order to improve our knowledge about the normal and abnormal behaviors of
              articular cartilage as well as the treatment of disabilities caused by damaged
              cartilage.  Therefore, the long-term objective of this research is to
              understand the mechanical characteristics of articular cartilage using an
              experimentally validated mathematical model.

The mechanical characteristics
              of articular cartilage depend upon the structural integrity of its molecular
              constituents and their interactions.  There have been significant efforts in
              mathematical modeling of articular cartilage reported in the literature, which
              accounted for such interactions between the constituents of the tissue.  The
              current paradigm in cartilage biomechanics is based on the model assumption
              that articular cartilage is a binary mixture of a porous, purely elastic solid
              matrix (PG and collagen) and an inviscid interstitial fluid.  This assumption
              postulates that the viscoelastic behavior of articular cartilage is solely
              governed by a diffusive friction caused by the relative motion between the
              fluid and solid phases, which is termed the "fluid flow-dependent viscoelastic
              mechanism".  However, there has recently been strong evidence that articular
              cartilage exhibits significant viscoelastic behaviors in the absence of the
              apparent flow of interstitial fluid within the tissue matrix, which is termed
              the "fluid- flow-independent viscoelastic mechanism".  Furthermore, the
              investigator's recent preliminary studies have indicated that the overall
              mechanical behavior of articular cartilage is largely governed by complex
              coupling phenomena of the fluid flow-dependent and fluid flow-independent
              viscoelastic mechanisms.  Despite its strong evidence, however, the role of
              such coupled viscoelastic mechanism has not been fully explored, nor
              appreciated.  Therefore, the short-term objective of the present proposal is to
              understand the two distinct viscoelastic mechanisms - i.e., the fluid
              flow-dependent and fluid flow-independent viscoelastic mechanisms - of
              articular cartilage under various loading conditions using extensive
              mathematical/ computational modeling and its experimental
              validation.

Understanding the relative contribution of each (fluid
              flow-dependent or fluid flow-independent) viscoelastic mechanism is essential
              in developing a fundamental mechanical theory of articular cartilage, which
              will eventually help to develop various analytical tools for normal and
              pathological articular cartilage.  The outcome of the proposed research will
              also be useful for accurate understanding of mechanical behaviors and damage
              tolerance of normal and pathological cartilage.  This information will improve
              our knowledge about the underlying mechanisms resulting in the degeneration of
              articular cartilage and lead us toward an improved treatment for damaged
              cartilage.  Furthermore, the proposed study will help to advance current
              knowledge of the biomechanics of other soft tissues including tendon, ligament,
              muscle, brain, etc., since most of the soft tissues in the animal body share a
              similar structural composition.  They are composed of cells, porous
              viscoelastic ground substance (extracellular matrix or EMC) and interstitial
              fluid.


