Title       : Dissertation Research - Human Migration in Early Neolithic Europe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a0073721

Award Number: 0073721
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : May 1,  2001         (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11950              (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Douglas Price tdprice@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Price, Mr. R.Bentley will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will participate in the excavation of an early
              agricultural site in the Rhine Valley, Germany. He will then conduct strontium
              and lead isotope analyses on human skeletal material recovered from this and
              other archaeological occurrences which date to the same time period and
              culture. The goal of the research is to understand the process which led to the
              appearance of domesticated crops, animals and a settled way of life in Western
              Europe. While scientists recognize that crops such as wheat and barley and
              domesticated cattle sheep and goats first appeared in the Near East and at some
              later date spread westwards into Europe, the mechanism which underlies this
              movement is unclear. In many regions such domesticates appear suddenly -
              possibly within the span of a single generation and are accompanied by a
              distinctive pottery type termed "linear band ceramic" (LBK) A lively debate
              exists concerning whether it was technology itself or actual populations which
              moved. Many archaeologists believe that the LBK phenomenon reflects the actual
              movement of people - a group of pioneers who spread rapidly across much of
              Western Europe. Other researchers note that this area was already inhabited by
              hunting and gathering populations and thus far from devoid of a human presence.
              They argue that it was not people themselves who moved but rather objects and
              an understanding of how to use them. According to this model local hunters and
              gathers learned how to plant crops, herd livestock and make pottery. The
              observed changes in settlement pattern were thus the result of new technology
              and subsistence practices.

To help resolve this issue, Mr. Bentley will
              examine a series of skeletons from LBK sites in the Rhine valley and conduct
              both strontium and lead isotope analyses of bone and teeth. The human body
              absorbs both elements from food and the proportions of strontium and likely
              lead isotopes reflects their abundance in the food itself. This in turn is
              strongly affected by the underlying bedrock geology. Because teeth form early
              in an individual's life and do not remodel over time, they reflect the ratio in
              the region where one's early years were spent. Bone however remodels over time
              and bone isotope ratios reflect a later period in an individual's life. Mr.
              Bentley has noted that strontium isotopic values in the Rhine floodplain where
              LBK sites are found, differ significantly from those in the surrounding
              highlands where pre-existing hunting and gathering populations were located.
              Through analyses of these ratios, it should be possible to determine whether
              LBK people lived their entire lives within this area or whether they came from
              elsewhere. Analysis of results by sex should also provide insight into possible
              marriage patterns.

This research is important for several reasons. It will
              shed light on cultural dynamics in prehistoric Europe. It will help to develop
              the application strontium isotope analysis tool to archaeological questions. It
              will also explore the possibility of using lead isotope analysis in the same
              way. Finally, it will contribute to training a promising young scientist.

