Title       : Topology and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2002     
File        : a0073006

Award Number: 0073006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sylvain E. Cappell cappell@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0073006
Sylvain Cappell

Among the range of problems to be investigated
              in topology 
and geometry in low and high dimensions, some concern the 
study
              of transformation groups, that is the symmetries of 
manifolds and of more
              general spaces.  New methods of 
classifying such group actions will be
              developed with a 
view to making good connections with methods of equivariant
              
homotopy theory; basic "naturality" questions for the set 
of group actions
              on a manifold will be studied.  Another 
set of problems concerns a variety of
              both topological 
and algebraic invariants of varieties, e.g. theories of
              
characteristic classes, and new methods of explicitly 
computing them.  A
              related series of questions to be 
investigated concerns the relations between
              the global 
topology of divisors and the local geometry of their
              
singularities which must, in general, be regarded as 
"singular knots."  The
              natural actions of mapping class 
groups and their Torelli subgroups on the
              moduli spaces 
of representations (which are foundational in algebraic
              
geometry, in gauge theory, in 3-manifold topology, and 
in string theory)
              will be investigated with a view to 
applications in three dimensional
              topology.  Decomposition 
methods for studying analytic and geometric
              invariants of 
manifolds and the relations between them will be investigated,
              
again with a view of applying such relation to three 
manifolds. 
              Computations of generalized characteristic 
classes of toric varieties will be
              combined with other 
topological, geometric, and analytical methods to obtain
              
results in geometrical combinatorics and applications to 
problems
              concerning lattice sums.

This research project involves several
              investigations in 
a range of problems in topology and geometry in low and
              
high dimensions and studies of some new applications of 
these in other
              areas of mathematics.  Some of the research 
work will involve invariants of
              manifolds and of more 
general spaces, such as singular varieties.  Effective
              
methods of computing such natural invariants will be 
sought.  The moduli
              spaces and three manifold invariants 
to be investigated also arise in
              geometrical approaches 
to theoretical physics.  A combination of geometrical,
              
algebraic and analytical methods will be used to study 
possible
              applications of singular varieties to problems 
concerning comparisons of
              lattice sums with integrals.  
Such comparisons are of interest in many areas
              of the 
mathematical sciences.

