Title       : DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Costs of Parental Behavior, and Patterns of Paternal
               Effort and Paternity in the Pumpkinseed Sunfish (Lepomis gibbosus)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a0073536

Award Number: 0073536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9960               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Webster   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Like other sunfish, male pumpkinseeds invest substantially in parental care.
              However, because eggs are fertilized externally, a window of opportunity is
              open for males adopting an alternative reproductive tactic. These "sneaker"
              males do not provide parental care; instead they sneak fertilizations in the
              nest of parental males. Because parental males are cuckolded and their parental
              behavior is parasitized, the question of how paternity affects parental care is
              of substantial interest. Using behavioral observations, experimental
              manipulations, and molecular analyses of paternity in a wild population of
              pumpkinseed sunfish, this study investigates the success of sneaker males and
              explores how paternal care is affected by paternity in this
              species.

Intuitively, paternity should be related to parental care, since
              reproduction is costly and investment in unrelated offspring may be wasted.
              However, theoretical models suggest that males may adjust their parental care
              in response to low levels of paternity within their brood under certain
              conditions but not others. Most of the empirical work testing this theory has
              been conducted with birds and has produced mixed results. Data and experiments
              using fish may prove more manageable to studies involving experimental
              manipulation. This study will be among the first to use molecular techniques to
              investigate the relationship between paternity and paternal care in a fish, and
              will also examine the four factors thought to be critical to such a
              relationship. This study is expected to provide not only valuable information
              regarding paternal care and alternative reproductive strategies in fishes, but
              also a different system that may clarify our understanding of paternal effort
              and paternity.


