Title       : Computational Studies in Polyhedral Convexity: Lattice Points and Triangulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2000    
File        : a0073815

Award Number: 0073815
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73923              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesus De Loera deloera@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              De Loera
0073815

     The investigator studies the combinatorial and
              algebraic properties of optimal subdivisions, coverings, and triangulations of
              convex polytopes.  He develops algorithms for the computation of such optimal
              objects.  Criteria of optimality that are explored include minimization of the
              number of simplices, of the total sum of lengths or areas of simplices, and of
              the average volume of the simplices.  He also develops software for counting
              all lattice points inside a low-dimensional polytope and for computing their
              integer hulls.  The technique also allows the fast computation of volumes. 
              Specific problems are considered to assess efficiency of the software, for
              example the optimal arrangements of n points, in a sphere of fixed radius, that
              maximize the number of lattice points inside their convex hull.  Algorithms for
              the software are adaptations of new techniques, due to Barvinok, that are based
              on covering polyhedra with unimodular simplices.  This project also includes
              methods from convexity, combinatorics, integer and linear programming,
              commutative algebra, complexity, and intensive computer experimentation.  The
              results of this work should be of interest in integer programming,
              combinatorics, and symbolic-algebraic computing.

     Informally speaking,
              the first part of this project can be thought of as an attempt to understand
              how to break or decompose objects, such as cubes and polygons, into elementary
              blocks or pieces efficiently.  This is perhaps reminiscent of creating jigsaw
              puzzles.  The blocks used in the decomposition are, for instance, tetrahedra,
              triangles, or smaller cubes.  An example of efficient decomposition is to use
              the smallest number of pieces.  The second part of the project involves
              establishing practical computer software for counting regularly distributed
              points within regular boundaries.  Examples of regularly distributed points are
              arrangements of atoms or crystals.  Many of the theoretical questions under
              study are motivated by problems in computer graphics and computer visualization
              (via the design of economic meshes for modeling figures), data security and
              computation (in the context of RSA encryption, which is used in internet
              transactions), and operations research (via certain techniques for solving
              integer programs when levels of uncertainty are expected).  The training of
              students is an important component of the project.

