Title       : New Intermetallic Phases with Matter Occupancy Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a0073587

Award Number: 0073587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $566500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Lee sl137@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roald Hoffmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project will focus on new intermetallic compound discovery, structure
              determination and property measurement, effectively coupled with quantitative
              computational methods and qualitative theory to develop experimentally
              productive structural and bonding models.  The focus is on intermetallic
              systems where it is not clear whether main group element-metal, metal-metal, or
              element- element bonding dominates structures and properties.  This class of
              materials has been chosen because they are difficult to understand and because
              these materials possess an unusual balance of bonding trends that could very
              well lead to materials with novel properties such as matter occupation waves
              and sublattice shear patterns.  A focus of the synthetic efforts is
              substructure-superstructure relations.  Crystalline superstructures provide
              intrinsic clues as to the bonding.  If a range of superstructures appears for a
              class of materials, that is often a clue that the structures are in some
              careful (and easily perturbed) balance of determining physical forces.  Phases
              will be studied in which transition metal -main group interactions dominated
              the structure (Nowotny chimney ladder phases), metal alloys involving both
              electronegative and electropositive atoms (Copper-Zinc) and square net systems
              with reduced energy gaps between the composing elements (ternary rare earths
              and a variety of ternary compounds with alternating transition metal and main
              group elements in the lattice).  These systems do more than just force one to
              go beyond the Zintl concept, they also bear structural features in common.  All
              these systems exhibit matter occupation wave superstructures, a type of
              ordering which can not in general be treated by the traditional charge density
              wave arguments.  There are also connections to problems of crystal growth, of
              ionic conductivity and a possible new phenomenon of  sublattices moving or
              shearing through each other.  New theoretical ways at looking at such
              superstructures will be developed.  The goal is to full couple experimental and
              theoretical work.  [The graduate students supported by this research may be
              reasonably expected to have elements of synthesis, property characterization
              and theoretical computation in their theses.]
%%%
Structure, composition,
              property correlations of these new classes of materials may exhibit interesting
              magnetic, superconductivity, and ionic conducting behavior.  Students will be
              trained in solid state synthesis, property characterization and theoretical
              computation and modeling, all of which are areas of high relevance to current
              academic and industrial job opportunities.

