Title       : Nonlinear Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0073077

Award Number: 0073077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan B. Goodman   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0073077
Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear
              Waves

Abstract

0073077  Goodman



This work consists of several
              projects in applied and computational mathematics.  One project focuses on
              anisotropic adaptive finite element methods.  It has been demonstrated that
              anisotropic refinement leads to more efficient computations in thin layers,
              such as boundary layers.  These methods will be extended to three dimensional
              problems and encoded in general-purpose software.  Another project involves
              mathematical techniques for understanding the value of stock options and other
              derivative securities.  We will examine how more desirable, sophisticated
              pricing models differ from those in use today.  If the extra sources of
              uncertainty introduced in multi-factor models are not too large, we can
              estimate their effect on pricing and hedging strategies using perturbation
              methods rather than the large scale computation that they seem to require.  A
              third project concerns numerical methods for solving stochastic differential
              equations.  The goal is to develop a method as accurate as Milstein's method
              that does not require sampling repeated Ito integrals or explicitly evaluating
              derivatives of noise coefficients.

Computation of quantities of practical
              interest, such as stresses in structures, fluid or heat flows, etc., are often
              limited by computer memory and speed, so techniques that reduce computational
              cost have immediate practical application.  One part of this project concerns
              development of a more efficient finite-element algorithm, a central tool of
              engineering computation.  Currently, adaptive computations automatically
              determine the resolution appropriate to a region, so that the computation will
              not waste high resolution where it is not needed (e.g. far from the source of a
              stress).  Anisotropic refinement, the topic of this work, goes one step
              further, seeking directions in which high resolution is not needed (e.g.
              parallel to a long crack).  A second part of this project focuses on
              mathematical methods used in the banking industry.  The finance industry has
              been transformed by computers, communications, and instant access to
              information.  A liquidity revolution has occurred through use of sophisticated
              quantitative methods.  Investors, businesses and bankers can now understand
              risk much better, and, through derivative instruments and markets, sell the
              risk to those who wish to assume it.  The New York financial community has an
              edge on other foreign banking centers through the use of more sophisticated
              quantitative market models, which pose analytical and computational challenges
              for finance professionals and applied mathematicians.  This project examines
              ways to make complicated financial models amenable to analysis.



