Title       : Electrical Impedance Characterization of Discontinuous Conductive Fiber
               Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0073197

Award Number: 0073197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas O. Mason t-mason@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The premise of this work is that the electrical impedance response of composites
              with discontinuous, highly-conductive fibers can be employed to characterize
              their microstructure (fiber bonding, orientation, number density, etc.) and to
              monitor important changes upon loading, including strain and permanent damage
              effects (e.g., matrix cracking and fiber debonding, fracture and pullout). 
              Such capabilities are needed for the controlled fabrication and deployment of
              'smart', self-monitoring structural composites.  Since the necessary
              requirements for such an impedance response-highly conductive fibers, a
              moderately conductive matrix, and a frequency-switchable interfacial
              impedance-have been identified, this project will study the impedance response
              of cementitious matrix (steel or carbon fibers in cement) and ceramic matrix
              (SiC in silicon nitride) composites.  A combination of laboratory 'physical'
              simulations (e.g., single wire/fiber in a dielectric medium), pixel-based
              computer modeling (in collaboration with NIST), and actual composite studies
              (single fiber pullout, bulk compressive, and notched-beam tensile tests) will
              be carried out, with the latter appropriately instrumented for simultaneous
              impedance measurements.  
%%%
This project will study the microstructure and
              microstructural changes during loading of composite materials using impedance
              spectroscopy.  The results obtained should be applicable to a broad range of
              composites, including cement-matrix, ceramic-matrix, and even polymer-matrix
              systems (if the above-mentioned conditions are met) and are an important first
              step in the development of novel self-monitoring composite materials and
              methodology.  As well as improving our understanding of these composites, the
              impedance spectroscopy technique will be developed into a reliable
              characterization tool for microstructural analysis.  In addition to the
              training of two graduate students and several undergraduates in materials
              science and engineering, the materials and experiences from the project will be
              incorporated in a course teaching science and engineering principles to
              non-science undergraduates.
***

