Title       : Distributed Bandwidth Management and Pricing in High-Speed Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0073359

Award Number: 0073359
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi R. Mazumdar mazum@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine P. Rosenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Bandwidth management and pricing of elastic services is key to the
              efficient and profitable running of emerging high-speed networks. Elastic
              traffic or traffic which can alter its rate characteristics to adapt to the
              congestion state of the network, such as TCP/IP traffic, already forms a major
              part of the traffic carried by today's networks, the Internet being the current
              paradigm. In networks where the basic bandwidth availability and user
              characteristics are not efficiently priced as well as managed, profitability or
              efficiency is reduced since pricing and consequent user satisfaction are going
              to determine demand and useful throughput (\goodput").  While the ideas of
              dynamic optimal resource allocation and pricing based on user resource requests
              and budgets are very attractive they cannot be implemented in a large network
              for scalability reasons. This is due to both communication as well as
              computational overheads. Hence, there is a need for creating a hierarchical
              structure and to perform aggregation in order to make the concept implementable
              and useful. However, the researchers believe that there is a need for a
              well-defined framework so that they can understand and quantify the trade-offs
              that have been made in terms of efficiency, overhead, fairness, complexity,
              responsiveness (especially if the propagation delays are large) and robustness.
              Other issues very much related to implementation are linked to measurement of
              congestion and to convergence and stability of efficient and computationally
              feasible distributed algorithms.
     The proposed research will:
     (1) 
              Further develop and refine a game theoretic framework proposed by the PIs for
              bandwidth allocation for elastic traffic. The allocation maximizes the
              efficiency (in terms of network revenue) of network utilization and
              incorporates the crucial notion of fairness. The main thrust will be the
              development of appropriate solution concepts in non-static environments.
    
              (2) Use the above framework to develop pricing structures which will lead to
              network efficiency while providing user level satisfaction.
    (3)  Develop
              distributed algorithms which enable the proper allocation of bandwidth as
              defined through game theory above based on users' willingness to pay and
              bandwidth demands. In particular, the issues of
network measurements and local
              information will be addressed. This can be seen as either a solution for
              a
small network or as a benchmark to which the researchers proposed solutions
              incorporating hierarchy and aggregation will be compared.
    (4)  Design of
              scalable solutions incorporating aggregation and an appropriate hierarchical
              structure of the network, i.e., user level, groups of users, etc.  Particular
              attention will be paid to trade-offs in terms of
performance and complexity.
              Both the pure bandwidth allocation based on performance as well as
              pricing
based cases will be considered.
    (5)  Study in the implementation
              of these solutions in the context of network protocols such as TCP/IP. This
              will involve issues related to stability, convergence, and adaptivity to
              changing conditions.
     (6) Develop notions of network bandwidth derivatives
              or option pricing for booking or provisioning of bandwidth resources based on a
              Black-Scholes paradigm. This is another example of the techniques that the
              researchers plan to use. This one will be used at an intermediate level of the
              researchers' network hierarchy, namely between a service provider and a network
              operator.
     The researchers expect that the proposed work will involve:
              advances in applications of game theory; contributions to the notions of
              aggregation and fairness; development of an approach to bandwidth options;
              optimal pricing structures; development of feasible real-time algorithms for
              bandwidth allocation; and contributions to implementation issues based on
              available information. The techniques will be drawn from game theory, Lyapunov
              theory, convergence of stochastic algorithms, nonlinear constrained
              optimization, mathematics of finance, and stochastic analysis.

