Title       : Generalized Regression Modeling of Ordinal and Bounded Response Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0073044

Award Number: 0073044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Simpson dgs@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

0073044

This research aims to develop new statistical methods,
              inference
and theory for regression modeling of ordinal and bounded
data.
              Recent work indicates a strong possiblility of unifying 
the most commonly
              used ordinal models and extending them to a 
broader class of models. A
              unified approach will lead to comprehensive
and flexible ordinal regression
              modeling. Further this line of
research is directed at developing improved
              methods for
temporally and spatially correlated ordinal data. Bounded response
              
data are common in many applications. The second part of this 
project will
              extend general regression methods and inference methods 
for bounded response
              data. Parametric and semi-parametric methods
will be developed to model
              correlations among bounded responses.
Modern computing algorithms such as
              Markov Chain Monte Carlo
provide the means for developing software for
              correlated ordinal
and bounded response data.   

Ordinal modeling has
              widespread applicability in the social 
sciences and medical studies. Moreover
              ordinal modeling has 
recently emerged as an important tool for risk
              assessment in 
environmental toxicology and in civil engineering applications
              
where the probabilities of events of different severity 
need to be modeled.
              Bounded response data are common in 
infrastructure studies, which use bounded
              condition scores, 
e.g., 0-100 scale. The data may be correlated over time
              (e.g., 
the history of a road section) and space (e.g., neighboring road
              
sections are correlated). The methods being developed will improve 
modeling
              and uncertainty assessments and will have applications 
in many fields such as
              environmental risk assessment, 
infrastructure management, transportation risk
              modeling and the 
assessment of treatments for depression and other
              social
functioning disorders.


