Title       : Late Middle Pleistocene Occupations and Adaptations at Almonda, Estremadura,
               Portugal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a0073531

Award Number: 0073531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98445              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Marks amarks@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Anthony Marks and collaborators
              will conduct two field seasons of research at the archaeological site of
              Galeria Pesada, located in the Estremadura region of Portugal. The Galeria is
              one of a number of infilled cavities located in a fault structured
              southeast-facing cliff. Examination of a series of underground tunnels revealed
              the presence of Paleolithic artifacts and with NSF support Dr. Marks conducted
              trial excavations in several infilled areas in an attempt to locate in situ
              material. A test pit in the Galeria Pesada revealed a series of superimposed
              strata rich in both lithic and anthropogenically modified faunal remains.
              Typological analysis as well as preliminary electron spin resonance dating
              indicates that the site can be assigned to the late Middle Pleistocene and
              therefore documents the shift from Lower to Middle Paleolithic cultures.
              Because only a small area has been excavated and relatively few artifacts
              recovered, Dr. Marks will, over the course of two field seasons open a larger
              area. Increased lithic sample size will allow him to: provide an accurate and
              comprehensive description of the assemblages and their constituent parts;
              measure the nature and degree of technological and typological continuity and
              change throughout the assemblages; and test the proposition that different raw
              materials are responsible for differences in lithic manufacture techniques.
              Remains of both large and small animals are represented and through their
              analysis Dr. Marks will attempt to reconstruct subsistence strategies and
              determine the extent to which purposeful hunting, as opposed to scavenging was
              practiced.

Western Europe was first inhabited by hominids (early humans) ca.
              500,000 years ago and although archaeologists have traced in broad outline
              major stages of culture change significant gaps in understanding remain. Early
              inhabitants produced an industry which included large bifacially worked "hand
              axes" similar to those found in other regions of the Old World. At some later
              date distinct flake based industries appeared and these developed into the
              industry associated with Neanderthal peoples. Archaeologists however do not
              understand how this transition took place - whether it was gradual or abrupt
              and whether it involved replacement or in situ development. Lively disagreement
              exists on the capabilities of Neanderthals and their predecessors, especially
              their ability to hunt large animals. The deposits at the Galeria Pesada span
              this crucial period and Dr. Mark's research,  has the potential to shed new
              light on this important period of human development.

