Title       : Dissertation Research: The Detection of Recombination from DNA Sequences and its
               Impact in Phylogeny Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0073154

Award Number: 0073154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Crandall keith_crandall@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073154
Crandall and Posada
	A fundamental assumption in
              molecular-phylogenetic reconstruction is that there is only one history
              underlying the set of DNA sequences under study. However, different regions of
              the gene under study can have different evolutionary histories due to
              reticulate evolution caused by recombination between chromosomes, gene
              conversion or horizontal transfer. Traditional methods of phylogenetic
              reconstruction simply ignore recombination, and the impact of recombination on
              the different phylogenetic estimation algorithms is unknown. Graduate student
              David Posada, under the direction of Dr. Keith Crandall, proposes to
              characterize, using computer simulations, the performance of different
              phylogenetic methods when recombination has occurred.
A related problem is the
              establishment of the presence of recombination in real data sets. Numerous
              methods have been developed to test for the occurrence of reticulate evolution
              from a set of aligned DNA sequences, and to determine the bounds of these
              events. Unfortunately, very little is known about the relative strengths and
              weaknesses of these methods. Computer simulation will be used to characterize
              the performance of different methods for detecting recombination. The effects
              of different rates of recombination, of the size of the recombination unit and
              position of the recombinational event, of mutation rate, of population size,
              and of sequence length, will all be studied. The different detection algorithms
              will also be applied to empirical data sets where recombination has been
              identified and described, and to mitochondrial data sets, where recombination
              is supposedly absent. This characterization will help indicate the appropriate
              tools for detecting recombination and for understanding phylogenies of
              potentially recombining sequences. Given the increasing number of nuclear genes
              being sequenced, recombination can no longer be ignored in phylogenetic
              reconstruction methods.


