Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Resistance, Tolerance and Species
               Interactions in a Brassica/Herbivore/Pathogen System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a0073558

Award Number: 0073558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8606               (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur E. Weis aeweis@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Weis
0073558

The proposed research will use greenhouse and field experiments
              with the wild mustard Brassica rapa and three of its natural enemies to
              determine 1) genetic correlations between resistance to enemies, 2) genetic
              correlations between tolerance of enemies, 3) genetic correlations between
              tolerance and resistance to a particular enemy, and 4) ecological interactions
              between natural enemies.  A greenhouse component of the research will provide
              the controlled conditions necessary for determination of genetic correlations,
              and a field component will allow for determination of the impacts of herbivores
              in the field.  Groups of plants from half-sib families will be exposed to
              different treatments, each consisting of exposure to one natural enemy or a
              combination of natural enemies.  Resistance and tolerance of each plant family
              to their natural enemies will be determined from treatments exposed to single
              enemies.  Comparison of the impact of attack by multiple enemies with the
              impact of each of those enemies alone will determine whether there are
              ecological interactions. If there are interactions, then the impact of a group
              of natural enemies will differ from the sum of their independent
              impacts.

This research will provide important insights into the genetic
              structure of plant defense against their natural enemies.  Plants can cope with
              attack by natural enemies by either avoiding or minimizing damage by the
              enemies (resistance) or by regrowing after damage has occurred (tolerance).  In
              order to understand how these interact to form an integrated defense system,
              two potential constraints need to be understood:  1) genetic correlations
              between resistance or tolerance traits and 2) ecological interactions between
              enemies.  When resistance is genetically correlated to tolerance, then any
              selection program to improve the one will cause the other to decline.  When
              enemies interact, their effects on plant performance can be synergistic, thus
              the value of resistance to one enemy in isolation may not predict the total
              value of resistance to both.   Investigating these two constraints can help
              increase our understanding of the contribution of plant defense on herbivore
              diversity, and aid in the structuring of plant breeding programs for crops that
              face multiple harmful pests.

