Title       : A Finite Difference Approach to Pseudospectral Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a0073048

Award Number: 0073048
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bengt Fornberg bengt.fornberg@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pseudospectral (PS) methods are high-accuracy alternatives to finite
difference
              (FD) and finite element methods (FEM) for the numerical solution
of PDEs. They
              are particularly effective for solving convection-dominated
equations over
              long times and in relatively simple geometries. Both the
algorithms themselves
              and the analysis of them have traditionally been
closely tied to expansions in
              different classes of orthogonal functions.
The recent book "A Practical Guide
              to Pseudospectral Methods" (by the
present investigator) notes that a large
              body of generalizations,
enhancements and insights can be gained by viewing PS
              methods instead as
special cases of FD methods. Several such opportunities
              were explored under
the grant DMS-9706916. Building on these experiences, we
              will now introduce
radial basis functions (RBFs) as an additional component to
              be integrated
with PS schemes. Although computationally quite costly, the
              spectral
accuracy of RBFs, combined with their extreme geometric flexibility,
              would
seem to make them ideally suited to complement PS methods in the
              vicinity
of irregular boundaries. To realize this requires much research
              regarding
the basic features of RBF approximations, as well as research on
              issues
related to interfacing them with PS and FD methods. 

Pseudospectral
              (PS) methods were first proposed in the early 1970's (in
connection with
              meteorology and turbulence modeling). They have since been
shown to be
              extraordinary effective for high-accuracy calculations in
numerous other
              fields, such as computational electromagnetics and nonlinear
waves.
              Strategically important application areas include simulating the
radar
              scattering from airplanes, the electrical interference between
components on
              computer chips, and the transmissions of signals in optical
fibres. The main
              weakness with PS methods has been the difficulty to apply
them in complex
              geometries. Some of this has been overcome in recent years
(usually by
              splitting a complicated domain in simpler parts, and then
applying some
              suitable computational means for coupling of the subdomains).
A quite
              different and highly promising approach will be introduced and then
explored
              under this grant. This involves combining 'classical' PS methods
with the
              geometrically extremely flexible approach known as radial basis
functions
              (RBFs). This has never been attempted, and the research falls in
the 'high
              risk, high gain' category. Success is by no means certain, but if
it happens,
              it could have a major impact, particularly on computational
electromagnetics
              in applications such as simulation of radar scattering /
stealth properties of
              objects. 

