Title       : New Numerical Methods and Analysis for Navier Stokes Equations Involving
               Interfaces and Simulation of Electro-Migration of Voids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0073403

Award Number: 0073403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhilin Li zhilin@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for the continuation of the PI's research toward
              the
development, implementation, and application of efficient numerical
              methods
for interface problems especially with moving interfaces and/or
              free
boundaries. Specific projects include development of the immersed
              interface
method for the Navier Stokes equations modeling incompressible
              viscous two
phase flow with fixed or moving interfaces. Related to this topic,
              some
important projects include development of new projection and/or
              gauge
methods so that the second order accuracy can be preserved even with
              the
presence of interfaces; second order elliptic solvers that can satisfy
              the
maximum principle for interface problems in two and three dimensions;
              the
finite element methods using Cartesian and/or adaptive Cartesian grids
              for
interface problems. Another application which will be studied in depth
              is
the simulation of electro-migration of voids in integrated circuits
              with
the presence of grain boundaries.

This proposal is about developing
              efficient (fast, accurate, and in real
time) methods to simulate some
              important moving interface/free boundary 
problems. Applications include the
              simulation of the interface between 
water and oil in petroleum industry;
              simulation of contaminated bubbles 
in water for environmental science;
              simulation of crystal growth of pattern 
formulation in material science; 
              simulation of cell deformation and motion 
of biofilm in medical and biology
              sciences; and simulation of 
electro-migration of voids in an integrated
              circuit in semi-conductor 
industry. Over the years, we have developed
              advanced methods for solving 
these interface problems and we believe we are
              the leaders in this area. 
Therefore we are very confident in the success of
              the proposal and can
maintain the edge in this area over other countries.
              Economically, the 
success of this proposal can save millions of dollars that
              are
needed to carry out real experiments. 

