Title       : Dissertation Research: The Macroevolutionary Consequences of a Neogastropod
               Adaptation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a0073248

Award Number: 0073248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9992               (Estimated)
Investigator: David Jablonski djablons@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073248
Jablonski and Price
Although evolutionary biologists have formalized
              the study of adaptation, few studies explain both why a trait is adaptive and
              ho--w it affects a lineage's history.  Graduate student Rebecca Price, assisted
              by her adviser Dr. David Jablonski, addresses this issue in a study of fossil
              and living species of a group of gastropod molluscs of the Fasciolariidae. The
              neogastropods are an ideal focal taxon because they have high modern diversity,
              permitting the use of living animals to determine the functional significance
              of the character in question, and a rich fossil record directly to observe
              morphological changes through geologic time.  The hypotheses under test concern
              the columellar folds, or plications on a gastropod shell's aperture, that
              traditionally are used as taxonomic characters, and that may function as
              adaptations, for example in body retraction to avoid predators, or in muscle
              attachment to increase speed of movement. Such functional adaptations may have
              affected rates and patterns of species diversification in different sublineages
              within the Fasciolariidae (Neogastropoda: Mollusca).  This family has a rich
              fossil record, a range of fold morphologies, and, according to a preliminary
              phylogeny, has lost and added folds repeatedly.  
The student will use
              computed tomography (facilities made available at Argonne National Laboratory
              outside Chicago) to depict in 3-dimensions and quantify a series of characters
              that describe columellar fold morphology in ca. 100 samples in this family.  To
              test that columellar folds are adaptive, and to evaluate some hypothetical
              functions, the student will (1) map each aspect of fold morphology onto an
              evolutionary tree to determine when it evolved, and (2) conduct a series of
              functional experiments at a marine station on shells with and without folds. 
              The experiments are designed to improve our understanding of correlations
              between morphology and function, with the results extrapolated back on the
              phylogeny to track the 130 million years of fasciolariid history in functional
              terms. 

