Title       : Gauss Mixture Quantization for Image Compression and Segmentation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0073050

Award Number: 0073050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Gray rmgray@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard A. Olshen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
The research is concerned with techniques from statistical signal processing
              and information theory as they apply to communication systems with multiple
              goals. Such systems arise in multimedia communications networks like the
              Internet. The decomposition of data streams into different types is critical to
              finding information desired by a user among vast available sources, and it can
              also provide methods for displaying, rendering, printing, or playing the
              received signal that take advantage of its particular structure. Signal
              processing and coding theory have provided powerful mathematical models of
              information sources and algorithms by which these sources can be communicated
              and processed. Typically systems are designed as a collection of separate,
              unrelated, components. This can result in much less than optimal overall
              performance. Furthermore, it can hamper theoretical understanding of the
              fundamental limits on achievable performance.We treat the simultaneous design
              of mathematical models that account at once for information sources, data
              compression, and signal processing and apply to extracting information from the
              received data. Our emphasis is on image communication and processing. Because,
              the techniques draw heavily from demonstrably successful methods in speech
              coding and recognition they are natural for both signal types, individually or
              together.


The research involves a unified approach to data compression,
              statistical classification and regression, and density estimation. It is based
              on a novel combination of vector quantization, Gauss mixture models, measures
              of minimum discrimination information (relative entropy), and universal coding.
              Vector quantization provides both a theoretical framework and a method for
              implementation. Gauss mixture models are a flexible class by which to describe
              information sources. They can be fit to real data by clustering with respect to
              a minimum discrimination information measure of distortion. A primary objective
              is the development and application of conditional versions of rate-distortion
              extremal properties of Gaussian models in order to design robust algorithms for
              compression, classification, modeling, and combinations thereof. There are many
              open questions about relations among modeling, compression, and
              classification/regression. Our goal is to provide answers to as many of them as
              possible and in so doing to contribute to understanding the interplay of
              modeling, signal processing, and coding. We describe optimized and
              implementable robust codes for compression and classification for a variety of
              information sources, especially for multimodal imagery. Part of our efforts are
              devoted to purely mathematical aspects of tree-structured regression, which is
              related to martingale theory and to the differentiation of integrals.

