Title       : Localized Electronic States in Amorphous Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 20,  2002  
File        : a0073004

Award Number: 0073004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Craig Taylor craig@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research is a continuation and redirection of an existing project on the
              electronic and structural properties of disordered semiconductors. One major
              emphasis is the photodarkening effect, which is a metastable shift of the
              optical absorption edge to lower energies after optical excitation at energies
              greater than the energy of the optical band gap. The primary goal of this
              project is to develop a detailed microscopic description of the changes that
              occur at arsenic and chalcogen sites on photodarkening. A second thrust
              concerns the decay of optically excited electrons and holes in amorphous
              semiconductors that occurs at low temperatures and at long times after
              cessation of the optical excitation. These problems will be attacked by means
              of melt quenching, sputtering and PECVD growth techniques, magnetic resonance
              spectroscopy (ESR, NMR, and NQR) optical spectroscopies, various combinations
              of optical and magnetic resonance techniques, electrical and acoustic
              measurements applied to specifically selected chalcogenide glass systems. The
              specific tasks of this work are: to develop an understanding of the details of
              the local structural order before and after photodarkening in chalcogenide
              glasses; to ascertain the influence of chalcogen atoms on the decay of
              photo-excited electrons and holes that appears to be universal in the
              tetrahedrally-coordinated amorphous semiconductors; to examine partially
              crystallized and anisotropic chalcogenide glasses on a nanometer scale; to
              investigate the rigidity percolation threshold using sound velocity and
              attenuation methods; to study the intrinsic defects in chalcogenide glasses as
              the structure goes from low average to high average coordination number; and to
              study the role played by molecular hydrogen and the possible relationship with
              metastabilities in group IV-chalcogenide glasses.  This work will be performed
              with students and postdoctoral research associates.
%%%
Amorphous,
              microcrystalline and nanocrystalline semiconductors are currently used, or are
              contemplated for use, in many applications, including flatpanel displays,
              infrared optical fibers and detectors, and solar cells.  In spite of these
              successful applications there are very few universal properties to provide a
              general  
theoretical understanding of these materials.  This research is
              focused on the investigation of how electrical and optical excitations of
              certain types of glasses decay over a long period of time. The goal of these
              studies is the development of an atomic/molecular level of understanding of
              these and related processes.  This research will be performed with students and
              postdoctoral research associates who will thereby be prepared for employment in
              industry, government and academe.
***


