Title       : GOALI: Development and Applications of Multidimensional NMR Methods in Polymer
               Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0073346

Award Number: 0073346
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter L. Rinaldi PeterRinaldi@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth F. McCord  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is for a project to develop advanced multidimensional nuclear
              magnet resonance (NMR) experiments, and to apply these methods to the
              characterization of commercially important polymers.  For the past decade,
              triple resonance three dimensional (3D) NMR methods have been enormously
              valuable for studying the structures of biological macromolecules.  The use of
              these methods in polymer science is relatively new.  Recently, triple resonance
              3D-NMR correlation experiments relating the shifts of 1-H, 13-C and a third NMR
              active nucleus X (where W is 19-F, 31-P, 29-Si, or 119-Sn) have been described.
               However, many commercially important polymeric materials are hydrocarbon based
              (i.e., they contain only 1-H and 13-C NMR active nuclei).  The need for NMR
              methodology to study these materials is clear.  The purpose of this project is
              to develop a site of multidimensional NMR experiments tailored to the
              characterization of hydrocarbon-based synthetic polymers.  These experiments
              will be applied to the characterization of the microstructures in commercially
              important copolymers and terpolymers of ethylene with a-olefins methyl
              methacrylate, methacrylic acid, butyl methacrylate and/or carbon monoxide. 
              This structure information will be used to gain insight into the nature of
              initiation, termination, rearrangement and branch-forming reactions in the
              polymer.

The project involves the combined use of existing unique resources,
              worth more than $15 million, at the academic and industrial partner
              institutions.  It will provide new analytical methods which will be valuable to
              polymer researchers who must characterize the structures of new materials.  The
              information obtained from the analysis of the specific polymers in this project
              will be useful to polymer engineers who will use the structure information to
              develop engineering models for plant processes.  This knowledge will aid in the
              development of new materials, help to improve the properties of existing
              manufactured materials, and contribute to the development of improvement
              polymer manufacturing processes.  In the long-term, the information and
              methodology obtained from this proposal will be of general use in the materials
              science industry.

