Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetics and Resource Specialization in the Seed
               Beetle Genus Stator (Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae: Bruchinae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0073330

Award Number: 0073330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8987               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian D. Farrell farrellb@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073330
Farrell and Morse
	Most  herbivorous insects feed on only one or very
              few kinds of hostplants, despite the apparent advantages of being able to use
              multiple hosts when foodplants are scarce in space or time.  Ecological
              research has generated
considerable insight into the generation and
              maintenance of this specialization, but the long term persistence and
              consequences of variation in diet breadth are poorly understood.  For example,
              is specialization a dead end?  There is less evidence on how or even whether
              the process of specialization within populations of generalist species is
              connected to speciation and specialist species. Research by graduate student
              Geoffrey Morse, under the direction of Dr. Brian Farrell, will use DNA sequence
              data to: (1) reconstruct the phylogeny
of the seed beetle genus Stator (family
              Bruchidae); and (2) examine the genetic relationships of populations of the
              sister species S. limbatus Horn (a generalist seed predator) and S. beali
              Johnson (a specialist feeder).  The first aspect will test hypotheses
              concerning the evolutionary consequences of changes in resource specialization.
               The second aspect will test hypotheses concerning both the nature of
              speciation in phytophagous insects, and the population genetic
correlates of
              divergence in diet breadth.
	Insights into how insects become specialists or
              generalists, as well as into the evolutionary consequences of these different
              habits, have implications for fields as diverse as evolutionary biology,
              conservation biology, and agricultural entomology.  By providing an explicit
              historical perspective on the evolutionary ecology of host use in Stator, this
              research will contribute to the synthesis between ecological and evolutionary
              explanations of diversity and resource use.


