Title       : Mobility-Based Clustering for Scalable and Responsive Routing in Ad-Hoc Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0073972

Award Number: 0073972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229425             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rami Melhem melhem@cs.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Taieb Znati  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   In this study, the researchers propose to develop a mobility-based
              framework for adaptive clustering and routing in wireless ad-hoc networks-an
              emerging class of network architecture that is characterized by its highly
              dynamic topology and its limited resources.  Within this framework, the
              researchers will address several key, as yet unanswered questions, which have
              been raised with respect to the routing problem in ad-hoc networks. 
              Specifically, it has been argued that to achieve acceptable routing
              performance, multiple routing strategies may need to act cooperatively in the
              same network.  However, this raises the question as to what those strategies
              should be, and how to effectively toggle between them.  Furthermore, it has
              been proposed that mobility information can be used to select longer-lived
              routes, and to improve the efficiency of route creation and maintenance. 
              However, no well-defined mobility based metric has been proposed that reflects
              a quantitative measure of path stability.  In this study, the researchers
              explore novel and significant ideas which address each of the shortcomings
              described above, and builds them into a unified
routing framework. 
              Specifically, the researchers propose to develop a well-defined mobility based
              routing metric, referred to as path availability.  This metric is used for
              adaptive cluster characterization and routing in ad-hoc networks.
    The
              mobility-based cluster characterization provides the basis for an efficient
              distributed clustering algorithm which adaptively maintains a cluster
              organization-the size and membership in each cluster is determined dynamically
              by the mobility characteristics of the local nodes.  Using this metric, the
              researchers propose to investigate pro-active intra-cluster and inter-cluster
              routing strategies:  intra-cluster routing will be based on table-driven
              routing protocols that maintain up-to-date routing information regarding all
              cluster destinations, whereas inter-cluster routing is managed on a
              demand-basis by constructing routes in a dynamic hierarchical fashion as a
              sequence of relatively stable clusters between the source and the destination. 
              More efficient route search is enabled by the proactive maintenance of routes
              within each cluster, and reactive route repair is only needed if the source or
              destination depart their original clusters, or if the next cluster along a
              route becomes unreachable.  Most of the reaction to node mobility is handled
              locally within the clusters, hence, the far-reaching effects of topological
              changes are minimized. By adapting the characteristics of the cluster
              organization to localized node mobility patterns, the strategy is expected to
              perform well over a wide range of conditions.  Furthermore, this framework can
              be extended
to address the need to support QoS requirements for mutlimedia
              communications.  Very few clustering strategies have defined either an adaptive
              clustering technique, or have factored mobility information into the clustering
              decision process. Hence, this work represents a significant, and sustainable
              contribution to the field.

