Title       : Compiler Techniques for Code Compression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0073394

Award Number: 0073394
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saumya K. Debray debray@cs.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William S. Evans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to develop techniques to reduce the memory footprint
              of executable code, so as to allow more and more sophisticated applications to
              be executed on limited-memory devices, such as hand-held computers, personal
              digital assistants, and embedded processors. Recent years have seen the
              incorporation of computers and computational devices into many aspects of our
              everyday lives. In many cases, the amount of memory available for such
              processors is limited by considerations such as space, weight, and power
              consumption. At the same time, there is a desire to run more and more
              sophisticated applications on such processors. Since an application that
              occupies more memory than is available on such a processor will not be able to
              run on that processor, it is desirable to develop techniques to reduce the
              memory footprint of applications. Moreover, it is necessary that the compressed
              applications remain executable, since for the application domains under
              consideration it is not feasible to decompress the executable in order to
              execute it. This project investigates the construction of tools and techniques
              for code compression in a manner that preserves executability.
