Title       : Topics in Pseudonoise Sequence Design and Error-Correcting Codes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0073555

Award Number: 0073555
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijay P. Kumar vijayk@ceng.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In this project, algebraic techniques are in use two to tackle 
two classes of
              problems related to improving the throughput and/or
reliability of a
              communication link are under study.  The first class
of problems under study
              is the design of long and efficient
error-correcting codes.   Such codes are
              of interest as longer
error-correcting codes tend to ``average'' out the noise
              and hence
provide better performance.      The second class of problems
              relates
to the design and analysis of families of signature sequences that
              are
used to distinguish between the signals of different users in
              a
multi-user environment.  Examples of multi-user environments include
Code
              Division Multiple Access (CDMA) cellular and personal
communication systems.  
              More details on example problems drawn from
each class are provided below. 
              

Since the early 80's, the promise of algebraic geometric (AG) codes
has
              been the delivery of a sequence of error-correcting codes of
increasing length
              whose asymptotic performance exceeds the
Gilbert-Varshamov bound and for which
              efficient and practical  
encoding and decoding algorithms are available. 
              Computationally
efficient decoding algorithms for AG codes are now available
              and there
now exist explicit descriptions of algebraic curves of the
              type
required to construct these long codes.  Construction of good codes on
              
these curves requires the determination of a basis for a certain type
of
              vector space of functions defined on these curves.  The
investigators study
              efficient methods of generating such bases.  The
use of novel algebraic
              geometry techniques to generate pseudo-random
sequences is an example of the
              type of problem belonging to the second
class.  The investigators examine
              methods of generating sequences
having pseudo-random properties such as low
              correlation and large
linear span.  Also under investigation are more
              efficient means of
assessing the performance of pseudo-random sequences in a
              multi-user
setting, for example, more efficient means of determining the
              minimum
Euclidean distance between adjacent multi-user signals. 
              The
performance in a multi-user setting, of a a specific sequence
              family,
known as family S(2) and previously co-designed by the PI is
              also
under study.  
