Title       : Combined Optical and Terzhertz Control of Semiconductor Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0073130

Award Number: 0073130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore B. Norris tnorris@eecs.umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project concerns the use of coherent optical and terahertz (THz)
              fields to control the phase and population of electrons, holes, and excitons in
              semiconductor quantum structures, including quantum wells and normal-mode
              microcavities. Coherent optical and single-cycle terahertz (THz) pulses will be
              generated by means of femtosecond lasers.  The combined use of optical and THz
              pulses opens up new possibilities for the generation and control of
              electron-hole wavepackets in semiconductors. Three general areas of research
              will be explored: (1) Coherent Control of Microcavities and Optical Analogies
              to Quantum Transport, (2) THz Emission from Excitonic Wavepackets, and (3) THz
              probes of Exciton and Polariton Dynamics.  These experiments will allow us to
              explore the semiconductor optical analogies to processes of great interest in
              other fields of physics, namely single-particle transport of electrons in
              quantum systems, and the generation of high harmonics in the ionization of
              atoms by short intense laser pulses. Graduate and undergraduate students as
              well as post doctoral research associates will participate in this
              research.
%%%
When light shines on a semiconductor material, electrons which
              are tightly bound to the atoms in the material are "freed up" to move
              throughout the semiconductor.  If the wavelength (color) of the optical
              excitation is chosen properly, these form states called "excitons" which behave
              in many ways analogously to a hydrogen atom. Over the past few decades, many
              optical experiments were performed to study the properties of these excitons. 
              With the recent advent of femtosecond laser technology, it has become possible
              to not only generate excitons, but to control them as well.  Our program will
              take a novel approach to the control of excitons, by using simultaneous optical
              and far-infrared (terahertz frequency) pulses to manipulate the electrons in
              the semiconductor. The basic science being investigated is important from a
              technological point of view, because the interface between high-speed
              (terahertz) electronics and optics is one of the fundamental problems which
              must be addressed for the further development of high-speed communications and
              computers.  This research will engage the collaboration of graduate and
              advanced undergraduate students and post doctoral research associates.  They
              will receive training in a contemporary forefront area of science and
              technology and thereby prepare them for entry into the scientific/technological
              workforce.
***



