Title       : Relationship Between Magma Recharge and Eruption Revealed Through In Situ
               Geochemical Fingerprinting and Crystal Size Distribution Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2001   
File        : a0073884

Award Number: 0073884
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126305             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Bohrson bohrson@geology.cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0073884
Bohrson

The process of magma recharge, which is intrusion of
              hotter magma into the base of a magma reservoir, is thought to be a catalyst
              for some volcanic eruptions.  Newly intruded and standing magma may mix, and by
              one of a number of mechanisms, vesiculation may occur.  Vesiculation leads to
              increased pressure in the magma reservoir, which, in turn, may lead to
              eruption.  Previous work suggests that the degree of explosivity of the
              eruption may be critically dependent on the rate of intrusion and volume of
              recharge magma: slow intrusion of relatively small volumes of recharge magma
              may lead to gentle eruption whereas rapid intrusion of relatively large volumes
              of recharge magma may cause explosive eruption.  These contrasting scenarios
              predict that the associated volcanic deposits may record differences in the
              extent and style of magma mixing and in the timing of recharge relative to
              eruption. The 1915 eruption of Lassen, a volcanic center located in
              northeastern California, is an extremely well-documented eruption in which
              recharge is hypothesized as the eruption catalyst.  For volcanic products of
              this eruption, the chemical fingerprint of magma mixing will be determined
              using in situ laser-ablation ICP-MS, and the location of formation,
              crystallization history, and residence times of crystals will be determined
              from crystal size distribution analysis.  Together, these data will reveal the
              timing of the recharge event relative to eruption and will also permit a
              description of the fluid dynamics of mixing in this reservoir.  Through studies
              such as this one, quantitative constraints on the timing between recharge and
              eruption and on the relationships among recharge rate, recharge volume and
              explosivity will emerge.  Such information will lead to enhanced understanding
              of dynamics and timing of volcanic eruptions.   

