Title       : Dissertation Research: Osteological Size and Shape Variation and the Evolution
               of Ossification Sequence in Ostariophysan Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0073267

Award Number: 0073267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9458               (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry Chernoff chernoff@fieldmuseum.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073267
Chernoff and Thomas
Current studies of the morphology of organisms
              emphasize the idea that changes in developmental processes are fundamental to
              differences in the shape, size, and form of related species.  A relatively
              simple shift in the timing of a developmental event can potentially result in
              striking morphological divergence between two related lineages.  This project,
              by graduate student Katherine Thomas under the direction of Dr. Barry Chernoff,
              seeks to investigate the relationship between developmental timing and
              morphological change by comparing skeletal development in four lineages of
              freshwater fishes.  The fish skeleton is composed of numerous spatially and
              functionally related bony elements, and an important event in the growth of
              each element is the time at which the bone begins to ossify (or take up calcium
              salts).  Thus, changes in the timing of ossification events may strongly
              influence adult morphology. 
	This study will document patterns of skeletal
              development in four fish species representing the major lineages within the
              superorder Ostariophysi, an assemblage of primarily freshwater fishes including
              catfishes, tetras, and their relatives.  The developmental times at which bones
              ossify will be recorded, and this information will be used to address the
              following three questions.  1) How variable is the relative timing of bone
              ossification among related species?  2) Do any sets of bones appear to be
              highly correlated among species in the time at which they ossify, suggesting
              strong functional or developmental associations among the elements of the set? 
              3) Is there a relationship between the developmental time at which a bone
              ossifies and its variation in size and shape?  Answering these questions will
              strengthen our knowledge of how changes in developmental patterns and processes
              mediate morphological diversification.

