Title       : Framework for Statistical Evaluation of Complex Computer Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0073952

Award Number: 0073952
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome Sacks sacks@niss.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat'l Inst. of Stat. Sci.
	      PO Box 14006
	      Research Triangle Pk, NC  277094006    919/685-9300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Though inherently a statistical issue, model evaluation lacks a unifying
              
statistical framework; this project supplies such. The foundation of the
              
framework is the use of Bayesian techniques to quantify the degree to 
which
              a model captures an underlying reality; develop theory and methods 
that allow
              dual use of data in both estimation of model inputs and 
evaluation of
              outputs; select evaluation functions, by which a model and 
reality are
              compared and through which flaws (causes of "invalidity") 
are found; and to
              design the collection of field and computer simulation 
data. The building of
              the framework relies on specific formulations of 
problems, motivated by
              testbed examples such as subsurface fluid flow 
models - where the computer
              model is deterministic but uncertainties are 
present in the model inputs and
              specifications - and traffic simulators 
- where the model is intrinsically
              stochastic, in addition to having 
uncertain inputs.  
  
Computer models
              are everywhere and evaluating their fidelity to reality 
is central to
              assessing their effectiveness in understanding real 
phenomena (such as flow
              of pollutants through soil and into groundwater) 
and predicting results of
              innovative technologies (such as new signal 
timing strategies to relieve
              traffic congestion in urban networks). This 
project develops a statistical
              structure and basis for such evaluations 
applicable across the scientific and
              technological landscape.  In the 
process, the project creates the ingredients
              for a virtual laboratory 
to disseminate results, broaden involvement of other
              researchers (and 
users), and establish a unique educational and training
              environment. 
