Title       : Ion Beam Fabrication and Modification of Nanoscale Structures and Devices with
               In Situ Feedback Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0073590

Award Number: 0073590
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $385000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jene A. Golovchenko Golovchenko@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This experimental condensed matter physics project focuses on the development of
              ion beam processing techniques to fabricate nanoscale structures in a
              controlled way. Nanoscale atomic scale flows of material will controlled by
              exposure to MeV heavy ion bombardment. New feedback controlled ion bombardment
              methods are used to control the size of nanopores in silicon nitride. The
              detailed atomic scale mechanism responsible for the observed modification of
              these nanopores is not understood and is an objective of this project. The
              tunneling based feedback control concept will be generalized to surface
              structures being exposed to high-energy ion fluxes. A goal is to fabricate
              lateral nanoscale electronic devices like tunnel junctions and room temperature
              single electron transistors. A potential application would be to electronically
              read DNA base sequences of a single molecule at kilo to megabase/second as the
              molecule moves through a nanopore structure. The project will train graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows in the art and science of nanofabrication.
              These cutting-edge skills will prepare the participants for modern careers in
              industry, academe, and government. 
%%%
This condensed matter physics project
              will study of the influence of energetic ion beams on the atomic scale
              structure of materials. Of interest are fundamental processes responsible for
              ion beam induced motions of atoms of an exposed material. Control over these
              motions can ultimately be used to fabricate electronic and mechanical devices
              of unprecedented small size and sensitivity. This could lead to fabrication of
              extremely small and sensitive electronic devices, capable of amplification,
              computation, or chemical sensing on the atomic scale. An exciting example of
              the latter would be a "DNA Transistor", capable of electronically reading the
              sequence of a single DNA molecule on a very short time scale. This will require
              the ability to 
fabricate solid state structures with articulated features on
              the length scale of 15 Angstroms. This research program will provide training
              of graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in an important area of
              nanoscience and technology, prepare them for careers in industry, government,
              and academe.


