Title       : POWRE: Gender Stereotypes and the Gender Gap: A New Look at Female-Male
               Negotiations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  2000      
File        : a0073682

Award Number: 0073682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74801              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura J. Kray   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1321,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to gain a better theoretical understanding of the role of
              gender stereotypes in promoting and sustaining the gender gap in negotiations. 
              The theoretical and methodological bases for this research are closely derived
              from research programs in social and cognitive psychology that have been
              developed by prominent researchers.  By adapting these theoretical arguments to
              the negotiation domain, a promising and relatively unexplored area of
              investigation is revealed.  The project will involve a series of controlled,
              experimental studies examining bargaining behavior between men and women.  The
              applied or practical aspect of this research is to develop negotiating
              strategies that level the playing field upon which male-female negotiations are
              conducted. 
 
This research is important and timely because a significant
              gender gap exists in terms of work pay and advancement across all income
              brackets.  For example, female professors earned on average 87.5 cents for
              every dollar earned by male professors in 1998.  In addition, women comprised
              43% of assistant professors at major research universities, but less than 14%
              of full professors.  In many fields, this salary and advancement differential
              is even wider.  Why does this gap exist?  One place to start examining its
              roots is at the bargaining table, where many critical, career-related issues
              are decided.  It may be the case that a woman and a man experience negotiations
              very differently based on a commonly shared awareness of "what it takes to
              succeed" at the bargaining table.  One widely held stereotype about women is
              that they are less effective negotiators than men.  For example, a typical
              negotiation scenario involves buying a new car.  Popular wisdom suggests that
              women bring a man with them to the dealership so that they are "taken
              seriously" and given a fair shake.  Indeed, evidence from one audit of new car
              dealerships reveals that salespeople quoted women significantly higher prices
              than men who used exactly the same scripted bargaining strategies as the women.
               But over and above any bias on the part of the dealer, does the woman carry an
              additional burden with her into the dealership, which is the fear that anything
              she says or does will be interpreted in light of this negative stereotype about
              her gender's negotiating ability?  If so, is it this burden that ultimately
              affects her bargaining success?  How can this burden be lifted to create gender
              equality at the bargaining table?

Funding for this project under the POWRE
              guidelines is justified because the project goals are so closely aligned with
              goal of the POWRE program, which is to increase the prominence and influence of
              women in scientific fields in which they are currently underrepresented. 
              Because the vast majority of tenured professors in business schools are white
              men (94%, according to one recent survey), and the investigator is just
              embarking on her tenure-track journey, facilitating her tenure pursuit will
              help to achieve this stated goal of the POWRE program.

