Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution of Female/Male Ratio in Gynodioecious Nemophila
               Menziesii
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0073550

Award Number: 0073550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6855               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Weller SGWELLER@UCI.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0073550
Weller & Barr

The appearance of females in hermaphroditic plant
              populations has been a puzzling evolutionary phenomenon because females would
              appear to suffer in gene transmission compared with hermaphrodites.  Another
              puzzle is that female frequencies can vary considerably over short distances
              and time scales.  In many species, sex is determined by an interaction between
              nuclear and cytoplasmic genes.  One mechanism that has been proposed to explain
              female frequency variation is repeated gene flow of cytoplasmic male sterility
              (female-causing) and nuclear male fertility restoring (hermaphrodite-causing)
              genes and a conflict of interest between these two genomic subsets.  This gene
              flow model will be tested with an annual plant, Nemophila menziesii, which
              shows considerable variation in female frequency.  An alternative hypothesis to
              gene flow, the effect of females on hermaphrodite fitness and how that affects
              female frequency dynamics, will also be investigated.  A third experiment is
              proposed to determine transmission genetics of nuclear restorer alleles. 
              Finally, the role of hybridization leading to the appearance of females on a
              large geographic scale will be examined.

Theoretical work has shown that
              genomic conflicts may be the cause of a large array of evolutionary phenomena.
              Cytoplasmic male sterility is one of the best studied genomic conflicts largely
              because of its use in agricultural hybrid seed production. However, outside of
              work on few model systems, the dynamics of genomic conflicts affecting sex
              ratios in natural systems has not been established.  This study of Nemophila
              menziesii will test new models and tie in previous work with genomic conflict
              theory.  The genetics of cytoplasmic male sterility will also be investigated. 
              Finally, the regional sex ratio variation seen in N. menziesii is a unique
              feature that allows for an examination of large-scale sex ratio
              processes.



