Title       : A Dominating-Set-Based Routing Scheme in Ad Hoc Wireless Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2002     
File        : a0073736

Award Number: 0073736
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jie Wu jie@cse.fau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida Atlantic Univ
	      777 Glades Road
	      Boca Raton, FL  334310991    305/393-3000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Recent advances in technology have provided portable computers with
              wireless interfaces that
allow networked communication among mobile users. 
              The resulting computing environment, which
is often referred to as mobile
              computing, no longer requires users to maintain a fixed and universally
known
              position in the network and enables almost unrestricted mobility.  An ad hoc
              wireless
network is a special type of wireless mobile network in which a
              collection of mobile hosts with
wireless network interfaces may form a
              temporary network, without the aid of any established
infrastructure or
              centralized administration.
     Efficient routing among a set of mobile hosts
              (also called nodes) is one of the most important
functions in ad hoc wireless
              networks.  Routing based on a connected dominating set is a
              promising
approach, where the search space for a route is reduced to the nodes
              in the set.  A set is dominating if
all the nodes in the system are either in
              the set or are neighbors of nodes in the set.  In this proposal,
the
              researchers study a simple and efficient distributed algorithm for calculating
              a connected dominating set
in an ad hoc wireless network, where connections of
              nodes are determined by their geographical
distances and the corresponding
              graph is called a unit graph.  A reduced graph is then induced
from the
              connected dominating set and the routing process is restricted to this reduced
              graph.  The researcher's preliminary results on random unit graphs are very
              promising in generating a small reduced graph in a way faster than existing
              methods.
     The goals of the proposed research are: (1) Enhance the process
              (also called the marking
process) of determining a connected dominating set of
              a unit graph.  (2) Complete the update/re-
calculation algorithm for the
              connected dominating set when the topology of the ad hoc wireless
network
              changes dynamically.  (3) Extend the proposed approach to a hierarchical
              structure, where
the marking process is applied on the reduced graph to
              generate a reduced graph of the reduced
graph.   The hierarchical structure is
              obtained by applying the marking process iteratively.  (4) Select
an
              appropriate routing protocol for the reduced graph.  This scheme could be a
              proactive routing
(such as various extended link state and distance vector
              routing protocols), a reactive routing (also
called on demand), or a
              combination of both.  (5) Explore the possibility of combining dominating
set
              information and location information provided by a Global Positioning System
              (GPS) to derive
a better routing scheme.  (6) Integrate different components
              and fine tune the system through an
empirical study based on a set of
              well-defined quantitative performance metrics.

