Title       : Dissertation Research: Causes and Consequences of Hybridization in California
               and Gambel's Quail (Callipepla californica and C. Gambelii)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a0073271

Award Number: 0073271
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Rosemary Grant rgrant@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0073271
Grant & Gee

This study will investigate the causes and consequences
              of hybridization, the interbreeding of different species, in Gambel's and
              California Quail (the California State Bird). The consequences of hybridization
              range from extinction of one hybridizing species, when one species genetically
              swmps out the other, to the formation of an entirely new species. The outcome
              of hybridization depends on two factors, 1) the frequency of interbreeding
              between individuals, and 2) the survival and successful reproduction of hybrid
              offspring. This study will therefore explore what conditions lead to
              interbreeding between Gambel's and California Quail. Further, this study will
              compare the number of young born to interbreeding quail versus the number born
              to same-species pairs, and it will compare the survival of those hybrid and
              pure-species offspring. This current picture of hybrid survival will be paired
              with an investigation of the historical pattern of gene exchange between quail
              types, which will be accomplished by examining DNA sampled extensively through
              each quail range.

Although low rates of hybridization are widespread in
              nature, its incidence may be increasing due to human landuse patterns. This
              human-caused increase in hybridization may be contributing to species
              extinction, making further research of hybridization increasingly important.
              This study will strengthen our understanding of the factors responsible for
              interbreeding between individuals, gene flow between species, and ultimately,
              speciation and extinction through hybridization.




