Title       : Research in Robust and Efficient Computational Methods for Partial Differential
               Equations Arising in Fluid Flows and Electromagnetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0073698

Award Number: 0073698
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103089             (Estimated)
Investigator: George S. Dulikravich gsd@mae.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pavel B. Bochev  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project is directed towards the development, analysis and numerical
              
validation of new finite element methods for fluid flows and
              
electromagnetics.  The research in methods for fluid flows will focus on
              
applications of nonstandard least-squares principles in the construction
of
              the numerical algorithms.  While for incompressible viscous flows
              
conventional least-squares principles have established themselves as a
              
viable alternative to mixed Galerkin methods, such principles are not
              
completely satisfactory in the context of high Re or transonic flows.  To
              
circumvent existing computational defects of L2-norm methods such as
              
sensitivity to singularities, lack of norm equivalence and etc., the new
              
algorithms will be based on mesh-dependent and negative-norm least-squares
              
principles.  The emphasis of the second research direction will be on eddy
              
current computations in three dimensions.  To address computational
              
complexity of 3D simulations algorithms will use equivalent potential
              
formulations of the governing equations.  The issue of proper gauge
              
selection for the potentials will receive a thorough and systematic
              
examination so as to ensure well-posed sets of differential equations. 
              
Algorithmic development will pay special attention to the efficient
              
implementation of the relevant boundary and interface conditions where
              
least-squares terms will be used to enforce these conditions
              weakly.



The common thread which links the two principal research
              directions of
this project is the focus on new computational algorithms for
              partial 
differential equations.  Such equations arise in virtually every
              field of 
science and engineering and their efficient numerical solution is
              critical 
for our ability to conduct computer simulations of physical
              processes 
ranging from atmospheric motions to flows of current in
              superconductors.  
As a result, development of high performance computational
              tools which 
enable realistic simulations will play an increasingly important
              role for 
the future advances in science and technology.  The impact of such
              
computational algorithms will be felt not only in terms of tremendous cost
              
and/or time savings made possible by replacing field experiments by
              
virtual, computer experiments, but also by the fact that in some instances
              
computer models may be the only feasible design approach.  In the focus of
              
this project is the development of such tools for differential equations
              
arising in modeling of fluid flows and electromagnetic fields.  Two
              
specific applications that we have in mind are computation of
              
three-dimensional eddy currents and simulations of transonic and high
              
Reynolds number flows.  One motivation for our research is the practical
              
relevance of these problems.  For instance, solution of the eddy current
              
equations arises in such varied areas as development of toroidal field
              
magnets for fusion power, modeling of plasma physics phenomena, and design
              
of tape heads, while transonic and high Re flows are relevant to design of
              
aircraft and modeling of dispersion of pollutants.  At the same time
              
numerical solution of these problems in realistic three-dimensional
              
settings continues to be an outstanding and challenging computational
task.
              Thus, our research is also motivated by the real and existing need to 
develop
              efficient and robust computational tools for electromagnetics and 
fluid flow
              applications which can be used in such realistic settings.


