Title       : Localized Approach to Quality-of-Service Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2000       
File        : a0073819

Award Number: 0073819
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299919             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi-Li Zhang zhzhang@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Quality-of-Service (QoS) routing is an important traffic engineering
              mechanism for providing requisite services for many emerging applications on
              the Internet.  In QoS routing, paths for flows are selected based upon
              knowledge of the resource availability (referred to as QoS State) at network
              nodes (i.e., routers) and the QoS requirements of the flows.  It is expected
              that QoS routing will choose, among the many possible choices, a path that has
              sufficient resources to accommodate the QoS requirement of a given flow. 
              Because of its awareness of the network QoS state, QoS routing, if done
              appropriately, can significantly improve network throughput.
     In this
              proposal, the researchers present a novel approach to QoS routing -the
              localized QoS routing approach.  Unlike the conventional global QoS routing
              approach that requires network-wide exchange of QoS states among routers, the
              proposed localized routing approach attempts to infer the network QoS state
              from locally collected flow statistics such as flow arrival/departure rates and
              flow blocking probabilities, and performs path selection based on this local
              information.  As a result, the proposed localized QoS routing approach avoids
              the drawbacks of the conventional global QoS approach such as degraded
              performance in the presence of inaccurate routing information.  Furthermore, it
              has the advantage of minimal communication overhead, no processing overhead at
              core routers, and easy deployability.
     The researchers propose to study
              and develop localized QoS routing algorithms using a novel adaptive
              proportional routing framework.  Adaptive proportional routing exploits the
              inherent randomness in path selection by proportioning flows among multiple
              paths between a source and a destination.  Flow proportions are determined
              based on the perceived quality of these paths, and are dynamically adjusted in
              response to the changing network conditions.  Using adaptive proportional
              routing framework, the researchers will focus on the following aspects of their
              localized QoS routing approach.
     Theoretical Foundations:  The researchers
              plan to develop theoretical models under which the behavior of localized QoS
              routing can be studied and analyzed.  Their insights will then be used to guide
              the design of practical schemes.
     Proportional Source Routing:  The
              researchers will develop proportional source routing schemes using local flow
              statistics collected either at route-level or link-level.  Through theoretical
              analysis and simulations, the researchers will study the adaptivity and
              stability of these schemes.
     Proportional Next-hop Routing:  The
              researchers also will explore applicability of localized adaptive proportional
              routing to hop-by-hop path selection and will develop proportional next-hop
              flow routing schemes using locally gathered aggregate flow statistics.
    
              Hierarchical Proportional Routing:  The researchers plan to study methods for
              topology and QoS state aggregation using the localized adaptive proportional
              routing framework, and to develop hierarchical proportional routing schemes
              using a combination of proportional source routing and proportional next-hop
              routing.
     Proportional Hybrid Routing:  The researchers will develop
              hybrid QoS routing schemes that 1) combine infrequent global QoS update
              mechanisms and localized flow proportioning methods, and 2) integrate on-line
              path selection with off-line traffic engineering/flow placement. The
              fundamental trade-off between the system overhead, the time scale of control
              and the system performance will be investigated in these contexts.
    
              Implementation:   The researchers plan to implement the proposed localized QoS
              routing schemes in a testbed.  They will measure the performance and processing
              overhead of these schemes under real traffic settings.
     The deliverables
              from the research effort will include journal and conference publications,
              technical reports and memorandums, Internet Drafts, and software prototype
              implementation.

