Title       : Compiler Optimizations for Limited Memory Embedded Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  2000  
File        : a0073512

Award Number: 0073512
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mukesh Singhal                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260093             (Estimated)
Investigator: Santosh Pande   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 2876,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Embedded systems are widely used in a variety of applications which involve
              ubiquitous computing. Due to small form factors (such as in hand-held devices)
              and other application needs, embedded systems are characterized  by limited
              resources such as the computing power and memory. In addition the application
              needs demand real time performance requirements and low power consumption.
              High-level languages such as C, C++ or Embedded Java are replacing assembly
              language in programming embedded systems due to the complexity of modern
              application domains that need to be mapped. This can however incur a code size
              and performance penalty due to the semantic gap between the high level
              languages and the underlying embedded instruction set architecture. This is
              where the role of compiler optimizations becomes critical.These optimizations
              are a must (and not optional) since available resources on embedded systems are
              quite limited and unless applications are optimized they may not even fit the
              available resources (such as the memory). 

The focus of this proposal is to
              devise compiler optimizations for embedded systems to maximally use the limited
              resources such as the available amount of on-chip and off-chip memory. We first
              propose compiler optimizations  for data and code segments of embedded software
              for size and speed given the constraints on limited on-chip memory and
              addressing modes. Since local resources are very limited on these processors
              and since the embedded devices typically form a part of bigger systems in the
              form of sensors, actuators etc., they are often networked.   In such a
              networked environment, data and code are down-loaded on an embedded device
              just-in-time from a server and then executed. A very important issue is then
              how to dynamically optimize codes that are down-loaded  on to an embedded
              device just-in-time.  Since local resources are very scarce, such dynamic
              optimizations prove immensely useful. This is the second set of topics we
              address in the proposal. 

We anticipate that these optimizations could not
              only improve performance of existing applications mapped on these systems but
              could also allow mapping new application domains on them by satisfying their
              resource constraints.
