Title       : Research in Algebraic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0073760

Award Number: 0073760
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81590              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Wachs wachs@math.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT:

The PI  continues her current research in algebraic  combinatorics,
              focusing on topological and algebraic aspects of partially ordered sets and
              graph complexes.  This involves further development of powerful tools such as
              shellability and fiber theorems.  Such tools have been used and enhanced by the
              PI and her collaborators for the purpose of studying some important examples
              which include partially ordered sets related to the partition lattice and graph
              complexes related to the matching complex.  The  study  of topological aspects
              of partially ordered sets grew out of the famous 1964  paper of Rota on the
              Moebius function of a partially ordered set.  It provides a deep and
              fundamental link between combinatorics and other branches of mathematics such
              as topology, algebra and geometry.  It also has applications in computer
              science.  Research in complexity theory, knot theory, group theory and discrete
              geometry has inspired interest in studying the topology of graph complexes, a
              subject closely related to the topology of  partially ordered sets.

This
              research is in the general area of combinatorics.  One of the goals of
              combinatorics is to find efficient methods for arranging, enumerating and
              manipulating discrete collections of objects.  The behavior of discrete systems
              is extremely important to modern communications and computer systems.  For
              example, the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone
              systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete
              sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial research. 

