Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Examination of Novel Wing Morphology and
               Function in Mechanical Sound Producing Piprids (Aves: Pipridae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0073289

Award Number: 0073289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard O. Prum prum@ku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073289
Prum and Bostwick
	The Neotropical manakins are a family of ca. 40
              species of birds located in
Central and South America.  Male manakins are
              strikingly colored, and perform elaborate courtship displays for females.  One
              unusual aspect of manakin behavior is the propensity of males to use wing
              sounds in their displays.  Relative to vocal sounds, these "mechanical sounds"
              are rare among birds.  However, in manakins the hypothesized relationships
              between the species (the phylogeny), together with details about the mechanical
              sounds themselves (when they are produced during displays, and with which part
              of the wing, etc.) indicate wing sounds have evolved multiple times within the
              family.  In fact, at least three lineages, Manacini, Ilicurini, and Piprini,
              independently evolved the ability to produce distinct mechanical wing sounds in
              courtship displays.
	Graduate student Kimberly Bostwick, with direction from
              adviser Dr. Richard Prum, is studying morphological and behavioral features of
              this mechanical sound production and its evolution in Pipridae birds.
              Specifically, the project will consider: (1) how the morphology of the wing
              (the form of the bones, muscles, and feathers) has evolved relative to
              non-mechanical sound producing birds, and whether it varies between the three
              mechanical sound-producing lineages, (2) how, behaviorally and physically, the
              modified morphology is functioning in living birds to produce the wing sounds,
              and (3) how the morphology, functioning of the wing, and acoustics of the
              mechanical sounds have evolved through time within the three different
              lineages.  Classical anatomical description will be combined with field
              video-recording and modern comparative phylogenetic methods to shed light on
              these questions.  Given that the wing sounds are used in courtship displays in
              which males compete with one another to mate with females, the resultant
              character evolution (behavioral, morphological, and functional) is likely to be
              in response to the selection of male displays by females.  Thus, the research
              addresses how sexual selection via
female choice has led to morphological
              diversity in the manakins.

