Title       : FRG: Fullerene Nanotube Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0073046

Award Number: 0073046
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3739180            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Smalley res@cnst.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Fred Wudl  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Tour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Heath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J Fraser Stoddart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1682,1762,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this Focused Research Group proposal will develop the molecular
              science of fullerene nanotubes.  These new materials have been hailed for their
              materials properties and the applications that these properties promise.  The
              single greatest impediment to realizing this promise is the current poverty of
              chemical approaches for manipulating the tubes as individual molecules. 
              Single-walled nanotubes (swnts) are truly molecular entities, owing to their
              high degree of structural perfection, but the molecular science of manipulating
              them in the sense that chemists manipulate other molecules is still quite
              embryonic.  These manipulations include solubilization, covalent derivatization
              of tube ends and sides, sorting by length, electrical type, and diameter,
              assembly, cutting, and synthesis of tubes of specific helicity.  These are the
              tasks that comprise the basis of nanotube manipulation, and are central
              technologies in the realization of the promise of swnt.  One particular aim
              will be to develop a variety of strategies to solubilizing nanotubes in various
              solvents, including water, by supramolecular routes.   Associations of swnts
              with other molecules will be designed - e.g., polymers or large macrocyclic
              compounds - both for solubilizing the tubes and for assembling them without
              making any covalent attachment to their sides, thus preserving fully their
              intrinsic materials properties.  Sorting tubes by length, type, and diameter
              will be crucial to fulfilling hopes of using nanotubes as wires in molecular
              electronics.  Crude separations by length and diameter have begun, but cleaner,
              scalable chromatographic and electrophoretic methods are needed.  Sorting by
              electrical type will be approached by exploiting their different electrical and
              magnetic properties(e.g., using electrophoresis, electrochemistry, and electric
              or magnetic field gradients), as well as their structural differences to
              derivatize selectively by type.  

A grand challenge is to synthesize tubes
              of a given electrical type.  The plan is to utilize seed crystals of a
              particular type, (separated by methods developed as part of the proposed work),
              and use covalent chemistry at the end to assemble a catalyst for growth there. 
              This challenge will make demands on several of the other goals, providing both
              a rich driving force, and, if successful, a remarkable new materials science
              with far-reaching technological impact.
%%%
This Focused Research Group
              project will have a major impact in a fast-breaking area focused on the
              development of the molecular science of fullerene nanotubes.  The research is
              highly synergistic, multidisciplinary, high-risk and high-impact, with a
              significant probability for technological payoff in areas that include
              molecular electronics and high performance composites.  This team of
              intrnationally renown experts is being jointly supported by The Office of
              Mulitdisciplinary Affairs, The Division of Materials Research and The Chemistry
              Division of The Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate, and by the
              Division of Chemical and Transport Systems of The Engineering Directorate.

