Title       : Mineralogical Applications of Transmission Electron Microscopy and
               Energy-Filtered TEM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0073955

Award Number: 0073955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $437985             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Veblen dveblen@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Veblen
EAR-0073955

This proposal is a renewal of a previous research program
              that involved applications of transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and
              ancillary techniques to problems important to the fields of mineralogy,
              petrology, and geochemistry.  In this renewal, several diverse projects are
              proposed with an underlying thread of trying to understand the crystal
              chemistry of minerals and their reactions at the sub-nanometer scale.  These
              projects will make use of a new NSF-supported, 300-kV TEM with a field-emission
              gun, an instrument that has excellent resolution for normal high-resolution TEM
              experiments and has revolutionized our chemical capabilities. The primary
              emphasis of the work proposed will be the exploration of how these new
              analytical capabilities can be applied to mineralogy and geology, as
              applications of this technique to the earth sciences so far have been largely
              unexplored.  It is proposed to attempt direct chemical analysis of a number of
              mineral microstructures that are in the size range of less than one to a few
              unit cells.  These include stacking faults, twin planes, and antiphase
              boundaries in pyroxenes and other minerals; the C domains in calcian dolomite;
              the fine-scale chemical modulations associated with spinodal decompositions in
              pyroxenes and feldspars; and Guinier-Preston zones that form during kinetically
              arrested exsolution in chain silicates. In addition, efforts to achieve
              quantification using these new analytical methods will be continued.  Other
              projects to be pursued include explorations of structural disorder and chemical
              variation in newly synthesized, Na- and K-bearing, high-pressure pyriboles that
              contain alternating single and double silicate chains; of possible
              relationships between chemical composition and superstructures in the sulfides
              bornite and digenite; of order-disorder relationships in hibonite and other
              minerals of the magnetoplumbite group.

