Title       : Dissertation Research: Artocarpus Phylogenetics and Conservation, Taxonomy and
               Biogeography of Breadfruit (Artocarpus altilis)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0073161

Award Number: 0073161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Motley tmotley@nybg.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073161
Motley and Conard
	The genus Artocarpus is a member of the fig and
              mulberry family (Moraceae). It consists of approximately 50 tree species all
              native to the tropics of Southeast Asia and the Pacific. Many of the species
              are cultivated on a local level for their timber, fruit, or seeds. Two species,
              breadfruit, A. altilis and jackfruit, A. heterophyllus, are important crops
              throughout the tropics. Despite the economic and subsistence significance of
              this group of plants, the evolutionary relationships among them remain unclear.
              Graduate student Nyree Conard, under the direction of Dr. Timothy Motley, is
              investigating these relationships, including morphological features as well as
              DNA sequences from all of the species, to create a phylogeny or
"family tree"
              of the genus. The phylogeny will be useful for identifying
close relatives of
              the cultivated species in the genus and for setting an
evolutionary framework
              for more detailed species level studies such as conservation and germplasm work
              on breadfruit.
Breadfruit is a traditional staple crop in the Pacific Islands
              where it has been cultivated and improved upon by human selection for millennia
              so that today hundreds of seedless and seeded varieties exist. Although the
              entire tree has uses, it is primarily harvested for either its starchy fruit or
              proteinaceous seeds. In the late 16th century European explorers
              began
travelling to the Pacific Islands and wrote accounts of breadfruit. At
              this
point in time, it was already being widely cultivated throughout
              Oceania
(Melanesia, Micronesia, Polynesia) and the Europeans soon realized
              how
useful the tree was and began distributing it to colonies throughout
              the
tropics. Although its native region is known to be somewhere in Oceania,
              its
precise center of origin and its subsequent human-facilitated
              dispersal
route through the Pacific is unclear. Additionally, the taxonomy of
              breadfruit is controversial with one to three different species of
breadfruit
              being recognized and possible hybrids existing. By using DNA
fingerprinting
              techniques, relationships among varieties from different
Pacific Island groups
              will be assessed to address the issues of origin,
human-facilitated dispersal
              routes, and taxonomy. In addition to providing
insight into human migrations
              in the Pacific, the fingerprinting data will
also be used to help manage
              living breadfruit germplasm collections so that
their genetic diversity can be
              most effectively utilized and conserved. 


