Title       : Novel Biodegradable Polymer and Hydroxyapatite Structures with Controlled
               Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0073586

Award Number: 0073586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kacey G. Marra   (Principal Investigator current)
              Toby M. Chapman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Prashant N. Kumta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The proposal focuses on the fundamental aspects of synthesizing polymer/ceramic
              composites with a well-characterized interface.  Three routes are proposed
              representing a controlled increase in the expected level of interaction between
              the polymer and the ceramic:  1. Physical or chemical adsorption, 2. In situ
              precipitation of hydroxyapatite (HA), within the polymer backbone and, 3.
              Chemically bonding HA with the polymer network.  In case 1, the HA will be
              mechanically mixed in a solution of the dissolved polymer followed by
              evaporation of the solvent.  The polymers selected for this study will be
              polycaprolactone (PCL), and poly (lactic-co-gylcolic acid) (PLGA), as well
              blends of these polymers.  Additionally, commercial HA as well as synthesized
              HA will be incorporated to study the effect of the morphology of HA on
              mechanical strength.  In case 2, HA will be chemically synthesized in the
              presence of the polymer in a solvent medium suitable for solvation of the
              polymer.  This particular synthetic protocol will provide a better molecular
              mixing of HA in comparison to case 1 and lead to chemisorbed species. 
              Polycaprolactone will be examined as preliminary results with PCL and HA
              indicate an in situ formaiton is viable.  In case 3, novel dendrimers will be
              synthesized and a chemical reaction will be initiated between the calcium and
              phosphorous between the polymer and HA.  Dendrimers with terminal amino groups
              such as poly(L-lysine) can be derivatized by amide formation with glycolates
              giving terminal alcohols.  These terminal functional groups attached to the
              dendrimer can serve as bridging sites for attachment of reactive calcium and
              phosphate alkoxy groups that can polymerize to form HA.  This process will
              provide a unique way to covalently bond HA to a polymer.  The above three
              methods provide a novel way of synthesizing polymer/ceramic composites with
              controlled interfacial polymer/ceramic interface using spectorscopy, x-ray,
              high-resolution electron microscopy, thermal analyses and mechanical
              testing.

The results from the present studies should have an impact on the
              synthesis, control of interface structure, and design of polymer/ceramic
              composites.  If successful, this project will enhance the understanding of the
              in situ synthesis within a polymeric 
Or dendrimeric network.  Thus the
              synthetic processes developed here will form the basis of generating new
              composite materials that could be used for a number of engineering
              applications, including tissue engineering.

