Title       : Collaborative Research on High Bit-Rate Communication: From Mathematical
               Development to Fiber Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0073923

Award Number: 0073923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $927779             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Jones   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan S. Hesthaven  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0073923
Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative Research
              on High Bit-Rate Communication - From Mathematical Development to Fiber
              Design


Abstract

0073923  Jones


This project will focus on the
              development of mathematical and computational techniques for addressing the
              critical issues of optical fiber communication technology.  The modeling and
              methods will be aimed at the more efficient use of fiber bandwidth.  It will
              include both single channel and Wavelength Division Multiplexing techniques. 
              The group will develop methods for the investigation of theoretical models of
              the main fiber optics technologies.  This includes the emerging techniques of
              dispersion compensation, distributed amplification, wavelength division
              multiplexing, and uses of the newly developed dispersion-profiled fiber.  Also
              to be investigated will be the influence of dispersion management on four-wave
              interactions and therefore on the stability of bit-patterns in multi-channel
              systems.  Each of these methods involves, in some way, the spatial management
              of dispersion and other physical effects.  In general, this leads to an
              inhomogeneous evolutionary partial differential equation with rapidly varying
              coefficients.  Much of the mathematical and computational theory will be aimed
              at a deeper understanding of these equations and their properties within the
              specific context of optical transmission.  An emphasis will be placed on the
              averaging theory, stabilization of pulses and pulse interactions.
              

Increasing the bit-rate in optical fiber communications is a challenge that
              is both scientifically exciting and technologically imperative.  An objective
              of this project will be to take the involvement of mathematical investigations
              in improving the efficacy of optical communications to a new level. We shall
              intertwine the development of the underlying mathematics, numerical techniques
              and the practical, experimental implementation of new scenarios through a group
              effort that involves representatives from academia, government laboratories and
              industry.  The development of new mathematical and computational techniques is
              crucial for the both the formulation of new strategies and their initial
              evaluation.  This effort will take the methods of modern applied mathematics
              into the fiber optics engineering community.  It will pave the road for further
              interactions between applied mathematicians and electrical engineers and
              promises to make the field of optical communications even more vigorous.  At
              the same time, the work will stimulate new areas of applied mathematics, such
              as the study of averaging methods for strongly inhomogeneous partial
              differential equations, stability and interaction of pulses, and development of
              effective computational methods for rapidly varying systems.


