Title       : Collaborative Research: Energy-Constrained Geochemical Models for Open System
               Magma Bodies with Anatexis, Replenishment, Magma Mixing and Fractional
               Crystallization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  2001   
File        : a0073883

Award Number: 0073883
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wendy A. Bohrson bohrson@geology.cwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Central Washington Univ
	      400 E. 8th AVE
	      Ellensburg, WA  98926    509/963-2111

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bohrson
EAR-0073883

Existing tools that model the geochemical evolution of
              open-system magma bodies suffer from several limitations, the most critical of
              which are lack of accounting of energy-conservation and lack of inclusion of
              the consequences of wallrock partial melting. A new tool will be developed,
              called Energy-Constrained Recharge Assimilation Fractional Crystallization
              (EC-RAFC), that models the geochemical evolution of a magma body-wallrock
              system. A user-friendly EC-RAFC computer code, written in Visual Basic, will be
              developed in which energy, mass and species are conserved as magma undergoes,
              fractional crystallization, magma recharge, and assimilation of partially
              melted wallrock. Input parameters include thermal and chemical characteristics
              of the magma body, wallrock, and replenishment magma.  The EC-RAFC model will
              couple phase equilibria and thermochemical constraints by incorporating
              information from melt productivity functions fa (Ta) and fm(Tm) for
              user-defined compositions of initial magma, wallrock and replenishment magma.
              The EC-RAFC computer code will also allow for the development and maintenance
              of compositionally distinct melt reservoirs within an EC-RAFC magma body, thus
              enabling application of EC-RAFC to zoned ignimbrites. A critical component of
              this project is development of code capability that can model melt extraction
              efficiency that is less than unity so that mass and energy addition can be
              decoupled. Application of the EC-RAFC simulator to a number of well-documented
              magmatic systems spanning a range of geologic environments will allow
              exploration of the potential systematics that exist in the relative roles of
              fractional crystallization, recharge and assimilation in magma bodies from
              particular tectonic-magmatic settings (e.g., MOR, continental arcs). This
              research has the potential to impact the work of the large number of
              geoscientists who generate and interpret geochemical, geochronological,
              petrographic and petrologic data from extant and ancient magmatic systems and
              will parallel the dramatic improvement in the amount and quality of geochemical
              data describing magmatic systems. 



