Title       : Pb and U Elemental and Isotopic Fractionation in Radiation-Damaged Zircon:
               Implications for Low-Temperature Discordance Mechanisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0073602

Award Number: 0073602
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64747              (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Mattinson jmm@magic.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0073602
Mattinson

This proposal requests support for investigation of a
              newly recognized behavior of Pb and U isotopes in the mineral zircon.  The U-Pb
              system in zircon is widely used to determine the ages of geologic events, and
              fully understanding the system's behavior is required for accurate
              interpretation of measured ages.  Loss of Pb from zircons produces "discordant"
              ages which can be accurately extrapolated to the "true" age only if the Pb loss
              mechanism is fully understood.  Recent experiments reveal that loss of Pb
              related to low-temperature fluid leaching of naturally radiation-damaged zircon
              can be accompanied by isotopic fractionation of the Pb and also U isotopes. 
              The isotopic fractionation of Pb is contrary to previously accepted ideas about
              Pb loss from zircons, and calls into question some important assumptions used
              in interpreting U-Pb age data.  Understanding of this fractionation and Pb loss
              behavior is important in obtaining accurate ages from discordant zircon U-Pb
              data.  The proposed research will combine zircon analysis by a series of
              partial dissolution steps, with annealing of the zircons at a range of
              temperatures prior to dissolution.  The annealing partially to totally repairs
              the natural radiation damage, allowing detailed understanding of the exact role
              of the radiation damage in the loss of Pb from the system.  Detailed study
              (electron microprobe and scanning electron microscope) of the chemical zoning
              within individual zircon grains, and of the possible pathways by which fluids
              gain access to the interiors of zircon grains, will help us better understand
              interactions of fluids with zircons on the intra-grain level, and the role of
              these fluids in U-Pb discordance.

