Title       : Rejection of Disturbances with Uncertain Spectra: Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a0073302

Award Number: 0073302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186581             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pierre T. Kabamba kabamba@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Semyon M. Meerkov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
P.I: Pierre T. Kabamba, Department of Aerospace Engineering
Co P.I: Semyon M.
              Meerkov, Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science
University
              of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI

Proposal Number:  0073302
Title:  Rejection of
              Disturbances with Uncertain Spectra: Theory and
Applications
Project
              Abstract
The objectives of this project are to develop novel, specialized
              analytical tools for analysis and design of control systems that are robust
              with respect to disturbance model uncertainty, and to demonstrate their
              applicability in industrial situations.  Disturbance rejection is a pervasive
              problem in control systems engineering, and our previous work has highlighted
              the importance of uncertainty in disturbance models.  Among others, the
              following problems will be addressed:
1.	Rejection of disturbances with
              uncertain spectra in systems with saturated actuators.
2.	Investigation of
              performance measures other than variance (e.g., l-infinity norm) and
              disturbance models other than colored noise (e.g., a train of delta-functions
              with uncertain inter-arrival time).
3.	Application of the results obtained to
              analysis and design of controllers in the aerospace (in co-operation with
              Boeing) and automotive (in co-operation with Ford) industries.

The approach
              of the research is based on (a) a functional equation, that could be viewed as
              converse of the standard spectral factorization Lemma and (b) the method of
              stochastic linearization, that allows analysis and design of nonlinear systems
              driven by random inputs.
The work is planned as follows: Problem 1 will be
              addressed the first year, problem 2 during the second and third year, and
              problem 3 will be underlying our work throughout.
The impact of the research
              is in providing the control engineer with an analytical methodology for
              analysis and design of controllers that are robust with respect to
              uncertainties in the disturbance model. While such analysis is typically
              carried out today by simulations, the availability of the analytical tools to
              be developed will provide a useful alternative.



