Title       : POWRE: Tracing the Source of Phosphorus Using Oxygen Isotopic Ratios
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0073851

Award Number: 0073851
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael A. Mayhew                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yang Wang ywang@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0073851
Wang

Phosphorus plays a decisive role in the biological world and is
              a limiting-nutrient in many fresh water ecosystems.  However, the widespread
              use of synthetic fertilizers over the past decades has disrupted that balance. 
              The high phosphorus loading due to human activities has been blamed for
              upsetting ecosystems by causing harmful algal blooms in lakes and rivers as
              well as in coastal waters.  An increased phosphorus influx has also been linked
              to changes in native flora and fauna in many wetland ecosystems.  Determining
              the source of phosphorus can help in understanding the cycling and
              transformation of phosphorus in aquatic environments.  The goal of this
              research is to explore whether the oxygen isotope O-18 can be used as a tracer
              to distinguish "fertilizer" phosphate from "natural" phosphate.  This will
              involve (1) analyzing the stable oxygen isotopic composition of fertilizers,
              and (2) sampling and analyzing the delta O-18 values of dissolved phosphate in
              unpolluted aquatic systems.  The working hypothesis of this study is that
              phosphate in fertilizers is primarily derived from marine phosphate and should
              have delta O-18 values reflecting the marine environment.  Because fresh water
              (in general) is depleted in O-18 relative to seawater, phosphate from the
              natural phosphorus cycling in fresh water ecosystems is expected to carry delta
              O-18 signature distinct from the phosphate in fertilizers.  This project
              represents a new research direction for the principle investigator (PI).  The
              support from a POWRE award will allow the PI to develop the necessary
              preliminary results for a promising avenue of research in the biogeochemical
              cycling of phosphorus.  Since the PI is a tenure-earning assistant professor,
              the POWRE support will help her establish an active research program on campus
              that will involve students, assist in her academic advancement and strengthen
              her case for promotion to associate professor.  Also, it will allow her to play
              a key role in the multi-departmental efforts involving the Departments of
              Geological Sciences, Oceanography, Chemistry and Biology at Florida State
              University (FSU) and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory to develop a
              strong graduate program in Molecular Ecology and Environmental Science at
              FSU.

