Title       : Composition Patterns in Nucleotide Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a0073081

Award Number: 0073081
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289327             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Benson benson@camelot.biomath.mssm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mt Sinai School of Medicin
	      One Gustave L. Levy Place
	      New York, NY  100296504    /   -

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PI:  Gary Benson
Proposal Number: 0073081
Institution:  Mt. Sinai School of
              Medicine

Project Summary

This project is an investigation of
              computational problems that arise for a new type of discrete pattern in DNA
              sequences, the composition pattern.
Composition is a vector quantity
              describing the frequency of occurrence of each alphabet letter in a particular
              string. Let S be a string over E.Then, C (S) =(f1; f2; pH j _ j) is the
              composition of S, wherefore 2 _, fi is the fraction of the characters in S that
              are i. A composition pattern is a string P = r1r2 _ _ _ rp, where RI represents
              a composition region i.e. a substring of homogenous composition which differs
              from that of its surrounding regions. Note that the order of letters in RI is
              irrelevant, as it has no effect on the composition of RI. To date, algorithms
              which characterize DNA functional sites have concentrated primarily on
              identifying what this proposal terms position-specific patterns, such as the
              consensus sequence or the
more flexible, but less specific weight matrix based
              pattern profile. Unfortunately, position-specific patterns are usually not
              selective enough to distinguish actual occurrences of a feature from false
              positives. Too often, when these patterns are used to search for unknown
              matches, one to several orders of magnitude more false positives than true
              positives are obtained. The composition pattern is a new approach which
              embraces an important physical property, the potential for variation in
              structural conformation (shape) of the DNA double helix, yet does so in the
              context of a type of discrete pattern which has apparently not been previously
              explored by the algorithmic community.  DNA crystallization studies support the
              idea that certain dinucleotides base-steps confer specific types of
              flexibility. Further evidence is provided by studies of intrinsically curved
              and `kinkable' DNA. Based on these observations, it is suggested here that for
              conformational flexibility, the order of nucleotides in a sequence may be less
              important than the effect, which certain nucleotide or dinucleotide base-step
              biases impart on the sequence as a whole. In support of this assertion is an
              accumulating body of evidence of important DNA features whose unifying
              characteristic is composition bias rather than position-specific information.
              This research project encompasses algorithm development for three related
              problem areas which form the basis for understanding the functional importance
              of composition variation in nucleotide sequences and the detection of
              composition patterns. These areas are:

Pattern matching. A composition
              pattern and sequence are given. Find all occurrences of the pattern in the
              sequence. Occurrences may be exact or approximate.

Pattern detection. A
              sequence or set of sequences is given. Find all recurring composition patterns.
              Occurrences may be exact or approximate. The patterns are not specified or only
              partially specified
Sequence segmentation. A sequence is given. Partition it
              into statistically distinct regions of homogenous composition.  These problems
              have theoretical interest in their own right, independent of biology and have
              received almost no attention from the algorithmic community.

