Title       : Low Density Parity Check Codes and Turbo Codes for Wireless Communication
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0073506

Award Number: 0073506
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Krishna Narayanan krishna@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As the twenty-first century unfolds, new wireless services are being deployed
              and several more are envisioned.  In order to provide these services, future
              wireless systems should be capable of handling much higher data rates than
              today's systems.  The limited spectrum available for these services implies
              that the spectral efficiency of future systems will have to be significantly
              higher. In addition to being spectrally efficient, next-generation wireless
              systems will have to be power efficient.  Lower transmit powers means lesser
              interference to other users, better reuse of the spectrum and, hence, higher
              efficiency for the overall network.  Wireless channels offer several
              impairments to the transmitted signals, deteriorating the quality of the
              communication link.  Increasing the power and spectral efficiency in the
              presence of such an unreliable
link is a challenging task which can be greatly
              facilitated by the use of efficient coding and signal processing techniques.
              This research investigates the design of powerful coding techniques such as
              turbo codes and low density parity check codes for increasing the power and
              spectral efficiency of wireless systems.

This research involves a detailed
              study of the design and performance analysis of turbo-like codes with low
              decoding complexity, and low density parity check codes (LDPC) for use in a
              wireless environment. Specific areas covered in detail are the design of coding
              schemes for use with multipath channels and turbo equalization, the design of
              LDPC codes for spectrally efficient modulation, and the design of incremental
              redundancy schemes using LDPC codes for use in a non-stationary environment.
              This work differs from the existing work in that it studies several novel
              coding techniques and concentrates on the design of codes matched to the
              iterative decoding algorithm being used, rather than the design of codes based
              on hypothetical
maximum-likelihood decoding.
