Title       : Design, Theoretical Validation, and Empirical Evaluation of a Class of Multicast
               Congestion Control Schemes: Marriage of Feedback Control Theory and Multicast
               Congestion Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0073725

Award Number: 0073725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hitay Ozbay ozbay.1@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chao-Ju Hou  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The researchers have observed an explosive growth in transporting
              continuous media applications to multiple recipients on the Internet.  Examples
              include continuous media servers, digital libraries, remote medical diagnosis,
              and distance learning.  As most Internet continuous media based multicast
              applications do not support end-to-end congestion control, wide deployment of
              these applications have severe negative impact, ranging from starvation of
              self-controlled TCP flows to the potential for congestion collapse.  The main
              intent of this proposal is thus to design, implement, analytically validate,
              and empirically evaluate a class of congestion control schemes for multicasts
              with the following design objectives: scalability, capability to adjust source
              sending rates to achieve TCP-friendliness and (weighted) fairness in an
              analytically provable manner, capability to handle independent losses of the
              same packet, capability to deal with dynamic traffic/membership changes, and
              minimal router support.
     Specifically, the researchers will lay out an
              analytical framework for rate-based multicast congestion control.  In
              particular,                                                                    
                                                                                      T1. 
              The researchers propose a novel approach for ACK aggregation so as to provide
              the sender with a simple but comprehensive view of congestion conditions in the
              multicast tree.
     T2.  The researchers characterize the congestion status
              with three phases: congestion free, congestion alert, and congestion avoidance,
              and will devise a simple, yet effective mechanism for a sender to diagnose,
              based on the parameters in the aggregated acknowledgment received and
              parameters locally kept, which congestion phase its connection is in and
              whether or not independent losses of the same packet has occurred.
     T3. 
              The researchers  will devise, based on robust feedback control theory, a class
              of rate adjustment schemes that are (i) TCP-friendly, (ii) robustly stable, and
              (iii) achieve (weighted) fairness among competing multicast sessions, feature
              (ii) is especially important for systems with feedback loops, but has not been
              extensively addressed in most of the multicast congestion control work perhaps
              except [10].  The proposed control theoretic work will hence center around
              robust stability and disturbance attenuation problems that appear in rate-based
              flow control for multicasts.
     T4.  To promote the wide deployment of
              proposed schemes, the researchers will investigate whether or not, and how, the
              operations (perhaps except acknowledgment aggregation) can be realized at end
              hosts.  If some of the operations cannot be accomplished without router
              support, the researchers will look into possible light-weight implementation
              methods.
     T5.  To empirically evaluate the performance of proposed
              multicast congestion control schemes, the researchers  will conduct extensive
              simulation in ns-2 [81] to test their TCP-friendliness, fairness, and
              scalability properties and compare them against existing work.  With the help
              of OARnet (the Ohio GigaPOP manager of Internet2) personnel,the researchers
              will also implement the proposed schemes in FreeBSD, and use a database server
              centered on large amounts of patient images acquired from MR and CT as a
              representative multicast application to empirically measure the key functional,
              scalable, and adaptive characteristics of the prototype software over the
              Internet2.

