Title       : Ultralevel Assembly of Micron-scale Components
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0073949

Award Number: 0073949
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Cima mjcima@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Modern mechanical assembly techniques are currently used to manufacture
              integrated hybrid electronic structures and composite materials.  Limitations
              such as the trade-off between precision and speed in these systems and the
              inadvertent development of static charge on dielectric surfaces limit the
              feasible component size to hundreds of microns.  Faster motion results in
              misplacement due to increased vibration.  Static charge causes parts to be
              moved from the desired location in an uncontrolled manner. Self-assembly
              techniques have been used to assemble composite materials on the micron or
              nanometer scale, but are limited to close-packed structures.  The current drive
              in the microelectronics industry toward increased integration and decreasing
              component size, and the development of micron scale composite materials require
              new assembly techniques.  This research project seeks to develop techniques for
              such ultralevel assembly.  Ultralevel assembly refers to the surface mount of
              discrete micron and submicron scale components directly on active substrates
              such as silicon chips.  The proposed method is a hybrid assembly process,
              utilizing electrostatic and electrophoretic forces in conjunction with light
              pressure to guide, or even "fly" components into position.  This sort of hybrid
              assembly process is also promising for the development of composite materials
              made up of micron scale particles arranged in non-close-packed arrays.  The
              proposed method for utilizing electrostatic forces to aid in assembly is based
              on controlling the local surface charge density on the substrate and component.
               A corona discharge device will be used to deposit a uniform surface charge on
              the component, and a charge of opposite polarity onto the substrate target
              area. The Coulombic force between the component and the oppositely charged
              target area will attract the component to the target.  A corona discharge
              device utilizes a point electrode at high voltage over a planar ground to cause
              local ionization of the surrounding gas.  The ionized gas molecules are
              accelerated toward the ground, and deposited on a dielectric surface. 
              Electrophoretic positioning in an electrolyte solution will be used to place
              parts smaller than 10 micrometers in diameter.  The surfaces of the components
              will adopt a charge in an electrolyte due to the specific absorption of
              potential determining ions.  Small patterned electrodes on the substrate
              surface will be used to create an electric field and attract the charged parts
              to the substrate surface. The accuracy of the proposed process will be dictated
              by the highly controlled Coulombic forces and radiation pressure and not by the
              positioning errors and vibration of the mechanical placement system. The
              simultaneous use of these forces will allow the efficient assembly of discreet
              components and will introduce the exciting possibility of forming new composite
              materials on the micron scale. 
%%%
Electrophoretic deposition of particulate
              coatings with no control over microstructure has been used industrially for
              many years. This research project seeks to use this technique to place
              micro-components in a specific location on a substrate surface.  The use of a
              focused laser beam in addition to these Coulombic forces will allow more
              accurate control over the position and orientation of the component. The
              application of such non-contact techniques offers the potential for vast
              improvements over traditional mechanical assembly.  This technique might have
              broad impacts in the microelectronics industry.
***
