Title       : Development of Geocasting Protocols for a MANET
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0073699

Award Number: 0073699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299933             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy K. Camp tcamp@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Navidi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Ad hoc networking involves computers, typically wireless mobile nodes, that
              cooperatively form a network without specific user administration or
              configuration.  In other words, ad hoc networking allows an arbitrary
              collection of mobile nodes to create a network on demand.  This capability has
              numerous applications in tactical missions and rescue operations, as well as
              for educational and commercial use.  Due to the number of applications desiring
              the formation of an ad hoc network infrastructure, development of this
              technology is currently a research priority at NSF.                            
                                                                                The work in
              this proposal concerns the development and performance evaluation of protocols
              that offer geocast communication in an ad hoc network.  The goal of a
              geocasting protocol is to deliver a packet to a set of nodes within a specified
              geographical area, i.e., the geocast region.  The researchers will develop and
              evaluate protocols that offer geocast communication to both explicityly defined
              groups (i.e., geocast to those mobile nodes in the geocast region that have
              registered with the group) and implicitly defined groups (i.e., geocast to all
              mobile nodes in the geocast region).  The researchers will also consider both
              fixed geocast regions (i.e., defined by a specific geographical location) and
              dynamic geocast regions (i.e., defined by a dangerous moving target).          
                                                                                             
                                                                                         The
              researchers will develop and evaluate (via simulation) three different
              approaches to geocasting: a directed flooding approach, a tree-based approach,
              and a mesh-based approach.  They  also propose to develop a hybrid approach
              that is based on the nature of the message to be transmitted and/or performance
              considerations (e.g., if the mobile nodes have been moving slowly in the recent
              past, then the redundancy offered by a mesh-based approach may not be needed). 
              Lastly, the researchers plan to incorporate predictable and controllable
              end-to-end quality of service when a shared tree or shared mesh approach is
              used.   Throughout the project, they will conduct extensive simulations to
              determine the conditions under which each of the geocast algorithms is most
              effective.  The researchers will vary the essential parameters in the
              simulations to avoid biased results, e.g., network size, connectivity,
              topological rate of change, and various movement/calling patterns.  In
              addition, the simulations will take into account some realistic limitations
              that have not always been addressed in prior performance evaluations, e.g.,
              location errors that exist in widely available consumer Global Positioning
              Systems.                                                                       
                  The proposed project is a collaboration between two investigators who have
              the experience and capability necessary to complete the project successfully. 
              The expertise of one investigator is in the mobile computing and networking
              area.  The expertise of the other investigator is in the development of
              simulation models and the evaluation fo a protocol's performance.              
                                                                                             
                       Throughout the investigation, the approach will be from a practical
              sense.  The researchers will attend Internet Engineering Task Force meetings to
              obtain the current status of ad hoc protocols and to share the  results. 
