Title       : Multigrid Optical Diffusion Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2001     
File        : a0073357

Award Number: 0073357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380176             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles A. Bouman bouman@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin J. Webb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rick P. Millane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recently, there has been growing interest in the development of medical imaging
              modalities based on light, as opposed to more conventional modalities based on
              ultrasound, X-ray computed tomography (CT), or magnetic resonance (MRI).
              Imaging based on light has the advantages of being non-invasive, safe, and
              requiring only inexpensive instrumentation. Conventional wisdom holds that
              light can not pass through tissue, but in fact, near infra-red light does pass
              through tissue and can therefore, in principle, be used to form images of the
              interior of the tissue. However, light passing through tissue is highly
              scattered, so that an image can not be calculated using conventional methods.
              This research is concerned with the development of new computational algorithms
              that can be used to form three-dimensional images from measurements of
              scattered light. These methods, known collectively as optical diffusion
              tomography, have the potential to provide safe, inexpensive, and portable
              imaging instruments.


Practical realization of optical diffusion imaging
              requires that a difficult non-linear inverse problem be solved in a
              computationally tractable manner to yield accurate images. In this research,
              new multigrid optimization methods are developed which have the potential to
              dramatically speed reconstruction. These new methods are applied in a Bayesian
              framework and use novel techniques to model the regions containing voids,
              opaque tissue, or fluorescence imaging agents. Moreover, optical diffusion
              tomography is representative of a broader class of important inverse problems;
              so that the methods developed in this research have application in problems
              ranging from image registration and motion estimation to environmental sensing
              and non-destructive evaluation.

