Title       : Mechanisms for Providing Optical Bypass in WDM-based Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a0073730

Award Number: 0073730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eytan Modiano modiano@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Over the past decade the growth in the use and capabilities of
              communication networks has transformed the way we live and work.  As we
              progress further into the information age, the reliance on networking will
              increase.  With the expected explosive growth in data traffic, networks will be
              strained in terms of both transport and processing requirements.  Wavelength
              Division Multiplexing (WDM) is emerging as a dominant
technology for use in
              backbone and access networks.  With WDM, the capacity of a fiber is
              significantly increased by allowing simultaneous transmission on multiple
              wavelengths (channels), each operating at the maximum electronic rate.  Systems
              with between 40 and 80 wavelengths are presently being deployed for
              point-to-point transmission.  With tens of wavelengths per fiber and
              transmission rates of up to 10 Gbps per wavelength, capacities that approach a
              Tera-bit per second can be achieved.  While these WDM systems are likely to
              meet future transport demands, electronically processing all of this traffic at
              network nodes will present a significant bottleneck.  Fortunately, it is not
              necessary to electronically process all traffic entering and leaving each node.
               For example, much of the traffic passing through a node is neither sourced at
              that node nor destined to that node.  To reduce the amount of traffic that must
              be electronically processed at  ntermediate nodes, future WDM systems will
              employ WDM Add/Drop multiplexers (WADMs) and cross-connects, that allow each
              wavelength to either be dropped and electronically processed at the node or to
              optically bypass the node's electronics.
     This project will develop
              mechanisms for providing optical bypass to the electronic layer thereby
              reducing the size and cost of electronic switches and routers in the network. 
              A number of techniques will be explored, each of which is appropriate for
              different traffic scenarios.  For the case of low rate stream traffic, grooming
              algorithms will be developed to selectively multiplex multiple low rate traffic
              streams onto wavelengths such that the number of wavelengths that must be
              processed at each node is minimized.
For bursty packet traffic, topology
              reconfiguration algorithms will be developed to reduce the load on the
              electronic switches and routers via dynamic load balancing.  Lastly, for large
              data transfers, Optical Flow Switching protocols that bypass all of the
              electronics in the network using all-optical end-to-end connections will be
              developed.  The combination of the above mechanisms will reduce the size, cost
              and complexity of electronic switches and routers and will lead to a dramatic
              increase in the traffic capacity that can be
supported by the Next Generation
              Internet (NGI).

