Title       : Rapid Task-based Self-Organization in Distributed Ad-hoc Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2000     
File        : a0073843

Award Number: 0073843
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301620             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Little tdcl@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   With the shrinking size of tetherless computing devices and increasing
              diversity in capabilities, the value of ubiquitous computing is rapidly
              becoming real. As these devices proliferate in number, their configuration,
              management, and organization as ad-hoc networking environments proves to be a
              challenging research domain. In most scenarios the interaction of these devices
              enables a broad range of applications. A group of such devices can communicate
              with each other to achieve a goal specific to the application, i.e., they
              perform a higher-level task or service by communicating intelligently with each
              other. This proposal is to investigate and develop a distributed framework for
              executing complex tasks not by using pre-configured devices but by selecting
              suitable computing elements based on task requirements and device
              characteristics. A prerequisite and enabling component for this work is the
              creation of a set of self-organization protocols for connecting and managing
              these computing elements with minimal application intervention during the
              lifetime of the task. Such protocols are referred to as "smart" protocols.
   
               Existing protocols for organizing devices are constrained by their dependence
              on available infrastructure
primarily because of the use of directory-based
              service discovery and are therefore less valuable for a truly ad-hoc computing
              environment. A key premise of this proposal is that the nature of the task can
              be exploited
to organize ubiquitous computing devices into logical task based
              groups. Tasks are then represented by
dependency or task graphs that describe
              how devices interact with each other. A distributed mechanism is
proposed for
              constructing and embedding a task graph on a network of computing elements
              for"\smart" task
execution. Additionally, a task-aware routing protocol for
              reducing routing delays is proposed. An expected
outcome of this approach is
              the ease with which larger, more complex services can be composed from
              smaller
services. These protocols can thus be rapidly deployed in ad-hoc
              environments enabling new applications in
diverse areas such as smart homes
              and offices, distributed robotics, sensor networks, large scale
              distributed
computing, smart battlefields, crisis management, etc.
    
              Specific tasks of this research are: (1) the development of efficient
              distributed algorithms for discovery
of suitable devices that can together
              perform a distributed task from within a sea of tethered or
              tetherless
devices, and protocols for execution of those distributed tasks;
              (2) the development of task aware routing
protocols using key link-state
              information; (3) specification for the use of state augmentation techniques
              for
handling nomadicity of users and devices as seamlessly as possible; (4)
              the simulation of the above protocols
using public domain network simulators;
              and (5) the implementation of a proof-of-concept prototype using
commodity
              hardware and software.
