Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Relationships and Pollination of
               Acridocarpus and Other Old World Malpighiaceae.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  2001   
File        : a0073299

Award Number: 0073299
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald H. Pfister dpfister@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Baum  (Principal Investigator former)
              Michael J. Donoghue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073299
Baum, Donoghue, and Davis
	Malpighiaceae are a family of flowering
              plants that are an important element of forests and savannas in the Old and New
              World tropics.  New World Malpighiaceae are pollinated by specialized
              oil-collecting bees (anthophorid females) and exhibit a highly conserved floral
              morphology despite tremendous diversity in fruit morphology and habit.  These
              oil-collecting bees are absent from the Old World.  Some Old World clades, like
              Acridocarpus, are presumed to be derived from New World lineages and they
              exhibit a combination of features associated with oil-bee pollination and with
              "buzz" pollination.  These groups provide an opportunity to examine the
              consequences of the loss of specialized pollinators.  The goals of this study
              by graduate student Charles Davis, under the direction of Drs. David Baum and
              Michael Donoghue, are (1) to infer the phylogenetic relationships within
              Malpighiaceae using chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences, (2) to infer the
              phylogeny or genealogy of Acridocarpus species in order to examine patterns of
              floral morphological evolution associated with pollinator shifts, and (3) to
              document the pollination of Acridocarpus in African habitats.
	Preliminary
              molecular data indicate that Old World genera of Malpighiaceae belong to
              several separate lineages, suggesting that morphologies associated with buzz
              pollination have evolved more than once independently.  However, several areas
              of the phylogeny remain poorly resolved.  Furthermore, several additional Old
              World lineages need to be added to existing datasets.  Analyses of Acridocarpus
              using ribosomal DNA sequences reveal two major clades, one including species
              endemic to Madagascar and New Caledonia and the other consisting of species
              distributed across Africa.  Oil glands appear to be entirely absent in species
              from Madagascar and New Caledonia, but appear in some African species. 
              Fieldwork in Africa indicates that species of Acridocarpus are pollinated by
              large xylocopine bees that buzz the anthers, and the floral glands produce
              sugars rather than oils. Resolving the phylogeny of Malpighiaceae with
              additional chloroplast DNA sequences, along with sequences of a nuclear
              phytochrome gene, will clarify the origin and relationships of the Old World
              species.  Further phylogenetic work will allow an evaluation of whether Old
              World species with similar morphologies have evolved independently, and whether
              such floral evolution is associated with the loss of oil-collecting
              pollinators.  This study will shed light on the patterns and mechanisms of
              morphological change following a shift in pollination system. 


