Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogeny, Host Plant Shifts, and Geographical Origin of
               the genus Trirhabda (Coleoptera: Chysomelidae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0073200

Award Number: 0073200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5200               (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl M. Kjer kjer@aesop.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073200
Kjer and Swigonova
	The diversity of beetles, grouped under the insect
              order Coleoptera, far exceeds the diversity of any other animal or plant group.
              Because more than half of all known beetles are herbivorous, studies of
              mechanisms of speciation in relation to host plant utilization, and potential
              coordinated evolution of beetles and their host plants (coevolution), should
              provide insights to understanding the evident evolutionary success of beetles.
              Hypotheses of evolutionary relations
(phylogeny) provide a foundation for the
              study of such mechanisms. The leaf beetles (Chrysomelidae) belong to the fourth
              largest family of beetles, making them among the most successful organisms on
              the earth. Graduate student Zuzana Swigonova, advised by Dr. Karl Kjer, is
              studying the chrysomelid genus Trirhabda, in order to determine evolutionary
              relationships among the species, determine whether closely related species feed
              on closely related plants, reveal
the history of host plant preference and
              host plant shifts among the species, disclose any pattern between species
              relatedness and geographic distribution, and identify the area that is the most
              probable biogeographical origin of the genus.
	The dissertation focuses on
              leaf beetles of the genus Trirhabda
(Coleoptera: Chrysomelidae) which contains
              26 species from America north of Mexico ("northern species") and 8 species from
              Mexico and Central America ("southern species"). The northern species have been
              studied in many ecological aspects and much is known about their host plant
              preference and life cycle.  In contrast, there is no information about host
              plant association or ecology of the southern species. Six out of the eight
              southern species are found in Mexico.
Beetles of the northern species feed on
              a narrow range of plants in the families Asteraceae and Hydrophyllaceae. Unlike
              other species from the family Chrysomelidae, they overwinter in the egg stage.
              Larvae and adults feed on leaves and inflorescence of the host plant. Pupation
              takes place in the soil below the host plant. The life history of each of the
              Trirhabda species is strongly influenced by the life history of their host
              plant.  Several northern species of the genus have been used as biological
              agents in control of weeds in fields undergoing secondary succession.  Despite
              the fact that Trirhabda species have been used in many ecological studies and
              despite the economic importance of some of the species, there has been no
              systematic study proposing evolutionary
relationships within this genus.
              Phylogenetic relationships will be inferred from three independent data sets:
              one morphological and two molecular. Morphological data will include carefully
              examined and reevaluated characters described in the literature.  New
              characters, including sensillae of the mouth parts, are to be examined using
              scanning electron microscopy.  Molecular data will include DNA sequences of
              mitochondrial small subunit ribosomal RNA, the first subunit of mitochondrial
              cytochrome oxidase, and nuclear ribosomal ITS (internal transcribed spacer)
              sequences.

