Title       : Collaborative Research: Stochastic and Multiscale Structure Associated with the
               Navier Stokes Equations.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0073958

Award Number: 0073958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward C. Waymire waymire@math.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mina E. Ossiander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Enrique A. Thomann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald B. Guenther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1616,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Waymire
	This project will develop the theory of the motion of fluids as
              embodied by the Navier-Stokes equations using new probabilistic methods that
              exploit the power of stochastic calculus and probabilistic limit theory.
              Although the Navier-Stokes equations are essentially deterministic, the
              approach used in this work will build on a representation of the equations as a
              functional of an underlying branching random walk. This representation, which
              was recently discovered by LeJan and Sznitman in France, is clearly intrinsic
              to the structure of the Navier-Stokes equations. While this is not the first
              attempt to use stochastic methods in connection with the flows associated with
              the Navier-Stokes equations, it does represent an entirely new direction which
              has the potential to transcend much of existing theory. Specific problems
              considered in this proposal seek to provide a better understanding of the role
              of spatial dimensions, boundary conditions, multi-scaling exponents and
              singularities, viscosity, homogeneity, isotropy and rotational accelerations,
              stationary flows and long-time evolution.
	The Navier-Stokes equations
              describe the basic physics governing the motion of fluid in its various forms
              of air, water, oil, etc. As such these equations play a fundamental role in
              science and engineering through the modeling of all varieties of fluid flow,
              from atmospheric and oceanic circulation to the flow of water beneath the
              earth's surface. Improved understanding of these equations and their solutions
              is essential to applications which range from tracking climate change and
              dispersion of contaminants in the Earth's environment, to more stable aerospace
              and sea vessel designs. The nonlinearity inherent in these equations makes
              explicit solutions possible only for the simplest of flows. Consequently the
              development of a more complete understanding of these equations at all physical
              length scales ranks among the most important outstanding problems of
              contemporary mathematical physics. 

