Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution and Functional Morphology of Incisors in
               Wood-cutting Castorids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a0073119

Award Number: 0073119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9977               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen K. Smith kksmith@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Virginia L. Roth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Rodents are more diverse and abundant than any other mammal group.  Although
              their success has been linked to an upper and lower pair of ever-growing
              incisors, little is known about the evolutionary relationship between incisor
              shape and behavior (ex. diet) in these animals.  This study will examine
              incisor shape in fossil and living beavers with respect to the evolution of
              wood-cutting.  Wood-cutting is of particular interest because wood is extremely
              tough and it might be expected that rodents that frequently cut wood should
              exhibit incisors specialized for that behavior.  
Both living species of
              beaver are similar in appearance and cut wood extensively.  Fossil beavers,
              however, are a more diverse group.  For example, they ranged in size from
              squirrel to black-bear size.  Some used their incisor for digging.  They also
              possessed a diversity of incisor shapes.  In fact, one beaver that is known to
              have cut wood has incisors that differ in shape from those of the living
              beaver.  What is the behavioral and evolutionary significance of these
              differently shaped incisors with respect to the evolution of wood-cutting? 
              This question will be answered by reconstructing the evolutionary relationships
              among beavers, studying the relationship between incisor-shape, behavior and
              body-size in living rodents.  The PI will also examine microscopic tooth-wear
              features as these might help determine how rodents incisors function. 
	This
              research will serve to further our understanding of the evolutionary
              relationship between animal form and environment.  Beavers are of particular
              interest in this regard because they have an unusually large impact on the
              structure and possibly the evolution of ecosystems. 

