Title       : High Performance QoS Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0073802

Award Number: 0073802
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klara Nahrstedt klara@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   Internet traffic has increased at an exponential rate over the past decade.
               Much of recent explosion in Internet data can be attributed to the phenomenal
              growth in the number of new users, the migration of corporate data to the
              Internet, and a surge in usage of multimedia as a content delivery medium.  As
              a result, Internet traffic has doubled every few months and shows no signs of
              slowing down.  Another development is the ever increasing demand for multimedia
              applications such as ReadAudio, Windows Media and others.  These applications
              would benefit greatly if the underlying network infrastructure provided some
              form of Quality of Service (QoS) guarantee.
     Attempting to keep pace with
              the bandwidth and other QoS requirements for multimedia applications, network
              equipment vendors and Internet service providers have continuously developed
              and deployed faster routers and higher speed links at the edges of backbone
              networks.  Yet current demand for QoS guarantees within the routers still far
              exceed the supply.  Recent development of Internet differentiated services
              (DiffServ) aims to provide services such as premium and assured services in
              addition to the existing best-effort service within routers in order to satisfy
              the demand for bandwidth and other QoS requirements.  However several routing
              problems with respect to QoS guarantees are still open.
     The researchers
              will investigate the limitations of the current IP routers and their routing
              algorithms leading to the development of a high-performance QoS routing
              framework.  The researchers will apply two major ideas: differentiated routing,
              deploying different types of routing protocols for different service classes in
              an integrated fashion, and parallel algorithms and structures within the
              routers to decrease the routing overhead.  Hence, primary objectives of the
              proposed framework are to implement and theoretically support two innovative
              elements: (1) differentiated routing services and protocols to provide
              differentiation in routing decisions depending on QoS requirements, and (2) a
              QoS-aware router architecture with parallel computation on multiple general
              purpose processors to achieve cost effective, scalable and high-throughput
              routing.
     The first objective, exploration of differentiated routing, will
              allow the researchers to provide QoS-aware routing decision solutions within
              DiffServ networks.  The second objective, investigation of parallel algorithms
              and structures within a QoS-aware router architecture, will allow the
              researchers to provide fast solutions, hence low per-packet routing overhead,
              to three major problems within DiffServ routers: routing table computation,
              packet forwarding and packet scheduling.
     To achieve these two objectives,
              the researchers will investigate concepts and theoretical framework for
              high-performance QoS routing, and verify concepts and theoretical framework via
              simulations and prototype implementation.
     What makes this research
              feasible and promising are recent developments in QoS-aware systems, parallel
              algorithms and end-to-end QoS routing algorithms.  These components make it
              possible to support flexible and generic high-performance QoS routing
              framework, accessible to any distributed multimedia applications.

