Title       : The Constitution of Political Authority in Archaic Transcaucasian States, CA
               1500-780 B.C.: Archaeological Investigations on the Tsakahovit Plain, Republic
               of Armenia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0073519

Award Number: 0073519
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31931              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam T. Smith atsmith@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Adam Smith and his colleagues will
              conduct one season of archaeological research in the Tsakahovit plain, an
              elevated plateau in western Armenia. Approximately 133 square km. in extent and
              containing a series of fortresses and citadels dating to the second millennium
              BC, it provides an ideal setting for examining the factors which led to the
              rise and maintenance of archaic states. Bound by mountains on all sides, the
              Tsakahovit plain presents a geographically circumscribed region for analysis
              that includes a significant amount of geological and archaeological diversity
              within a manageable region. Archaeological investigation conducted in 1998 by
              Dr. Smith and colleagues indicate an intensive and extensive occupation during
              the Bronze and Iron Ages. Six fortresses which include both components have
              been documented to date and the most extensive and best preserved, the
              Tsakahovit fortress will provide the focus for this project. During this first
              season in what is envisioned as a long term effort the team will conduct a
              surface survey over a broad portion of the Tsakahovit plain to reconstruct
              large scale settlement pattern. While large fortresses are easy to locate,
              remains of smaller population aggregations are more elusive. The team will also
              record and sample clay sources from the survey areas in order to measure
              background geochemical variability. This will lay the groundwork for potential
              sourcing of ceramics and the reconstruction of trade networks. The team will
              also conduct subsurface survey and test excavations at three fortress sites.
              Chronology will be refined through continued ceramic analysis and radiocarbon
              dating.

While anthropologists have long recognized the role of archaic
              states in the development of complex political systems and have ordered them
              into typological systems, relatively little is understood about how these
              entities actually functioned. How did rulers maintain their sovereignty? How
              did institutions create discrete spheres of administration? How was political
              authority constructed? Dr. Smith's research will examine these issues. The
              proposed investigations will take advantage of a unique opportunity for
              collaborative research offered by the republic of Armenia. Long a crossroads of
              continents, Transcaucasis offers a rich setting for forging new anthropological
              approaches to the study of early states.

