Title       : Microbial Attachment to Minerals: Experimental Studies on Mineral-Driven
               Chemotaxis, & Role of Crystallography & Microtopography in Site-Specific,
               Oriented Cell Attachment...
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0073998

Award Number: 0073998
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katrina J. Edwards kedwards@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
In order to assess and predict the impact microorganisms have on processes
              such as mineral dissolution and precipitation over a wide range of
              environments, we need first information on where cells occur.  It is well known
              that microbial biomass in the environment is highly heterogeneous, and that
              cells are generally found attached to surfaces rather than free living.  Yet
              what controls cell distribution - in effect what surfaces they attach to - is
              poorly understood. Microbial attachment to surfaces has been widely studied but
              rarely in context that can be used to understand to natural systems.  Studies
              to date have largely been based on simplified models that neglect certain
              factors that may be key in determining the natural distribution of
              cells.

The proposed research focuses on determining the microbial mechanisms
              and surface forces that govern microbial attachment to mineral surfaces. 
              Specific goals include:  1) determining the importance of microbial metabolism
              in determining substrate specificity for attachment, and 2) determining what
              role crystal chemistry, crystal structure, and surface microtopography (steric
              effects) play in attachment.  To achieve these goals, two primary lines of
              experiments will be conducted.  To determine the role of microbial metabolism,
              attachment assays will be conducted with microorganisms selected for specific
              metabolic capabilities, with the aim of quantitatively determining the role
              chemotaxis plays in substrate selectivity.  To determine how steric effects
              impact attachment, experiments will be conducted in concert with theoretical
              calculations that account for factors such as cell type, cell wall thickness,
              cell size, etc.  Specific surface forces between microbial cells and mineral
              substrata will be quantified by Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM).



