Title       : Dissertation Research: The Evolution of Arboreal Carabid Beetles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0073273

Award Number: 0073273
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8266               (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Maddison beetle@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073273
Maddison and Ober
	The diversity of many groups of living organisms is
              related to the evolution of novel features that contribute to an explosive
              increase in the number of species. Adaptations acquired during such a radiation
              posses specialized functions and a unique evolutionary history. An example of
              increasing diversification of species and progressive specialization can be
              found in carabid beetles, commonly known as ground beetles, that have adapted
              an arboreal lifestyle. Graduate student Karen Ober, under the direction of Dr.
              David Maddison, is studying the evolution of arboreal adaptations in carabid
              beetles by surveying representative taxa across the 10 or so tribes of the
              large group Lebiomorpha. New collections from Malaysia and from Madagascar (the
              latter supplied by colleagues) will augment museum holdings and provide
              materials for molecular and morphological studies. Morphological features
              include tarsal and claw structures (independent of those associated with
              mating), leg length, and prorhorax shape, which may be involved in adaptive
              changes to arboreal life.
	To investigate the origin and evolution of arboreal
              carabids, an evolutionary tree of lebiomorphs and their relatives will be
              reconstructed using molecular sequence data from minimally two genes, the 28S
              ribosomal RNA gene and the nuclear gene 'wingless.' Both show promise of
              providing mutational differences that would allow discrimination among lineages
              of lebiomorphs. With the evolutionary history of relationships in hand, one can
              study the number and direction of habitat shifts from ground-dwelling to
              arboreality and explore patterns of changes in ecological and morphological
              features presumed to be associated with arboreal life.

