Title       : Conceptual Design of a Long Wavelength Target Station at the Spallation Neutron
               Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a0073038

Award Number: 0073038
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hugh M. Van Horn                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4235753            (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Mason masont@sns.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1712      MATERIALS RESEARCH PROJECT SUP
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0073038
Mason
This award supports the conceptual design of a Long Wavelength
              Target Station at the Spallation Neutron Source as well as design development
              and R&D to support construction.  A second, long wavelength target station
              would make use of the SNS accelerator to increase the performance of neutron
              scattering instruments making use of neutrons with wavelengths greater than two
              angstroms (compared to the High Power Target Station being built by the SNS
              Project).  This will significantly enhance the capabilities of SNS for the
              academic user community in magnetism, polymers science, biomaterials and
              structural biology, liquids and amorphous materials, and other fields where
              characteristic lengths are greater than ten angstroms and characteristic
              energies are less than 1 meV.  Instrument designs and the science they will
              enable will be developed by the scientific community and coordinated with the
              design of the target and moderator systems that produce the neutrons.          
                                   . 
%%% 
Neutrons are a powerful tool for the study of
              the structure and dynamics of materials.  Instruments that measure the patterns
              produced by neutrons scattered from materials can be used to determine where
              the atoms are and how they move.  This proposal will fund work to develop a
              design for an experimental hall and associated instruments to be built at the
              Spallation Neutron Source, a new neutron scattering laboratory being built in
              Oak Ridge.  The same accelerator being built for SNS can also be used to
              produce neutrons at this second, Long Wavelength Target Station.  Adding such a
              target station to SNS will greatly enhance its scientific capacity for academic
              researchers in physics, chemistry, biology, engineering materials, and
              nanomaterials.  The proposal will involve researchers from many institutions in
              the design and development of a facility and its instrumentation with a full
              proposal for the Long Wavelength Target Station to be completed in the first
              year
***



