Title       : Source and Channel Coding for Multidimensional Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  2003   
File        : a0073489

Award Number: 0073489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Zeger zeger@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Vardy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project studies the theory of multidimensional channels and investigates
              effective coding techniques for such channels. The coding techniques are of
              three types: error-correction channel coding, constrained coding, and joint
              source-channel coding.  Emphasis is placed on applications to two-dimensional
              magnetic and optical recording as well as three-dimensional holographic
              storage. These are the storage devices of the future.  An important application
              of this research within the next few years is the storage of massive amounts
              of
still imagery and video on two-dimensional media. This will likely extend
              to three-dimensional and  four-dimensional (the fourth dimension is wavelength)
              devices over the next 5 to 10 years.  Such multidimensional devices will
              require a shift in paradigm, since most of the existing theory
              for
error-correcting codes, constrained codes, and source-channel codes was
              developed in the context of one-dimensional applications.  There is much to be
              gained by coding for multidimensional channels, but the problems associated
              with such channels are considerably more challenging than their
              one-dimensional
counterparts.

Interesting technical problems arise due to
              the spatially dependent nature of errors in multidimensional storage media. New
              error-correcting codes and interleaving techniques are needed to effectively
              protect data stored on such media. The physical properties of optical and
              holographic recording channels call for a new theory of constrained coding in
              multiple dimensions.  New joint source-channel coding techniques and theory are
              needed to maximize the recovered source fidelity for images and video stored on
              multidimensional
devices while keeping the storage density as high as
              possible.  Inparticular, the storage capacity of multidimensional devices can
              be greatly increased at the expense of a less reliable recovery of the stored
              imagery/video than is current practice for the storage of data. This project
              studies the tradeoff
between increased storage capacity and quantitative loss
              in fidelity of the reproduced source signal.  The main topics being
              investigated for multidimensional channels are: (1) Error-correcting codes,
              (2)
Interleaving techniques, (3) Soft-decision decoding, (4) Capacity
              computation for constrained channels, (5)~Encoders and decoders for specific
              constraints, (6) Joint source-channel coder design.
