Title       : Smart Antennas and DS/CDMA Communications: Basic Algorithmic Developments and
               Hardware Prototyping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a0073660

Award Number: 0073660
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140312             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dimitris A. Pados pados@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stella N. Batalama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0073660
Pados

Adaptive antenna arrays and DS/CDMA communication systems are
              
two subjects with their own individual challenges that have 
separately
              generated significant research interest over the past 
several years. When
              brought together at the integrated antenna-array
CDMA-receiver system level,
              these challenges are magnified and 
new problems of both theoretical and
              practical interest arise.
This proposed research on antenna array DS/CDMA
              communications
is characterized by the following three attributes: (i) The
              principle 
of joint space-time processing is maintained. (ii) Low optimization
              
complexity is sought, therefore matrix inversions and/or
              
eigen-decompositions are viewed as undesirable operations.
(iii) Superior
              adaptive system performance on short data records,
as opposed to ideal
              asymptotics, is the objective.

  In terms of projected contributions to
              science and engineering
principles, this proposed research is intended to
              build on past work
of the PIs during the last four years -supported by seed
              funding by 
the National Science Foundation- that led to initial understanding
              and
preliminary development of new linear filter optimization criteria
              and
procedures. The focus is on low bias and low short-data-record variance
              
adaptive optimization procedures that the investigators of this proposal
              
have developed and termed ``auxiliary-vector (AV)'' filtering. AV filtering
              
may touch many aspects of multidisciplinary engineering that are
              presently
hampered by the ``curse of dimensionality'' and could benefit from
              adaptive
filtering and/or adaptive system optimization through limited input
              data.
Variations of AV filtering schemes are currently considered in
              diversified 
areas that include temporal-only processing of CDMA signals,
              synchronization, 
adaptive robust spread-spectrum receiver designs, adaptive
              array radars,
Direction-Of-Arrival estimation problems, and jam-resistant GPS.
              This present
research plan covers aspects varying from basic algorithmic
              developments and 
theoretical analysis to DSP and FPGA hardware prototyping
              and testing through
the use of the SPW (R) block-level communications systems
              simulator, 
a programmable antenna array testbed with 12 complete receive
              chains, 
an anechoic chamber with range in excess of 7 meters, and a DSP/FPGA
              
board-level implementation testbed.
***

