Title       : Simulations of Strongly Correlated Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0073308

Award Number: 0073308
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Jarrell jarrell@physics.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9218,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0073308
Jarrell
This grant supports theoretical research on strongly
              correlated electronic systems.  Such systems include the high temperature
              superconductors, heavy Fermion materials, non-Fermi liquid metals and magnetic
              materials.  Models of these systems will be solved using finite-sized and
              dynamical mean field calculations and a novel tecnique which systematically
              incorporates non-local corrections to the dynamical mean field theory by
              mapping the lattice problem onto a finite-sized self-consistently embedded
              cluster.  This Dynamical Cluster Approximation (DCA) is fully causal and
              systematic in the inverse cluster size which sets the maximum length of the
              dynamical intersite correlations.  The effective cluster problem may be solved
              with conventional techniques such as perturbation theory or quantum Monte
              Carlo.  However, as in calculations employing the dynamical mean field theory,
              the DCA calculations remain in the thermodynamic limit.  Thus results from the
              DCA and finite-size calculations are complementary.  Results from quantum Monte
              Carlo simulations are analytically continued to real frequencies using the
              maximum entropy method.  These results will be compared to analytic and
              numerical approximations and experiment.  To obtain results more directly
              relevant to experiment, a technique which combines LDA and DCA will also be
              developed.  This study has two main objectives.  The first is to calculate
              experimentally and theoretically relevant properties of model systems more
              accurately than heretofore possible.  The second is to explore the
              non-perturabative regions of these models in order to predict new physical
              phenomena.  The results of this study should lead to a better understanding of
              strongly correlated electronic systems.
%%%
This grant supports theoretical
              research on the properties of strongly correlated electronic systems.   The
              techniques to be used are both analytical and numerical, and new methods to
              study these systems will be developed.  Strongly correlated electronic systems
              include the high temperature superconductors, the heavy Fermion materials, the
              non-Fermi liquid metals and magnetic materials.  Thus, while the issues to be
              addressed are of great fundamental importance, they also encompass many
              materials of practical importance.
***

