Title       : Density Functional Theory of Noncollinear Magnetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a0073546

Award Number: 0073546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard Kleinman kleinman@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award supports theoretical and computational research on a variety of
              topics relating to the electronic structure of magnetic materials.  Neutron
              scattering cannot distinguish between a spiral spin density wave (SSDW) and
              ordinary transverse spin density wave's (SDW) polarized in different directions
              in different domains.  It is relatively easy to calculate noncommensurate
              SSDW's but not SDW's.  This research will attempt to verify the widely held
              belief that Cr has a SDW ground state by calculating the energy versus wave
              vector SSDW curves and comparing the energies of the commensurate SSDW and SDW
              ground states.  The SSDW ground state of rare earth europium will also be
              calculated.

Also, full potential frozen spin wave calculations will be done
              for Fe and Ni.  A larger spin stiffness correction is expected to be required
              to obtain magnon dispersion curves in agreement with experiment in the case of
              Fe because its spins are more itinerant than those of Ni.  Also to be
              calculated are the magnon dispersion curves of rare earth gadolinium. 
              Calculations indicate FeRh is an itinerant antiferromagnet.  Although the
              frozen spin wave scheme will work for antiferromagnets in principle, it is not
              obvious that it will work in practice.  Assuming that FeRh is not found to have
              a SSDW ground state, the scheme will be tested for calculating magnon
              dispersion curves on it.

The spin stiffness used is a somewhat ad hoc
              gradient term added to the LSDA (local spin density approximation), but the
              LSDA as currently applied to SSDW's is stretched beyond its range of validity. 
              Furthermore, the spin stiffness correction contains an arbitrary multiplicative
              parameter.  Ideas will be pursued for obtaining further improvements in density
              functional approximations fo rnoncollinear magnetic systems.  If successful,
              some of the calculations made for the spin stiffness density functional will be
              repeated.  

Other calculations will be done.  For example, and in agreement
              with experiment, the GGA (generalized gradient approximation) yields a magnetic
              surface for V(001) whereas the LSDA does not.  One experiment finds that a
              monlayer of V on Ag(001) has no net magnetization whereas another finds it to
              be ferromagnetic.  An LSDA calculation finds an antiferromagnetic ground state.
               GGA calculations will be performed in the belief that they will result in the
              ferromagnetic state lying below the antiferromagnetic one, and inspire
              additional experimental work.
%%%
This award supports theoretical and
              computational research on a variety of topics relating to the electronic
              structure of magnetic materials.  Calculations will be done using density
              functional theory to determine the magnetic properties of a variety of
              materials.  These calculations will be compared with experiment and will assist
              in resolving issues relating to these important magnetic materials
***.

