Title       : Characterization and Control of Interfacial Structure in Type-II Superlattices
               and Quantum Wells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0073166

Award Number: 0073166
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Weimer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Hasenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses atomic-scale characterization and control of interface
              structure and composition in type-II quantum wells and superlattices grown by
              molecular-beam (MBE), and migration-enhanced (MEE), epitaxy. The approach
              emphasizes cross-sectional scanning tunneling microscopy (STM), examining
              limitations to interfacial perfection imposed by anion and cation segregation,
              incomplete bond type selectivity, and kinetically limited surface roughness,
              under a variety of growth conditions. Complete deconvolution of the respective
              roles of interface morphology (due to islanding in the growth plane) and
              inhomogeneous composition (due to mixed interface bond types, cross
              incorporation, or segregation) on interface roughness is expected.
              Characterization will be used to identify and understand growth conditions and
              associated phenomena which afford maximal control over interface bonding and
              planarity. Accordingly it is anticipated that structural and composition
              perfection needed for optimal type-II quantum well devices may be better
              understood, controlled and realized. 
%%% 
The project addresses basic
              research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
              relevance. Experimental tools are now available to allow atomic level
              observation of elementary surface processes which when better understood allow
              advances in fundamental science and technology. The basic knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials, and
              materials combinations.  An important feature of the program is the integration
              of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
              and technologically significant area. 
*** 

