Title       : Theory and Algorithms for Robust Information Embedding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0073520

Award Number: 0073520
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Wornell gww@allegro.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A Research Project on Theory and Algorithms for Robust Information
              Embedding

Principal Investigator:

Prof. Gregory W. Wornell

Research
              Laboratory of Electronics

Massachusetts Institute of
              Technology

ABSTRACT

A consequence of the widespread dissemination of
              digital computing and communication is the increasing ease and flexibility with
              which multimedia content in electronic formats---such as audio, video, and
              still imagery---can be distributed, exchanged, manipulated and otherwise
              processed. These capabilities open up a broad array of new applications, from
              digital restoration of photographs and recordings, to convenient and
              instantaneous sharing of such content via networks. At the same time, these
              changes have far-reaching societal implications, making it easier for
              individuals to, e.g., circumvent copyright laws, or circumvent security systems
              based on photo IDs, or doctor voice recording evidence in legal
              trials.

Information embedding is an important emerging signal processing
              technology for managing such multimedia content issues. Information embedding
              refers to the embedding of information in the form of a digital signature or
              fingerprint or other sequence of bits into a multimedia ``host'' signal or
              image in such a way that the embedding is both effectively imperceptible and
              resistant to the effects of benign forms of perturbation and noise, as well as
              to explicit attempts to remove or modify the embedded information. While a
              variety of heuristic approaches to embedding have been introduced within the
              research community, these existing approaches have many shortcomings. This
              research project is investigating the fundamental limits of information
              embedding systems, and exploring new methods for approaching these limits, for
              a wide range of applications. These applications range from copyright
              protection of digital multimedia content, to automated monitoring of
              broadcasting, to authentication of documents and identification.

An emphasis
              in the research is on robust quantization-based embedding methods, which lend
              themselves well to practical implementations. And as one particular focus, the
              research is developing a class of such methods referred to as quantization
              index modulation (QIM). Part of the research involves the development of
              optimized implementations of QIM, and an evaluation of its performance
              characteristics relative to alternative approaches.

