Title       : Dissertation Research: The Effect of Miniaturization on Skeletal Morphology in
               Frogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0073061

Award Number: 0073061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Cannatella catfish@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073061
Cannatella and Yeh
	Miniaturization is the evolution of unusually
              small body size within a lineage of animals. It has broad implications for
              features of ecology and physiology, as well as morphology. It has evolved in a
              taxonomically diverse array of animals, including all the major groups of
              vertebrates. Miniaturization offers unique opportunities for investigating the
              evolution of morphology.  In miniaturization, there is an area of contact
              between morphological evolution and the patterns and mechanisms of development.
              This results from the observation that miniaturization is often achieved via a
              precocious truncation of development, resulting in paedomorphosis, the
              retention of juvenile features of an ancestral species in the adult of the
              descendant species. Because miniaturization has evolved numerous times in
              frogs, and has also reached impressive extremes in the group, with certain frog
              species included among the tiniest extant vertebrates, frogs make an ideal
              group in which to study the effects of miniaturization on morphological
              evolution.
	Graduate student Jennifer Yeh, under the direction of Dr. David
              Cannatella, is making a comparison of miniaturization across numerous lineages
              of frogs, in the context of their phylogenetic affinities. First, the skeletons
              of miniaturized species will be compared to those of closely related larger
              species in order to document general patterns of morphological change, both
              from standard measurements and from computer-assisted thin-plate spline
              analyses. Preliminary data suggest that miniaturized frogs occasionally lose
              bones which ossify late in development.  In addition, analyses of skull shape
              indicate that many miniaturized species show specific differences compared to
              their larger
relatives, such as relatively larger braincases and sensory
              capsules. These patterns suggest that functional requirements constrain the
              response of morphology to size reduction.  Second, the extent to which
              developmental
truncation explains morphological patterns in miniaturized frogs
              will be investigated.  Evolutionary patterns associated with miniaturization
              will be compared to the within-species morphological changes that characterize
              development and growth.  Finally, variation in the degree to which morphology
              has responded to the evolution of small body size in different frog lineages
              will be assessed.


