Title       : 'Dissertation Research: Genetic Variation in Induction Kinetics and
               Antibacterial Strength of Drosophila Immunity Genes'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0073598

Award Number: 0073598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew G. Clark   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9104,9179,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0073598
Clark & Lazzaro

Insects face a diverse array of pathogens, which
              they combat with a generalized immune response.  There is extensive genetic
              variation in immune responsiveness among Drosophila lines derived from a wild
              population, with differences between lines in mortality rate following
              infection and in internal pathogen load sustained during infection.  A
              substantial component of the Drosophila immune response is provided by
              antibacterial peptides which are synthesized in response to septic injury. 
              Preliminary results also show significant variation among Drosophila lines in
              the transcriptional inducibility of one antibacterial peptide.  While previous
              and ongoing surveys of DNA sequence variation have uncovered coding variants in
              Drosophila antibacterial peptides, variation in the speed and strength of
              transcriptional induction of these genes following an infection may also be
              important.  This study will thoroughly quantify the amount of phenotypic
              variation in immune efficacy segregating in a natural population of Drosophila
              melanogaster.  Mortality rate following infection, suppression of internal
              pathogen growth, and the transcriptional inducibility of six antibacterial
              genes will be examined in 150 2nd-chromosome replacement lines of D.
              melanogaster.  Correlations between induction kinetics and immunity will be
              explored.  Several immune system genes will be completely sequenced in a subset
              of these lines, and molecular markers will be scored in all lines.  Statistical
              associations between nucleotide polymorphisms in antibacterial gene promoters,
              the transcriptional intensity of those genes, and whole organism phenotypes
              will be tested.  This work will provide a first look at the structure of
              natural genetic variation in innate immune responsiveness, and will address
              fundamental question of how natural selection drives  the evolution of
              transcriptional control and innate immunity.





