Title       : Dissertation Research: A Systematic Study of Tribe Neillieae (Rosaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2000       
File        : a0073041

Award Number: 0073041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9990               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Potter dpotter@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073041
Potter and Oh
Many plant groups distributed only in eastern Asia and
              temperate North America have long attracted the interest of botanists and have
              been the subject of numerous taxonomic, biogeographic, and evolutionary studies
              over the past two centuries.  Despite this long history of interest and several
              recent phylogenetic studies of such plant groups, their biogeographic history
              has not yet been well established.  Tribe Neillieae, comprising three
              taxonomically difficult genera, Neillia, Physocarpus, and Stephanandra, is
              distributed in eastern Asia and both eastern and western North America, usually
              in mountainous regions.  Tribe Neillieae possesses ideal characteristics for
              studying historical biogeography of eastern Asia and temperate North America:
              the tribe is a strongly supported natural group, its distribution can be
              dissected into many areas in each continent, and its small number of species
              (ca. 25) facilitiates the analysis of a variety of data using a range of modern
              phylogenetic methods.  However, no comprehensive systematic study of the group
              has yet been undertaken.  Graduate student Sang-Hun Oh, under the direction of
              Dr. Daniel Potter at University of California, Davis, is studying phylogenetic
              relationships of the tribe Neillieae using morphological and molecular data. 
              Four DNA regions, encompassing both nuclear and chloroplast genomes, for all
              species in tribe Neillieae will be analyzed along with morphological characters
              to estimate a maximally robust phylogenetic framework. Biogeographic history of
              the tribe Neillieae will be evaluated using this phylogenetic framework in
              conjunction with current distribution patterns and fossil records.  A taxonomic
              revision with a sound classification system that reflects evolutionary
              relationships of the members of tribe Neillieae will also be provided.  The
              historical biogeography of tribe Neillieae will provide important information
              relevant to understanding how and when the eastern Asian-North American
              disjunct distribution pattern developed.  In addition, considering that plants
              of Neillieae are horticulturally useful, this study will provide valuable
              information for screening germplasm and developing new ornamental cultivars. 
              Finally, by integrating several close relatives of the tribe Neillieae, data
              produced in this project will contribute to illuminating the evolutionary
              relationships within Rosaceae, an evolutionarily complex and economically
              important plant family.

