Title       : Y Chromosome Diversity in the Genus Pan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0073871

Award Number: 0073871
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172913             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anne C. Stone acstone@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Past DNA studies have suggested that chimpanzee population history has been
              surprisingly different from humans, although chimpanzees are our nearest
              relatives. Unfortunately the fossil record for chimpanzees is virtually
              nonexistent and, thus, genetic investigation of present populations is the best
              method to examine this history. Chimpanzees are, however, highly endangered and
              the window of opportunity to sample their genetic diversity may be rapidly
              closing. To date, genetic investigations have been limited, and they have
              focused primarily on the maternally-inherited mitochondrial DNA. The goal of
              this project is to search for variation on the Y chromosomes of chimpanzees,
              including Pan troglodytes, (the chimpanzee) and Pan paniscus (the pygmy
              chimpanzee or bonobo). This will provide a new perspective to test hypotheses
              about population history both within and between chimpanzee species. In
              addition, it will allow the comparison of chimpanzee and human demographic
              histories and, thus, can shed light on our own evolutionary history. We are
              also investigating Y chromosome evolutionary history in the great apes and
              humans. Because the chimpanzee Y chromosome is 25% smaller than the human Y and
              may have been subject to structural rearrangement, it is evident that the
              chimpanzee Y chromosome has undergone interesting changes since diverging from
              the ancestral human-chimpanzee Y chromosome. Finally, we hope to identify
              subspecies specific Y chromosome markers within Pan troglodytes that, when
              combined with mitochondrial DNA data, will allow the origins of the captive
              population to be clarified.

