Title       : Space-Time Coding for Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0073505

Award Number: 0073505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Fitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Urbashi Mitra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Space-Time Coding for Wireless Communications
Michael P. Fitz and Urbashi
              Mitra
Proposal 9980616,
The Ohio State University

	This research will
              extend the state of the art in channel coding for
multi-antenna communication
              systems.  It has recently been shown that
the capacity of a wireless
              communications system can be greatly
increased if multiple antennae are used
              both at the transmitter and the
receiver.  Furthermore, a method for achieving
              such gains is to
introduce controlled redundancy (coding) in the transmitted
              data
sequence spatially as well as temporally,  which is the
              conventional
scheme.  This area of research is still quite new and several
              key
problem areas need to be addressed.  For example,
              computationally
efficient methods for finding space-time codes are necessary.
              
Typically, the wireless channel is time-varying and it is not
              always
possible to achieve good estimates of the channel conditions;
              thus
evaluating the robustness of space-time codes is of value.  A
              related
project is to consider the interplay of space-time coding and
              decoding
methods with algorithms designed to estimate the channel and other
              key
communication parameters.  Turbo codes have recently emerged as
powerful
              codes for achieving near Shannon capacity, thus space-time
generalizations of
              such codes will be studied.  Finally, much of the
current work on space-time
              coding is for narrowband time division
multiple access systems, thus we shall
              consider space-time code design
and decoder design for wideband code-division
              multiple-access systems
as well.

	The first research thrust will focus on
              the development and analysis
of improved search techniques for space-time
              trellis codes.  Current 
methods for searching the distance spectrum of
              space-time trellis codes 
can be computationally expensive.  Methods for
              reducing the size of the 
error state trellis coupled with reduced complexity
              trellis search schemes
will be explored. The next focus is on evaluating the
              robustness of space-time
codes under realistic channel conditions.  In
              addition, space-time coding 
for parametric channels will be considered. 
              Thus, constrained channel 
uncertainty will exist and code designs for such
              scenarios will be developed.
The third research focus will be on space-time
              turbo codes as one method to 
achieve robustness to a variety of channel
              conditions.  The random--like 
structure of turbo coded schemes hold some
              promise of mitigating the possible 
interactions between the code structure
              and the channel characteristics.
Space-time code designs for CDMA channels
              will be investigated in the 
fourth research thrust.  CDMA signals have a
              larger dimensionality and
thus the space-time code design is different from
              that for single-user 
systems.  In addition, CDMA signals in a multipath
              channel will result 
in different optimal code designs. The final research
              topic will consider 
receiver designs in the context of space-time coding. 
              That is, channel 
estimation and synchronization for space-time coding and
              modulation will
be investigated.  Algorithms which exploit the properties of
              space-time
codes will be designed.  In addition, the performance dependence on
              accurate
channel estimates and synchronization will be analyzed.

