Title       : Adaptive Reduced-Rank Interference Suppression: Algorithms, Performance, and Low
               Power VLSI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2002     
File        : a0073686

Award Number: 0073686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295369             (Estimated)
Investigator: Majid Sarrafzadeh   (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Honig  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This research is concerned with algorithmic, performance, and hardware issues
              related to reduced-rank adaptive filtering.  Reduced-rank filters project the
              incoming received signal onto a lower dimensional subspace, which reduces the
              amount of training data needed relative to a conventional full-rank
              algorithm.
 Algorithmic techniques will be studied initially within the
              context of interference suppression for Direct Sequence (DS)-Code-Division
              Multiple Access (CDMA),  although they can be applied to any adaptive linear
              filter. The focus of the research is on a recently developed class of
              reduced-rank adaptive algorithms based on the multi-stage Wiener filter of
              Goldstein and Reed. This technique can achieve full-rank performance
with a
              very low filter rank, which enables rapid convergence and tracking. 
              Furthermore, these algorithms
do not rely on an explicit estimate of the
              signal subspace. The project is multi-disciplinary in that it combines the
              expertise of the two co-PIs in the areas of adaptive signal processing and low
              power VLSI design.
The main objective of the research is to build a low-power
              special purpose hardware prototype, which can serve as the computational engine
              for reduced-rank filtering in a variety of applications.  Algorithmic issues to
              be studied include selection of filter rank, performance in different adaptive
              filtering applications, such as equalization, and numerical stability and
              dynamic range problems.
