Title       : Dissertation Research: Conservation Genetics of Panax quinquefolium, American
               ginseng, in Illinois
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a0073315

Award Number: 0073315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabine S. Loew ssloew@ilstu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0073315
Loew

The principle investigators will study the risk of local
              extinction for Illinois populations of American ginseng, Panax quinquefolium, a
              commercially valuable, heavily harvested plant species. American ginseng
              suffers severe reductions in population size due to destruction of its forest
              habitat and harvesting pressure.  Population biology theory predicts decreased
              survival probability for small populations of organisms due to potential
              genetic problems (i.e., decreased genetic diversity) and demographic problems
              (i.e., low reproductive success).  Consequently, the goals of this project are
              (1) to identify the location and size of remaining populations of American
              ginseng in Illinois, (2) to monitor demographic and fitness parameters, such as
              number of seedlings and seeds in a subset of eight populations, (3) to
              determine the genetic diversity within and between a subset of twenty
              populations, and (4) predict survival probabilities for populations of
              different sizes. Genetic diversity will be assessed for proteins and
              DNA.

Despite predictions that small populations suffer increased extinction
              risks, native species of economic value, such as ginseng and Echinacea are
              regulated without vital genetic and demographic information on natural
              populations.  Life history characteristics of P. quinquefolium, such as
              self-pollination and limited seed dispersal, make it vulnerable to loss of
              genetic diversity and decreased fitness.  Therefore, P. quinquefolium is an
              important species for which to combine basic genetic and demographic
              information to assess viability of natural populations.





