Title       : Dissertation Research: Endocrine Coupling of Sexually Dimorphic Display
               Morphology and Aggressive Display Behavior in Two Sister Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2000      
File        : a0073203

Award Number: 0073203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9268               (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana K. Hews LSHEWS@scifac.indstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana State University
	      200 North Seventh Street
	      Terre Haute, IN  478091202    812/237-3551

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1160,9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              During aggression males often behaviorally advertise signaling traits.
              Aggression and the structures used in signaling aggression usually are
              correlated evolutionarily, but among Sceloporus lizard species they can be
              decoupled. This study will determine how sex steroid hormones control the
              development of two such male-specific traits: 1) patches of abdominal color,
              and  2) stereotyped aggressive behavior used to display the patches to
              opponents.  Work will study two Sceloporus sister-species, one with male
              patches and one in which males have evolutionarily lost the patches.  Hatchling
              hormone levels will be manipulated, and both patch expression and aggression
              will be scored in adults to test the hypothesis that decoupling of the male
              patches trait and aggression arises from species differences in hormonal
              control of the two. Assays of hatchling blood samples will verify that the
              altered hatchling hormone levels are within natural levels.

In many
              vertebrates, sex hormones (testosterone, estradiol) act during development and
              adulthood to produce differences between the sexes.  Testosterone can be
              converted to estrogen, which influences development of brain regions involved
              in aggression.  Testosterone also can be converted to 5a-dihydrotestosterone,
              which often affects development of male traits elsewhere in the body. 
              Decoupling could occur if species vary in these hormonal levels. For example,
              males of these species may vary in the enzymes needed for these conversions of
              testosterone. Relatively little is known about the variation in the hormonal
              mechanisms controlling differences in aggression and in signaling structures in
              natural populations, as most research focuses on inbred laboratory strains of
              rodents and domesticated animal breeds.

