Title       : Iteratively Decoded Bit Interleaved Coded Modulation: A Robust Reduced
               Complexity Design For Fading Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a0073391

Award Number: 0073391
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Ritcey ritcey@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
This research involves coded modulation, the combination of a convolutional
              code and a higher order digital modulation. The typical application is for a
              wireless communications system operating over fading channels. The design
              typically trades off performance versus complexity. More complex systems are
              larger in size and consume more power. High performance means high spectral
              efficiency (in bits per second per Hz), low error rate (probability of bit
              error) at minimum transmitted power. Modern systems basically achieve this with
              sophisticated receivers; decoders that are now feasible due to the advances in
              microelectronics. In this research, the goal is to improve the performance of
              bit interleaved coded modulation (BICM) by incorporating iterative decoding
              (BICM-ID). Systems using BICM-ID achieve high performance but are less complex
              than those incorporating turbo codes.

More specifically, the investigator
              studies fundamental advances both the design and the performance evaluation of
              BICM-ID systems. This is done is several ways. The research  optimize the
              codes, signal labels, bit interleaver in the encoder. Iterative decoding is
              improved by better matching with the specific channel type, and quality of the
              channel state information (CSI). Performance evaluation will be based on a more
              fundamental understanding of the error-free feedback bound for iterative
              decoding. The performance for channels with imperfect CSI and more general
              fading statistics is studied. Diversity will be improved in several ways:
              through explicit use of multiple channels and through constellation rotation.
              In all of these situations, design optimization and performance evaluation is
              investigated.

