Title       : RUI: The Meaning of Morphology: Source Hierarchy for Phenotypic Variation of
               Skeletal Hard Parts (Bryozoa)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a0073648

Award Number: 0073648
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Hageman hagemansj@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Meaning of Morphology: Source Hierarchy of Phenotypic Variation of Skeletal
              Hard Parts (Bryozoa)

Steven J. Hageman
EAR-0073648

Criteria for the
              recognition of fossil species are based largely on preservable hard parts of
              the ancient organism.  This is in contrast to the classification of living
              species, which in addition to skeletal hard parts, may include data from their
              soft tissue, behavior, biochemical and genetic composition.  Uncertainty about
              the relationships between genetic characteristics of an organism relative to
              its morphological characteristics can raise questions about the biological
              significance of fossil species.  Because paleontology had the ability to
              document change through deep time, it has a significant contribution to make
              toward answering fundamental questions of evolutionary biology.  These can not
              be addressed with confidence however, until we can document the relative
              importance of the genetic versus environmental components of variation in the
              skeletal hard parts of organisms.  In addition, little is known about how
              differences in the scale and magnitude of environmental variation may affect
              skeletal hard part morphologies (i.e., microscale spatial variation within an
              environmental setting could induce more morphological change than between two
              similar settings many kilometers apart, or vice versa).
By measuring features
              on the skeleton of modern colonial marine invertebrate organisms (Bryozoa) that
              are grown as clonal replicates in controlled laboratory experiments, the
              variation in the skeletal hard parts can be separated mathematically into their
              genetic and environmental sources.  This is a natural system analogous to
              cloning hundreds of sheep and growing sets of identical clones in different
              environments to determine the environment's influence on their final
              morphology.  Researchers at Gatty Marine Laboratory, Scotland have already
              grown clonal replicates of genetically different colonies of the intertidal
              bryozoan Electra pilosa under several controlled environmental conditions. 
              This project will separate genetic from environmental variation in these
              specimens.  In the second part of this study, specimens will be collected from
              the wild from environments that have been hierarchically subdivided in order to
              determine whether signals can be differentiated in a real world example. 
              Results from this study will have broader applicability to the fields of
              evolutionary biology, biostratigraphy, biogeography, and relationships among
              fossil lineages. 

