Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Analysis of the Dytiscinae (Coleoptera:
               Dytiscidae) as Inferred from Morphological and Molecular Characters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2001   
File        : a0073088

Award Number: 0073088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Luckow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Quentin D. Wheeler  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073088
Wheeler and Miller
	Graduate student Kelly Miller, under the direction
              of Dr. Quentin Wheeler, is studying the systematics and natural history of
              beetles of the subfamily Dytiscinae. The result of this project will be an
              understanding of the phylogeny of
dytiscine beetles (Coleoptera: family
              Dytiscidae), an important group of large,
aquatic predators.  These diving
              beetles occur in lakes and ponds throughout the world and are important
              predators of aquatic insects, such as mosquitoes, as well as a variety of other
              prey items including small vertebrates such as tadpoles and fish fry.  Members
              of the group have interesting ecological properties as dominant predators as
              well as interesting behavioral properties, such as complex mating behaviors. 
              This project will focus on discovering the phylogenetic relationships between
              the higher taxonomic groups in this subfamily including the currently
              recognized five tribes and 25 or so genera. It will also include members of the
              other major subfamilies of diving beetles as outgroup taxa which will help
              establish a phylogeny for the entire family.  The classification based on this
              analysis will be one of the first for any group of dytiscids that is based upon
              an explicit and comprehensive phylogenetic analysis.
	The project will be
              based on morphological characters observed from adult and immature forms, and
              on molecular sequence data for the nuclear gene "wingless" and the
              mitochondrial gene for cytochrome-B, sampled from as many lineages as possible
              within Dytiscinae and relevant outgroup taxa. Newly collected material from
              South America and Australia will augment North American collections and museum
              specimens. These data will be analyzed in a variety of ways, but eventually all
              available data will be combined to discover the best-supported hypothesis of
              the evolutionary history of the group.  The resulting phylogenetic hypothesis
              for the subfamily will form the basis for a revised classification that is
              stable and optimally informative.  As a result of this project, biologists
              using dytiscine beetles to answer questions about ecology, behavior,
              biogeography, etc., will be able to make informed decisions about suitable
              study taxa based on phylogenetic criteria.  This will, in turn, provide greater
              insight into generalizations about the process of evolution.

