Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics of Ulvaceae (Ulvales, Chlorophyta) using
               Nuclear and Chloroplast DNA Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2000       
File        : a0073169

Award Number: 0073169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9510               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Robert Waaland jrw@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073169
Waaland and Hayden
	Despite numerous DNA-based systematic and
              phylogenetic studies of land plants in the past decade, some major green plant
              lineages await exploration. The green algal division Chlorophyta contains many
              such groups, including the Ulvaceae (Ulvales, Ulvophyceae). Ulvaceae are
              morphologically simple cosmopolitan, macroscopic algae of marine and freshwater
              environments. Two members of the family, Ulva and Enteromorpha, are among the
              most familiar green seaweed genera. Common as ship fouling algae, they also are
              often implicated in "green tides" which result from excessive accumulations of
              their biomass following a bloom event. In addition to direct smothering of
              marine fauna, hydrogen sulfide released from the decaying biomass of green
              tides can present major health concerns for humans and marine
              communities.
	Morphological simplicity and phenotypic plasticity have thwarted
              past
attempts by systematists to diagnose natural groupings within the
              species-rich genera Ulva and Enteromorpha as well as among these and other
              genera in
the family. Graduate student Hillary Hayden, directed by Dr. J.
              Robert Waaland, will be studying the taxonomic affinities and systematic
              relationships of these genera, with an emphasis on new DNA-sequence data from
              both nuclear and chloroplast genes, for comparative analyses of mutational
              differences among the species. An improved understanding of Ulvaceae
              systematics is necessary for interpreting green tide phenomena and recognizing
              non-indigenous species. Further, biologists will benefit from a better
              understanding of phylogenetic relationships among these taxa and the complexity
              of phenotypic changes exhibited among a very closely related group of
              algae.


