Title       : Dissertation Research: Ontogeny and Anatomy of the Skeleton in Mooneyes and
               Goldeyes and the Systematics of Hiodontiform Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2000        
File        : a0073066

Award Number: 0073066
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Bemis wbemis@bio.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073066
Bemis and Hilton
With over 24,000 living fish species, Teleostei
              includes over half of all living vertebrate animals. Such a large diversity
              offers outstanding chances for discoveries in evolutionary biology. However, we
              still lack much information about teleostean anatomy and there is little
              consensus about such basic questions as the evolutionary origin and
              diversification of teleosts. To address these issues, graduate student Eric
              Hilton, under the direction of Dr. William Bemis, proposes a two-part study.
              First, he will describe in detail (for the first time) the skeletons of two
              North American teleosts known as mooneyes and goldeyes (genus Hiodon) on the
              basis of extensive series of specimens both geographic (to assess variability)
              and ontogenetic (to assess developmental changes from juvenile to adult form).
              The mooneyes and goldeyes belong to an early evolutionary radiation of teleosts
              that also contains such familiar species as knife fishes, elephant nose fishes,
              and arowanas. This group is believed to have split from all other teleosts
              approximately 150 million years ago, and the skeleton of mooneyes and goldeyes
              has remained largely unchanged since this time. For this reason, they can be
              used to represent early teleosts in studies of teleostean evolution. 
Second,
              the student will use the new anatomical information generated by the study for
              a broad analysis of teleostean phylogeny. A focused comparative survey of
              skeletal characteristics in more than thirty living and fossil teleostean
              species will build upon the first-hand observations of specimens used in the
              study. The reconstructed patterns of teleostean evolutionary diversification
              can then be compared with patterns developed by other researchers, including
              molecular systematists. Ultimately the morphological and molecular data on
              fishes can be synthesized to yield a reliable account of the origins and
              diversity of living teleosts.


