Title       : Electromagnetic Imaging of Vortex Dynamics in High-Temperature Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  2002       
File        : a0073366

Award Number: 0073366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roman Sobolewski sobolewski@ece.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Kadin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award is to several professors at the University of
              Rochester for a project aimed at an improved understanding of the vortex
              dynamics and pinning effects in high-temperature superconductors (HTS). This
              project will make use of modern femtosecond laser techniques and both
              electro-optic (EO) and magneto-optic (MO) imaging methods to provide
              time-resolved two-dimensional images of intrinsic vortex dynamics in HTS thin
              films, single crystals, and wires. Specific problems to be addressed include
              vortex nucleation and motion in the presence of random and periodic pinning,
              dynamical phase transitions of vortex matter induced by transport current, and
              vortex velocity distributions in flux-flow channels above the critical current.
               This research should have important implications for high-power applications
              of HTS materials.  This is a highly interdisciplinary research project, which
              will involve graduate and undergraduate students and faculty members in
              physics, materials science, and electrical and computer engineering at the
              University of Rochester, as well as researchers at 
Argonne National
              Laboratory.  The students will gain skills to enable them to compete in the
              future market place.
%%%
Superconductors are of great importance because they
              can carry very large electrical currents with zero resistance.  These currents
              in turn produce very large magnetic fields.  However, for currents above a
              certain "critical current", the material will no longer be a superconductor
              since magnetic vortices suddenly penetrate the superconductor, producing
              resistive loss and sometimes catastrophic heating in the material.  In order to
              make superconductors that can carry ever higher currents, it is essential to
              understand this breakdown mechanism in more detail.  This individual
              investigator award is to several professors at the University of Rochester for
              a project that will make use of femtosecond lasers arranged as ultrafast
              two-dimensional imaging cameras to take a series of snapshots of a
              superconductor while this breakdown is taking place, resulting in a
              "slow-motion movie" of the rapid dynamics of the magnetic vortices as they
              enter the superconductor.  The results of this study should provide clues to
              making higher-quality High-temperature superconducting wires, tapes, and thin
              films for a variety of electronic and energy-related applications. This is a
              highly interdisciplinary research project, which will involve graduate and
              undergraduate students and faculty members in physics, materials science, and
              electrical and computer engineering at the University of Rochester, as well as
              researchers at Argonne National Laboratory.  The students will gain skills to
              enable them to compete in the future market place.
***

