Title       : High Field Studies of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0073456

Award Number: 0073456
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Despina Louca dl4f@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bellave S. Shivaram  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates electron correlations in a class of materials where
              the strong effective interaction leads to unique physical effects.  The
              research is primarily experimental and exploits intense magnetic fields which
              have recently become available in the United States.  The materials are
              primarily in single crystal form and include UPt3, URu2Si2, U2Pt2In and LiV2O4.
              The project uses ultrasound, magnetometry, transport and thermodynamic
              measurements in intense magnetic fields, at low temperatures and high
              pressures.  Strongly correlated systems possess a rich phase diagram with a
              number of different possible electronic states existing in close proximity to
              each other.  An external perturbation can drive the system from one part of the
              phase diagram to a neighboring one.  Intense magnetic fields are one such
              perturbation which can have a marked impact on the electrons and thus provide a
              window to examine the strong correlations between them.  The proposed
              measurements present challenges due to the extreme environment of high magnetic
              fields, low temperatures and high pressures.  The results experiments may lead
              to an increased understanding technologically important materials such as high
              temperature superconductors and giant magnetoresistive alloys.  The knowledge
              and information obtained through this research is disseminated through an
              on-line resource center for strongly correlated materials maintained on the
              University of Virginia physics server.  Post and pre-doctoral students involved
              in this project will receive training in advanced instrumentation, materials
              handling and analysis that will prepare them for careers in academia and
              industry.
%%%
This research will examine the nature of the interactions
              between electrons in a class of materials where these interactions are strong
              enough to lead to unique and novel physical effects.  These materials are
              formed primarily from elements with unpaired f and d - electrons in their outer
              shells.  The research is experimental and involves the use of the most intense
              man made magnetic fields which have recently become available in the United
              States.  The materials that will be studied are in perfect crystalline form so
              that high quality measurements using techniques such as ultrasound,
              magnetometry, electrical transport and thermodynamics can be performed. 
              Intense magnetic fields can have several effects on materials.  The most
              commonly observed effect in metals is the increase of resistance.  A strong
              enough magnetic field can turn a metal into an insulator.  Such effects in the
              materials chosen for the proposed research are particularly dramatic.  The
              application of a magnetic field thus provides a window to examine the nature of
              the interactions between electrons in the chosen materials.  The electronic
              properties of these materials bear many similarities to those of several other
              technologically important systems such as high temperature superconductors and
              giant magnetoresistive alloys.  For the measurements chosen the extreme
              environment of high magnetic fields presents many challenges.  New experimental
              techniques are being developed to surmount these challenges and by themselves
              may offer technological pay-offs.  An on-line resource center to disseminate
              the knowledge and information obtained through the proposed research will be
              maintained on the University of Virginia physics server.  Graduate and
              undergraduate students involved in the project will receive training in
              advanced instrumentation, materials handling and analysis that will prepare
              them for wide ranging careers in academia, industry and the government.


