Title       : A New Framework for Adaptive Subspace Filtering: Theory and Algorithms for
               Application to Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0073559

Award Number: 0073559
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $545818             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert M. Gagliardi bobgags@solar.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Irving S. Reed  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal is a continuation of the research on Reduced-rank Adaptive
              Subspace Filtering for Spread Spectrum Communications, Array Signal Processing
              and Detection, a research grant funded by the National Science Foundation under
              Contract No. MIP-9706215. During the current grant, the theoretical foundations
              of the cross-spectral metric (CSM) for reduced-rank were studied. The practical
              processing algorithms to apply the CSM to several related research areas are
              developed. Our research shows that the CSM method results in a better rank
              reduction than the principal components method in the sense of the minimum mean
              square error for filtering. The remaining problem with the CSM method is that
              the eigenvectors of the data covariance matrix, that are used to span the
              full-rank space, are unknown and have to be estimated from the observation data
              in most applications. The expensive computation needed for obtaining these
              eigenvectors will hinder the use of the CSM method in real-time processing. In
              addition, the strategy used by the CSM method for searching a desired
              rank-reducing subspace is not efficient: one has to compute all of the
              eigenvectors and their corresponding eigenvalues in order to rank order the
              cross-spectral items, but only a certain number of them are needed for the
              subspace filtering. 
A new framework for reduced rank subspace filtering,
              built on a non-eigenvector-based subspace representation, is now proposed to
              address these issues. In this new framework, a set of orthonormal vectors,
              which tridiagonalizes, rather than diagonalizes, the covariance matrix, is used
              to replace a set of eigenvectors as a basis of the full-rank space. Advantages
              of this replacement are (1) the computation of the tridiagonalization has a
              much lower complexity as compared to that of the diagonalization; (2) the rank
              reduction from the full-rank N to the lower rank K only requires computing K or
              less desired orthonormal basis vectors, instead of computing all N of them, and
              (3) the resulting subspace remains optimal in the sense of maximum
              signal-to-interference plus noise ratio. The proposed effort for this
              non-eigenvector-based subspace filtering framework includes studying the
              theoretical foundations, developing adaptive processing algorithms and their
              computation architectures, deriving a rank reduction optimization metric, and
              evaluating theoretical and implementation performances as compared to the
              eigenvector based approaches. 
New results in rank reduced adaptive filtering
              will be directly applicable to several new research areas currently under
              consideration such as space and time wireless systems and code addressed
              multiple access signaling. In these applications, and similar extensions, low
              dimension addressing signals are superimposed in larger
              2-dimensional(frequency/time or space/time) signal spaces. Signal crosstalk in
              the form of address overlap must be removed by processing over the entire 2-D
              observation space. The ability to rank reduce data for efficient crosstalk
              rejection will be a major step in the development of practical processing
              algorithms. In addition, overlap interference will be time varying due to
              continual data modulation (in the multiple accessing case) and due to the
              spatial fading (in the space/time case). Hence adaptive updating processors
              will be necessary for maximum efficiency.  The research developed in the newer
              study proposed here will significantly influence practical filtering solutions
              for these two dimensional cases.

