Title       : FASEB Summer Research Conference on Retinoids to be held June 25-30, 2000, at
               the Copper Mountain Conference Center in Colorado.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a0073839

Award Number: 0073839
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Napoli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1158      BIOMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Napoli, Joseph L.

The tenth biannual FASEB Summer Research Conference on
              Retinoids will be held June 25-30,2000, at the Copper Mountain Conference
              Center in Colorado. The study of retinoids (vitamin A and its metabolites and
              analogs) promises to provide fundamental insights into the mechanisms of
              diverse basic cellular processes, including apoptosis, vertebrate development,
              and transcriptional regulation.  This FASEB conference provides the "home base"
              for a rapidly growing and diversifying international community of scientists
              who work with retinoids. The interdisciplinary, topically diverse program of
              this meeting is planned to highlight major developments, foment new ideas,
              facilitate in-depth collegial interactions, reinforce existing collaborations,
              and kindle new ones.  Through its length and structure,  the conference
              provides ample opportunities for more junior investigators to interact with
              senior scientists from this country and abroad.  All attendees, including
              speakers, are encouraged to present a poster. Outstanding posters by junior
              investigators will be selected by a committee; these investigators will be
              invited to present their research in talks to the conference. The conference
              will begin with a plenary lecture by Professor Pierre Chambon. There will be
              nine sessions consisting of 49 invited speakers/participants and approximately
              10 oral presenters of posters. Each session chairperson will provide a brief
              overview. Speakers will be encouraged to present their most recent unpublished
              work-indeed, one criterion in the selection of speakers was the likelihood of
              significant unpublished advances at the time of the meeting. Previous
              conferences have been very successful, judging by the turnout and feedback of
              the attendees. Thus, this series has an excellent record on which to base
              theYear 2000 conference.

This series of well-attended research meetings has
              been the sole national and the major international forum that address the full
              spectrum of retinoid biology.  This award will be used to defray the meeting
              expenses of junior investigators.

