Title       : Topics in Pattern Formation Far From Threshold
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a0073087

Award Number: 0073087
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas M. Ercolani ercolani@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0073087
Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Pattern
              Formation Far From Threshold

Abstract

0073087   Ercolani



This
              research examines various aspects of partial differential equations that model
              pattern formation in physical systems when they are stressed well above
              threshold.  Particular emphasis is placed on understanding the structure of
              defects in these systems, especially in the singular limit as some
              regularization is removed.  For this project the particular model under
              consideration is the regularized Cross-Newell phase diffusion equation.  This
              equation has a free energy similar to two-dimensional Ginzburg-Landau free
              energy except that variation is restricted to the domain of gradient vector
              fields.  Associated defect structures are typically one-dimensional rather than
              being point defects. This project explores four research problems related to
              this interesting model.  The first concerns generalizing the model to
              incorporate variations over director fields (unoriented analogues of vector
              fields).  This extension may have important consequences for understanding the
              emergence of labyrinthine patterns far from threshold.  The second project
              involves refining the technique of self-dual reduction (a novel method to
              determine natural candidates for asymptotic minimizers of the free energy) to
              incorporate general boundary conditions as well as general geometries.  The
              third project will extend the model to three or more dimensions. Potential
              applications would be to modeling filamentary collapse, seen in some recent
              experimental studies of bacterial colonies.  The final project will be to
              undertake a study of the validity of the phase equation within a model
              pattern-forming microscopic system.
  
Patterns with almost periodic
              structure are ubiquitous.  One sees them in nature as sand ripples, as tiger
              stripes, as fingerprints and in atmospheric and geological formations.  In the
              laboratory, they are seen in experiments on optical beams, on convection, on
              flame fronts, as labyrinths on magnetic films, as textured Faraday waves.  The
              striking similarity between pattern textures arising in very different
              microscopic contexts, not only in planform (striped, hexagonal) but also in
              defect structures, suggests that patterns are macroscopic objects with
              universal features depending only on common symmetries shared by different
              microscopic situations.  Finding macroscopic descriptions which unify and
              simplify our understanding of pattern behavior wherever it occurs is the
              principal objective motivating this research.

