Title       : Dissertation Research: Systematics, Secondary reproductive characteristics, and
               Biogeography of the Poeciliid Fish genus Limia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2000       
File        : a0073231

Award Number: 0073231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Springer mark.springer@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David N. Reznick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073231
Springer and Hamilton
	Limia is a genus of Caribbean freshwater fishes
              related to the guppies and sailfin mollies (Poecilia) and swordtails
              (Xiphophorus). Poeciliid fish are important model organisms for studying the
              effects of sexual selection (especially female 
choice) on the behavior and
              appearance of animals. The 20 species of Limias 
are very diverse in sexual
              behaviors and coloration, but have rarely been studied until recently. Some
              species have elaborate male courtship displays while others do not; in some
              species males have colorful fin and body markings while in others males and
              females both appear plain. There are hypotheses for why such differences
              between species would arise, and it is thought that behavior and coloration may
              each influence the evolution of the other. To assess these ideas, it is
              necessary to find out how the different species of Limia are related to each
              other phylogenetically (or genealogically). Knowing the phylogeny of the genus
              will help determine the sequence and directionality of evolution of these
              characteristics.
	Graduate student Aaron Hamilton, under the direction of Drs.
              Mark Springer and David Reznick, is evaluating the relationships of the twenty
              species in the genus Limia using DNA sequencing of two genes, one nuclear and
              one mitochondrial. The results can then be applied to two different fields of
              research, sexual selection theory and biogeography. A comparative analysis of
              the courtship behavior and coloration of Limia species will seek to determine
              if there is a correlation between the presence of a display and the elaboration
              of male color patterns, whether display behaviors are ancestral or evolved
              within Limia, and whether any traits evolved more than once in the genus. The
              phylogenetic tree can also be compared to those of other Caribbean animals to
              look for common biogeographic patterns, which may match hypotheses for the
              geologic history of the Caribbean islands. The Caribbean islands have been a
              focus of biogeographers debating whether the distribution of animal species on
              these islands has been influenced primarily by vicariant events (such as plate
              tectonics) or by over-seas dispersal of the organisms. A robust phylogenetic
              tree for the 20 freshwater Limia species will contribute to the ongoing
              synthesis of knowledge bearing on this problem.

