Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetics of Derived Leptosporangiate Ferns: A
               Reassessment of the Polypodiaceae S. L.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a0073036

Award Number: 0073036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2000        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rudolf Schmid schmid@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073036
Schmid, Smith, and Cranfill
	Graduate student Raymond Cranfill, under
              the direction of Drs. Rudolf Schmid and Alan Smith, proposes to study the
              evolutionary history of derived leptosporangiate ferns, the Polypodiales,
              through use of both molecular sequence data and morphology. The Polypodiales
              comprise most of the ferns living today and number about 8,000-10,000 species.
              They are a conspicuous and diverse element of almost every ecosystem in the
              wetter tropics and subtropics, as well as some temperate ecosystems. Although
              we now know that this group is monophyletic (that is, with a single presumed
              ancestry), our understanding of interrelationships within the Polypodiales is
              poor and unreliable. This is particularly true for the least specialized or
              basal groups that were the first to evolve. The evolutionary radiation of the
              Polypodiales probably occurred over a very short time in the Cretaceous Period,
              which occurred 140-65 million years ago. Because the diversification apparently
              was rapid at a relatively distant geological time, we will need to examine
              several different genes from the chloroplast, mitochondrion, and nucleus, as
              well as morphological features, in order to define the deeper relationships
              between these ferns.
	An understanding of the explicit evolutionary
              relationships of the Polypodiales is important for several reasons. (1) Because
              this is the most diverse group of extant ferns, an understanding of these
              relationships promises to shed light on a range of different and interesting
              topics in evolutionary and structural biology, from macroevolutionary processes
              to evolutionary
transformations in morphological characters. (2) A fresh
              understanding of the latter is particularly important to developmental
              biologists who are interested in the genetic control of developmental processes
              in plants. (3) This research is also important to our understanding of the
              evolution of modern terrestrial and epiphytic (non-terrestrial) ecosystems. It
              appears that the Polypodiales
may have radiated contemporaneously with the
              flowering plants and perhaps in response to habitat diversification that
              occurred as the flowering plants radiated into a wide variety of habitats and
              began to form communities of greater ecological complexity than may have
              existed before. Comparable processes appear to be shaping similar patterns of
              diversity. Therefore, what we learn from ferns may contribute significantly to
              an understanding of the early evolution and development of plant communities
              that we see today.

