Title       : Optical Properties of Terahertz-Modulated Quantum Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0073364

Award Number: 0073364
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Citrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0073364
Citrin
This research grant focuses on the optical properties of
              semiconductor heterostructures, including quantum wells (QW's), quantum wires
              (QWR's), quantum dots (QD's) and microcavities (MC's), in the presence of
              terahertz (THz) electromagnetic fields.  This research area, in addition to
              being of fundamental interest, has received a two-fold impetus from high-speed
              electronics and from high-bandwidth optical communications. Of particular
              interest to this research is the regime of low carrier density in which few
              electrons or holes are excited by the optical beam; the coherence properties of
              the carriers play an essential role.  

Previous reseach considered the
              dynamics of electron-hole (e-h) pairs excited by ultrafast optical pulses in
              the presence of THz fields.  Because the bandwidth of a sub-ps optical  pulse
              can be in excess of 10 meV, e-h pairs with varying degrees of excess energy (or
              excitons in different states of their internal motion) are excited by the
              optical pulse forming a wavepacket.  Such studies provide an analogy to several
              atomic physics phenomena, including the dynamics of Rydberg wavepackets,
              above-threshold ionization, and high-field harmonic generation.  The focus of
              the proposed work is to explore this analogy further, but more so to push into
              the domain where intrinsic solid state effects, such as many-body effects and
              carrier-phonon scattering, begin to make their presence felt by leading to
              dephasing of the optically excited e-h pairs.  Thus, the first optical
              nonlinearities that kick in as the optical intensity is increased beyond the
              linear optical regime will be studied.  Specifically, how do carrier-carrier
              and carrier-phonon scattering lead to dephasing of the optically excited
              electronic excitations, and how does this dephasing modify the spatial motion
              of e-h wavepackets excited by short optical pulses and driven by THz fields? 
              What is the nature of phonons emitted by such wavepackets; can coherent
              wavepackets of phonons be launched by THz-driven e-h wavepackets?  Can
              scattering rates themselves be modified by the dynamics of the THz-driven e-h
              wavepackets?

In addition to being an untapped area of fundamental importance
              in the spectroscopy of semiconductors, light propagation through THz-modulated
              quantum wells povides an optical analog for a class of time-domain
              single-particle quantum tranport phenomena that are otherwise infeasible to
              study.  In particular, tracking the temporal evolution of coherent wavepackets
              during the tunneling process is of fundamental interest and yet difficult, if
              not in practice impossible, to access in quantum transport experiments. 
              Fortuitously, there is a close analogy between the scalar classical
              electromagnetic wave equation and the single-particle Schroedinger equation. 
              This means that in a certain regime one can model by correspondence the quantum
              mechanical dynamics of a particle by an appropriate light-propagation
              experiment.  This correspondence extends to the phase, i.e., quantum mechanical
              phase maps to optical phase.  Clearly, interferometric experiments are routine
              in optics but require a tour de force effort in quantum transport.  A
              particularly interesting class of phenomena involves quantum tunneling through
              a time-modulated potential.  The connections between the same type of processes
              that are associated with the formation of THz sidebands on optical spectra of
              THz illuminated semiconductors with quantum transport phenomena.

The
              theoretical research will focus on regimes where neither the QW/atom or
              optical/transport analogies entirely hold, such as the nonlinear optical regime
              - where THz-modulated semiconductor heterostructures present new possibilities.
               Specifically, the propagation of cw and ultrafast optical pulses through
              heterostructures subjected to pulsed or narrow-band THz fields will be
              studied.
%%%  
 This research grant focuses on the optical properties of
              semiconductor heterostructures, including quantum wells (QW's), quantum wires
              (QWR's), quantum dots (QD's) and microcavities (MC's), in the presence of
              terahertz (THz) electromagnetic fields.  This research area, in addition to
              being of fundamental interest, has received a two-fold impetus from high-speed
              electronics and from high-bandwidth optical communications. Of particular
              interest to this research is the regime of low carrier density in which few
              electrons or holes are excited by the optical beam; the coherence properties of
              the carriers play an essential role.  
***


