Title       : Dissertation Research: Heterochrony in Insects: Phylogeny and Evolution of
               Acoustic Characters in the True Crickets (Orthoptera: Grylloidea)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a0073187

Award Number: 0073187
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9989               (Estimated)
Investigator: Naomi E. Pierce npierce@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry L. Shaw  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0073187
Shaw and Jost
	Crickets have always interested biologists for their
              calling songs used in
courtship.  In most species, male crickets produce a
              song which is heard and recognized by potential female mates.  There are
              thousands of cricket species worldwide, each of which has a unique type of
              song. Previous studies have looked for ecological or adaptive reasons that
              cricket calling songs are so diverse. However, few evolutionary studies have
              looked at cricket song from a morphological perspective, by examining the
              structures which produce and receive the sounds.  In crickets, these acoustic
              structures are specialized front wings in males, and hearing organs on the
              front legs of both sexes.  These structures are extremely diverse in crickets
              (there are ca. 3,500 described species in the world), but in many species are
              completely absent. Developmental studies have found that acoustic body parts
              are strictly adult structures which do not appear until the final life stage.
              In addition, many other structures -- such as hind flight wings, eyes,
              antennae, and genitalia -- are often reduced or absent in non-acoustic cricket
              species.  The simplest way that many adult traits could be reduced or absent in
              a species is by changing the timing of overall growth. In other words, many
              non-acoustic cricket species may simply be morphologically immature forms of
              closely related acoustic species. This project will test the hypothesis that
              morphological diversity in acoustic structures can be explained by changes in
              the timing of growth and metamorphosis, a process known as heterochrony.
              
	Graduate student Manda Jost, with guidance from faculty adviser Dr. Kerry
              Shaw, is studying the phylogenetic relationships of exemplar species of
              crickets and their acoustic evolution. The first step to testing the
              heterochrony hypothesis will be a broad, detailed survey of cricket morphology
              for hundreds of species.  A diverse sample of species will then be selected
              from regions around the world, and a phylogeny will be produced using DNA
              sequence from the mitochondrial gene CO-I.  Statistical and comparative tests
              will then determine whether morphological "maturity" of acoustic structures is
              significantly correlated with the "maturity" of other morphological structures
              which are functionally unrelated. Demonstrating that many functionally
              unrelated traits show simultaneous change would support the hypothesis that
              these traits are all under control of a basic growth schedule.  This idea is
              not an alternative to ecological or adaptive hypotheses, but provides a
              physical mechanism which could produce the diversity we observe. This study
              will result in the most detailed phylogeny to date of the crickets, while using
              new ideas and methods to study the diversity of cricket acoustic characters.

