Title       : VLSI Arithmetic Logic Schemes and Low-Power High-Performance Circuits for
               Parallel and Reconfigurable Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2000      
File        : a0073469

Award Number: 0073469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135320             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rong Lin Lin@geneseo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Geneseo
	      
	      Geneseo, NY  14454    716/245-5211

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: CCR 0073469
Title: New VLSI Arithmetic Logic Schemes and Low-Power
              High-Performance Circuits
For Parallel and Reconfigurable Computations
PI:
              Rong Lin

ABSTRACT

This research investigates several basic parallel and
              reconfigurable arithmetic and elementary functional unit designs, architectures
              and algorithms. Recently developed non-binary VLSI shift switch logic schemes
              and low-power high-performance circuits are used for the study. A set of
              application specific processors, using the novel logic and the building-block
              circuits, has demonstrated superiority in VLSI design, which includes
              high-speed large-size array multipliers, reconfigurable inner product
              processors and reconfigurable matrix multipliers. Development of a dynamically
              reconfigurable platform for all of these computations is a major target of this
              project.

	The new logic schemes primarily employ shift switch parallel
              counter units as logic operators, and 4-bit digital signals, representing
              values ranging from 0 to 3, as logic operands, where only 2-out-of-4 signal
              bits are subject to value-change at any logic stage in the worst case. This is
              used to simplify the circuit designs and to reduce the power-dissipation. The
              main focus of this research is to further explore the properties and advantages
              of the logic schemes and circuits, and to develop superior applications for
              parallel and reconfigurable computations. A significant impact on the next
              generation of microprocessors and SOC designs is expected.

