Title       : Isolation and Characterization of MADS-Box Genes from ARABIDOPSIS
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9418436

Award Number: 9418436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin F. Yanofsky marty@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Rapid progress has been made in the past few years towards  understanding the
              molecular and genetic mechanisms  controlling flower development.  These
              studies have  identified early-acting genes that specify the identity of 
              floral meristems, and later-acting genes that determine the  fate of floral
              organ primordia.  One family of genes that  has emerged as playing a major role
              in flower development  are the MADS-box genes, which encode putative
              transcription  factors.  Indeed, five different Arabidopsis MADS-box genes, 
              APETALA1, CAULIFLOWER, AGAMOUS, APETALA3, and PISTILLATA,  have been
              characterized in terms of their roles in  specifying both floral meristem and
              organ identity.  Furthermore, MADS-box genes have documented roles in 
              regulating gene expression in diverse organisms, including  humans, Drosophila,
              and yeast.  The focus of this proposal  is on the further characterization of
              three recently  published MADS-box genes (AGL4-6), on nine additional genes 
              that were recently isolated (AGL8-9 and AGL11-17), and on  the isolation and
              characterization of additional members of  this important gene family in
              Arabidopsis.  To identify new  MADS-box genes, PCR amplifications and low
              stringency  hybridizations will be used.  Full length cDNA and genomic  clones
              will be isolated and sequenced, and deduced protein  products will be compared
              to those already identified to  look at evolutionary relationships.  RFLP
              mapping will  determine if the cloned gene maps near a previously  identified
              mutation.  RNA blotting and in situ  hybridizations in wild type and mutant
              plants will define  the temporal and spatial pattern of gene expression, and 
              provide insights into the regulatory interactions between  these and other
              genetic loci.  Transgenic plants that  express sense and antisense RNAs will be
              generated by  Agrobacterium-mediated transformation, followed by targeted  EMS
              mutant screens to identify candidate mutations in cloned  loci.  Preliminary
              results from these experiments support  the hypothe sis that MADS-box genes
              play important and  diverse roles in plant development.  Characterization of 
              MADS-box genes will provide insights into the roles and  evolution of this
              important gene family in Arabidopsis, and  will contribute to our understanding
              of related genes in  distantly related plants and other organisms.
