Title       : The irrB and irrI Gene Products of Deinococcus radiodurans RI
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1997     
File        : a9418594

Award Number: 9418594
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Battista jbattis@unix1.sncc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1305,9104,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418594  Battista  Members of the family Deinococcaceae are distinguished by
              their extraordinary resistance to the lethal and mutagenic effects of many DNA
              damaging agents including mitomycin C, ultraviolet (UV) light, and ionizing
              radiation.  For example, an exponential phase culture of Deinococcus
              radiodurans R1, will withstand 5000 Gray (500 krad) of ( radiation without loss
              of viability.  The capacity to survive such massive insults to their genetic
              integrity suggests that the Deinococcaceae have evolved distinctive mechanisms
              of DNA damage tolerance and available evidence argues that efficient DNA repair
              is an integral part of this tolerance.  The enzymology of the deinococci's DNA
              repair processes is poorly understood, however.  It is the long term objective
              of this project to develop a comprehensive explanation for the deinococci's
              remarkable resistance to ionizing radiation.  Satisfying this objective will
              entail identifying the types of proteins involved in the repair of ionizing
              radiation-induced DNA damage, establishing how they interact with each other
              and determining how they are regulated.  This research initiates the
              characterization of two recently isolated ionizing radiation sensitive mutants
              of Deinococcus radiodurans R1 with the intention of determining the nature of
              the defect in each mutant strain.  This objective will be pursued through
              completion of the following stages:  (1) Sequence the irrB and irrI loci and
              use this information to determine how their expression is regulated and how the
              Irrb and IrrI gene products influence the activity of the D. radiodurans repair
              protein, endonuclease (.  (2) Evaluate each mutant strain for the ability to
              recognize and repair ionizing and ultraviolet radiation induced DNA damage by
              determining a) if cell extracts from these strains can bind DNA damage and b)
              if these strains can repair damaged transforming DNA.  (3) Evaluate each mutant
              for its effect on the extensive DNA degradation observed post-irradiation.  For
              each mutant, it wil l be determined: a) whether DNA damage is exported from the
              cell into the growth medium, b) what the size of the exported fragments are c)
              if the kinetics of damage export differs from wild type export during the first
              and second phases of DNA degradation, and d) if degradation terminates when
              repair should be complete.  %%%  Active oxygen species, in particular hydroxyl
              radicals, are the agents that mediate the majority of ionizing
              radiation-induced cellular damage in aerobic aqueous environments.  It is,
              therefore, expected that the study of the deinococci will yield general
              insights into how the lethal effects of oxidative cellular damage is best
              avoided.    ***
