Title       : Improved Electron Density Modification Algorithms for Macromolecular
               Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2000     
File        : a9418597

Award Number: 9418597
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223902             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rick P. Millane   (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Elucidation of the detailed molecular structures of proteins and  viruses by
              x-ray crystallography has provided a wealth of  information concerning
              relationships between structures and  activities. Although the number of known
              protein structures is  now quite large, the number of virus structures known is
              still  rather small, as a result of the enormous amount of human,  experimental
              and computational resources consumed in such an  investigation. A step that is
              particularly crucial in determining  virus structures, and some protein
              structures, is a computational  procedure called electron density modification.
               It is not  uncommon however, for this procedure to converge to an incorrect 
              solution.  This is referred to here as stagnation.  It is then  necessary to
              collect additional experimental data, usually from  heavy atom derivatives.  It
              is not always possible to prepare  derivative crystals of sufficient quality,
              in which case  determination of the structure is precluded.  Even if derivative
               crystals of sufficient quality can be prepared, their  preparation, and the
              subsequent collection and processing of the  additional diffraction data, can
              consume one or more person-years  of effort.    This proposal is concerned with
              developing new density  modification algorithms that are less prone to
              stagnation.  These  new algorithms will be based on techniques that have proved
               successful in overcoming stagnation problems in other areas of  image
              reconstruction such as in astronomy, and will be adapted  here for use in
              macromolecular crystallography.  The algorithms  will be implemented as
              computer programs and applied to the  determination of virus and protein
              structures that are currently  under investigation.  The algorithms will be
              designed so that  they can be implemented on massively parallel computer 
              architectures, to take full advantage of emerging computer  technologies.   
              The impact of successful completion of the project will be  substantial.  (1)
              It will provide a route for the determ ination  of structures that are
              resistant to solution by current  techniques.  (2) It will offer the
              possibility of true ab initio  structure determination of icosohedral viruses. 
              (3) In cases  where structure determination is currently possible only by the 
              slow and tedious collection and analysis of heavy atom derivative  data, it
              will reduce the effort involved (by as much as one or  more person-years per
              structure) by decreasing the amount and  quality of derivative data required. 
              The effect will be a more  rapid, efficient, and cost-effective determination
              of  macromolecular structures, and a larger pool of structures  available for
              study.
