Title       : Three Dimensional Magma Dynamics in Large Sills
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9418513

Award Number: 9418513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce D. Marsh bmarsh@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This award supports a project to study the emplacement and  solidification of
              sills in the Dry Valleys region of Antarctica  and to compare their histories
              to similar sheet-like magma bodies  on Easter Island and Reunion Island.  If
              the three-dimensional  history of emplacement and solidification of sheet-like
              magmatic  bodies could be learned through direct observation, a great  advance
              could be made in understanding the evolution of Earth.  Sheet-like bodies of
              magma may well be responsible for delivering  and shaping both the oceanic and
              continental crusts.  Beneath  ocean ridges, for example, relatively narrow (~1
              - 4 kilometers),  thin (100 - 300 meters) ribbons or sills of magma deliver, 
              through a delicate balance between emplacement and solidification  processes,
              the basic structure of the oceanic crust, which forms  some 60% of Earth's
              surface.  And basically similar  solidification processes in sheets of
              underplating basaltic magma  and high-level invading granitic magma go a long
              way to  delivering and shaping the continental crust through  remobilization
              and sorting of earlier magmas.  Learning the  dynamic history of sheet-like
              magmas has, however, proven  exceedingly elusive for two simple reasons: lack
              of vast  continuous rock exposures and lack of extensive, clear internal 
              markers to reveal the temporal and spatial history of  solidification. 
              Internal layerings are plentiful in the large,  well known layered intrusions,
              but there is little sign of the  nature and style of magma filling (e.g., was
              filling periodic or  steady? at discrete points or along fissures? slow or
              fast?  etc.).  The many large diabase sills throughout the world broadly  show
              how filling occurred, but rarely do they show any internal  indicators or
              markers detailing the filling and solidification  processes themselves.  And
              when a marker, as in the form of  trails of large, distinct, previously formed
              crystals, does occur  it rarely can be traced out in three dimensions due to
              poor  natural exposures.    T he Basement Sill of Antarctica changes all this. 
              It is thick  (300 meters), vast (greater than 5,000 cubic kilometers), 
              superbly exposed, and above all carries a distinct internal  marker in the form
              of a tongue of large (1 - 6 millimeters)  orthopyroxene crystals. Moreover,
              this orthopyroxene tongue  varies systematically in thickness, crystal size,
              and position  within the sill reflecting both the filling locations and the 
              rate of filling itself.  The documentation of this body and its  three
              dimensional dynamics may well prove to be the "Rosetta  Stone" of sheet-like
              magmatic systems.  It is of fundamental  importance and is central to this
              project.  The detailed  processes that give rise beneath ocean ridges to the
              structure of  the oceanic crust also may well be gained from this study.  And 
              the seeds of initiation of continental crust, through  Solidification Front 
              Instability and the production of silicic  lenses, is also clear in the
              Basement Sill.  As a comparative  study, a search for evidence in the lavas of
              Easter Island may  well also establish the importance of this process in
              volcanic  systems.
