Title       : Infrared Spectroscopic Studies of the Photosynthetic Oxygen-Evolving Complex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9418164

Award Number: 9418164
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bridgette A. Barry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418164  Barry  The technique of infrared spectroscopy will be used to
              investigate  the relationship between structure and function in the 
              photosynthetic oxygen-evolving complex, photosystem II.  These  experiments
              will focus on the manganese-containing catalytic site  and on the 33 kDa
              manganese-stabilizing extrinsic protein.  The  oxidation of water is a four
              electron event.  The manganese-  containing catalytic site of the photosystem
              II reaction center  accumulates these four oxidizing equivalents and cycles
              through a  series of five "S states."  Vibrational spectroscopy will be used 
              to obtain information concerning the structural changes that occur  in the
              manganese cluster and in the reaction center upon  photooxidation.  Infrared
              spectroscopy will also be employed in  order to investigate the structure and
              functional role of the 33  kDa protein.  This proposal has three objectives: A)
              to use  difference infrared spectroscopy to measure and to identify the 
              structural changes that occur upon oxidation of the photosystem II  manganese
              cluster; B) to test the hypothesis that secondary  structure changes occur in
              the 33 kDa protein when this extrinsic  subunits binds to the photosystem II
              reaction center; C) to use  difference infrared spectroscopy to determine if
              removal of the 33  kDa protein influences the structural changes that accompany
               oxidation of the manganese cluster.  %%%  Photosynthesis in plants involves
              the conversion of light energy  into chemical energy.  This process is carried
              out be the multi-  step transfer of electrons in membrane associated proteins. 
               Through this transfer of electrons, a relatively stable separation  of charge
              is built up across the membrane.  This charge separation  is the energy storage
              event and is driven by the energy of light.   The ultimate donor of electrons
              is water; the process of removal of  electrons from water results in the
              liberation of oxygen. This  oxygen production is critical for the maintenance
              of human life on  earth.  This propo sal will fund studies of the membrane
              associated  protein that is responsible for the production of oxygen.  Oxygen 
              producing chemistry occurs at a cluster of four manganese atoms.   Through the
              use of vibrational spectroscopy, we will obtain new  information concerning the
              structure and binding site of the  manganese cluster, as well as concerning the
              chemistry that occurs  at this metal cluster.  Vibrational spectroscopy is the
              ideal  technique to use to investigate these processes, since it is 
              exquisitely sensitive to small structural alterations.  ***
