Title       : Elemental Tracers of Carbon Export and Recycling in the RossSea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1994  
File        : a9418786

Award Number: 9418786
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213629             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack R. Dymond jdymond@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James McManus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,1315,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418786  Dymond  This project will analyze an existing suite of both sediment
              trap  and ocean bottom samples from the Ross Sea for barium and other 
              refractory elements (aluminum, sodium, vanadium, iron, thorium, and  tin), and
              evaluate barium as a proxy for biological productivity  and carbon export to
              the seafloor of the Ross Sea.    These analyses bear directly on the question
              of how much and how  quickly anthropogenic carbon dioxide is distributed among
              the  various global carbon reservoirs.  If the "new" atmospheric carbon  is
              sequestered in non-atmospheric reservoirs within a relatively  brief period,
              then the expected global warming will be reduced;   however it is also possible
              that any global warming enhances the  flux of carbon (and other greenhouse
              gases) from non-atmospheric  reservoirs to the atmosphere, enhancing the
              expected global  warming.  While little is currently known about the planetary 
              response, it is thought that oceanic processes, particularly  changes in ocean
              fertility and interactions between ocean fertility  and circulation, are
              defining factors in these questions.    Time changes in the oceanic carbon
              reservoir are related to ocean  productivity, and must be inferred from proxy
              observations.  The  disadvantage of the most widely used proxies -- organic
              carbon,  calcium carbonate, and opal (silicon dioxide) -- is that they  cannot
              distinguish between variable preservation rates and variable  productivity
              rates.  This project will link these proxies with the  flux of barium through
              the water column and in the sediment, and  constrain the extent of barium
              recycling with the refractory  element data.  This analysis will additionally
              help define the  strength and source of lateral carbon input to the Ross Sea.  
              Results from this study will be integrated with other continuing  studies to
              produce a better understanding of biogeochemical cycling  in the Ross Sea and
              in the Southern Ocean in general.  ***
