Title       : The Organic Matrix Associated With Calcium Oxalate Formation In Vitis Labrusca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  1998   
File        : a9418608

Award Number: 9418608
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Alice Webb   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9161,9181,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Webb  MCB-9418608    The major form of biomineralization in plants is crystal 
              formation in the plant vacuole.  These crystals may have a  function in mineral
              sequestration, plant defense, and  structural protection of plant tissues.
              Vacuolar crystals  form in specific cell types, idioblasts, under precise 
              developmental and environmental control. The major thrust of  this proposal is
              to determine the protein components of the  organic matrix, the cellular matrix
              which may function by  providing a template for mineral deposition, by
              nucleating  crystal growth, by forming the chamber in which  mineralization
              occurs, or by influencing the cellular  environment in which the crystals form.
               In grape leaves, a vacuolar membrane encloses each  individual calcium oxalate
              crystal. The membrane is part of  the organic matrix. This work will identify
              and characterize  the proteins on this membrane and the genes which encode 
              these proteins. The cellular disposition and abundance of  these proteins in
              crystal idioblasts and surrounding cells  will be determined with electron and
              light microscopy.  To  complement studies on the nature of these membrane 
              components, the developmental context of crystal formation  will be followed. 
              In this way, the key components of the  membrane contribution to the organic
              matrix can be  identified in relation the initiation and growth of  crystals. 
              %%%  Biomineralization, the biologically controlled formation of  mineral
              deposits, is crucial to the survival of many  organisms.  The formation of
              bones, teeth, and shells in  animals are important forms of biomineralization
              whose  functions are well-recognized.  Information about the  organic matrix
              provided for crystal growth in biological  organisms is being applied to
              materials science, where  organic macromolecules identified in
              biomineralization  systems can be used to manipulate the construction of thin 
              films and other crystalline materials.  Research may  identify novel
              calcium-binding proteins, crystal nucleating  s ubstances, or other molecules
              that promote or inhibit  crystal growth, with potentially wide application to 
              medicine, ecology, engineering, and ceramics.  %%%
