Title       : (GRGC) Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotope Geochemistry of Soil Minerals: Implications
               for Paleoclimatology and Pedology.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1997    
File        : a9418970

Award Number: 9418970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel M. Savin sms7@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,1304,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418970          Savin    The proposed work is a continuation of ongoing
              research into the  oxygen and hydrogen isotope geochemistry of soil minerals
              and soil  water.  The primary immediate goal of the work is to understand the 
              relationships between the isotopic compositions of different  pedogenic
              minerals (especially clay minerals and oxides) and the  climate of the
              weathering environment.  A major long term goal of  the research is to apply
              those relationships in the reconstruction  of ancient continental climates from
              the isotopic compositions of  minerals in paleosols.  An additional goal is to
              obtain increased  insight into the processes involved in the formation and 
              modification of soil minerals.  The proposed study is unique in that it will
              relate measurements of  the isotopic composition of pedogenic minerals to the
              isotopic  composition of soil waters and precipitation.  Studies of soil 
              minerals begin with very careful field, petrologic and mineralogic  examination
              prior to separation of phases for isotopic analysis.   These studies will
              include an extension of completed work on the  oxygen isotopic compositions of
              Amazonian lateritic kaolinites.   Other soil minerals (especially gibbsite,
              titanium oxides, and iron  oxides) from the same pedogenic facies of the same
              profiles will   be  analyzed for   18O.  All hydrogen-containing phases will be
               analyzed for   D.  Studies of soil minerals will also include  analysis of a
              variety of saprolites developed on igneous rocks in  the Virginia Piedmont and
              , in collaboration with colleagues at JPL  and Caltech, investigation of the
              stable isotope systematics of  soil minerals developed on basalt on the Kohala
              Peninsula (Hawaii)  along a climatic gradient (rainfall increasing with
              altitude from  20 cm to 150 cm per year.  The isotope geochemistry of soil
              water and, where possible,  precipitation, will be monitored over the course of
              a year at each  of the soil profiles which are studied (Brazil, Virginia
              Piedmont,  Hawaii).  Work on the isot ope geochemistry of soil water will focus
               on the analysis of the liquid water phase (rather than total water  as in most
              previous studies) in the unsaturated zone.  This is  important distinction when
              the soil water isotopic data are  to be  related the isotopic compositions of
              pedogenic minerals.  The  analytical technique to be used was developed in the
              current grant  period.  It is a laboratory-based CO2 equilibration technique.  
              Additional work is planned on the development and verification of  an in situ
              technique based upon the analysis of soil CO2  and upon  the   isotopic
              fractionations that occur when soil water is partitioned  into a liquid phase
              and other components (e.g., adsorbed water).
