Title       : Molecular Analysis of Abscission Zone Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9418400

Award Number: 9418400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lynn Zimmerman                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rod A. Wing   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMUS
	      College Station, TX  778433578    409/845-8670

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abscission is an almost universal phenomenon by which plants  shed organs.  In
              terms of ecology and adaptation, it allows  flexibility in dealing with
              stresses, injuries, and failure  of pollination.  It accommodates fruit and
              seed dispersal  and seasonal dormancy.  Economically it becomes important in 
              terms of leaf removal, flower/young fruit removal, and  mature fruit harvest. 
              There are agricultural situations  where it would be desirable to either
              promote or reduce  leaf, flower/young fruit or mature fruit abscission. 
              Abscission can be divided into three stages.  First, the  development of a
              region where abscission will occur --- the  abscission zone (AZ); second, the
              actual separation of the  organ from the plant; and third, the formation of a 
              protective layer of cells on the proximal end of the zone.  Although the
              process of cell separation between cells of  fully developed AZs has been well
              investigated, the process  by which certain cells differentiate as an
              abscission zone  is not well understood.  Experiments described in this 
              proposal will examine the molecular and cellular mechanisms  involved in the
              process by which an AZ forms on tomato  pedicels.  The long term goals of this
              program are to  establish a model system that can be utilized to study the 
              gene regulation and cell biology of abscission zone  development.  Tomato is an
              ideal system with which to set up  such a model system.  The PI hopes to
              determine the role of  the jointless gene in the abscission process and relate
              the  pattern of expression of this gene with the development of  abscission
              zones in chimeric plants.
