Title       : RUI Control of mRNA Translation During Spermatogenesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9418285

Award Number: 9418285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Kleene kenneth.kleene@umb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Boston
	      100 Morrissey Boulevard
	      Boston, MA  02125    617/287-5370

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0120000   Research Involving Recombinant DNA      
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The vast majority of mRNAs in meiotic and haploid  spermatogenic cells in mice
              exhibit high levels of  translationally repressed free messenger
              ribonucleoprotein  particles (mRNPs).  Some mRNAs, such as protamine mRNAs, are
               stored as free-mRNPs in early haploid cells and recruited  onto polysomes at
              specific times in late haploid cells.  The  proportions of other mRNAs in
              repressed free-mRNPs in  meiotic and early haploid cells range from virtually
              all to  none.  Thus, translation of nearly every individual mRNA in  meiotic
              and haploid spermatogenic cells is regulated by mRNA-  specific controls
              specifying the stage of translational  repression and/or the proportion of
              free-mRNPs.  Very little  is known about the mRNP proteins in spermatogenic
              cells,  even though these proteins are likely to determine the  translational
              competence of spermatogenic mRNAs.  The  overall objective of this proposal is
              to elucidate the  structure and translational competence of free-mRNP and 
              polysomal mRNP particles in meiotic and haploid cells in  mice.  The
              experiments are designed to characterize the  abundant mRNP proteins,
              specifically those mRNP proteins  that are complexed with large numbers of
              different mRNAs.  These mRNP proteins are predicted to consist of two well- 
              characterized proteins, the poly(A) binding proteins and Y-  box proteins, and
              a set of unidentified proteins.  There is  growing evidence that Y-box proteins
              function as non-  specific translational repressors by packaging many mRNAs in 
              a wide variety of eukaryotic cells into free-mRNPs.  It  follows that the
              structure and translational properties of  free-mRNPs may be determined
              primarily by Y-box proteins.  The basic premise of this proposal is that
              elucidation of  the general structure of free-mRNPs will be crucial for 
              understanding translational control of individual mRNAs.  A  major objective of
              this proposal is to characterize the  levels of various mRNP proteins in the
              cytosolic, polysomal  and free-mRNP fractions in several stages  of
              spermatogenic  cells that exhibit high levels of translationally repressed 
              free-mRNPs.  The translational competence of native free-  mRNPs and polysomal
              mRNPs will be compared in the  reticulocyte and wheat germ cell-free
              translation system.  This proposal is intended to introduce talented 
              undergraduates to research in molecular biology.
