Title       : Applications of Real-Space Refinement for Macromolecular Structure Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1995      
File        : a9418741

Award Number: 9418741
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Chapman chapman@sb.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Computational methods will be developed for the  determination, refinement and
              interpretation of  macromolecular structures by X-ray crystallography and 
              electron microscopy.  Crystallographic structure  determination involves the
              manual building of atomic model  into an electron density map, using
              interactive computer  programs, followed by automatic refinement of the model
              to  the diffraction amplitudes.  The crystallographic  applications will bridge
              the transition between model  building and automatic reciprocal-space
              refinement, a  transition that is a bottle-neck and a common source of  major
              errors in crystallographic structure determination.  Using new techniques of
              restrained real-space refinement,  the fit of the model to the electron density
              will be  optimized before the phases are abandoned for conventional 
              reciprocal-space refinement  Such local refinement, in turn  allows the phases
              and map to be improved, completing an  iterative cycle for a new method of
              model improvement that  is free from the feedback bias of omit-maps.  Thus the
              new  methods will have broad scientific impact since they will be  built for
              computer platforms common to the structural  biology laboratories.  The new
              methods will increase the  number of macromolecular structure determinations
              that can  be completed, improve the quality, decrease the chance of  errors,
              and decrease the resources that are required.  Thus,  this work will help
              further our understanding of the  function of individual macromolecules, and of
              their  interactions in the macromolecular assemblies that are  central to many
              cellular processes.  This award is supported  by the Computational Biology
              Activity and the Biophysics  programs.
