Title       : Sulfur Reduction by the Bacterial Thermophile Thermotoga neapolitana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1997      
File        : a9418197

Award Number: 9418197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Noll noll@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Noll  9418197  This project is an investigation of the physiology of elemental 
              sulfur reduction to sulfide by the hyperthromophilic bacterium  Thermotoga
              neapolitana.  Sulfur reduction (sulfidogenesis) is a  common property of
              hyperthermophilic bacteria and archaea, but the  mechanisms by which it occurs
              may differ among these organisms.   Since sulfidogenesis is found in organisms
              similar to the common  ancestors of two phylogenetic domains, it may have been
              present in  the ancestors of all lining organisms and, thus, represents an 
              early means to enhance catabolism using an inorganic electron  acceptor.  Our
              goals in this project are to determine how  sulfidogenesis contributes to
              bioenergetics and to elucidate the  metabolic pathways that lead to sulfide
              production.  We intend to  achieve these goals by pursuing three objectives. 
              (1) We will  purify and characterize an NADH:polysulfide oxidoreductase, one of
               two known sulfur reductases in T. neapolitiana.  We will clone its  gene to
              study its regulation and relationship to adjacent genes.  (2) We will isolate
              mutants defective in key enzymatic activities  to test hypotheses derived from
              biochemical studies and look for  evidence of alternative bioenergetics
              pathways.  (3) We will  finally develop a cloning vector for T. neapolitiana
              for the long  range goals of introducing mutations via gene replacement and 
              examining catabolic regulation.  %%%  This project is a study of how solid
              elemental sulfur is converted  to hydrogen sulfide gas by the bacterium
              Thermotoga neapolitana, an  organism that grows at very high temperatures (a 
              hyperthermophilic).  Sulfide formation is a common property of 
              hyperthermophilic organisms, but the mechanism by which it occurs  is unknown
              for many of them.  This process has evolutionary,  ecological, and economic
              importance.  Since the process is found in  organisms thought to be like some
              of the fist organisms to appear  on Earth, it may represent an early metabolic
              process.  The sulfur  cycle is central to t he biology of geothermal
              ecosystems, so these  hyperthermophiles are important in these environments. 
              The  biological removal of sulfurous compounds from coals and ores has 
              traditionally been mediated by aerobes.  Hyperthermophilic  anaerobes or their
              enzymes may provide an alternative means to  solubilize bound sulfur for
              measurement or removal.  Our goals in  this project are to determine how
              sulfide formation contributes to  bioenergetics and to elucidate the metabolic
              pathways that lead to  sulfide production. We intend to achieve these goals by
              studying  the enzymes that mediate this process, isolating the genes that 
              encode these enzymes, and developing genetic tools that will allow  future
              investigations of these enzymes, and developing genetic  tools that will allow
              future investigations of these and other  questions about the metabolism of
              this fascinating organism.  ***
