Title       : Changes in Paleosol Morphology and Geochemistry Associated with Mid-Paleozoic
               Afforestation and Decline in Atmospheric pCO2
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1995   
File        : a9418183

Award Number: 9418183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185647             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia Mora cmora@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven G. Driese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418183  Mora     The proposed research investigates changes in paleosol and
              pedogenic carbonate morphology and geochemistry preserved during the
              Siluro-Devonian time period, a period of rapid evolution and diversification of
              terrestrial ecosystems.  Land plant evolution led to progressively more robust
              plant size and deeper rooting capabilities and more widespread afforestation of
              the land surface.  The development and increasing abundance of vascular land
              plants may have contributed to increased weathering rates and draw down of
              atmospheric pCO2 from very high levels in the middle Paleozoic to near-present
              day levels in the Permo-Carboniferous.  The proposed research will evaluate the
              hypothesis that afforestation, increased weathering profiles and also
              contributed to changes in the stable isotope composition of pedogenic
              carbonate.   The proposed study will emphasize morphological and geochemical
              analysis of Siluro-Devonian paleosols from ten stratigraphic units (chiefly
              red-beds) exposed in outcrop in the U.S. and maritime Canada Appalachians. 
              Detailed macro- and micromorphological characterization of the paleosols,
              estimation of paleosol thickness, mass balance evaluation of soil major and
              trace element geochemistry and stable isotopic analyses of pedogenic carbonates
              phases will be combined with existing paleontological information for these
              units to characterize the "pedological signature" of afforestation of the land
              surface by vascular plants.  The results will permit a detailed evaluation of
              atmospheric pCO2  during this period of profound change using Cerling's soil
              carbonate paleobarometer.   The results will contribute to our understanding of
              the distribution and preservation of paleosols and pedogenic carbonate deposits
              and their usefulness (or limitations) as monitors of paleoenvironments and
              paleoclimate.  The results are relevant to models which predict the response of
              the Earth's lithosphere and biosphere to significant changes in atmospheric
              pCO2.
