Title       : Swimming Motility in the Cyanobacterium Synechococcus: A Genetic and Biochemical
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  1996   
File        : a9418842

Award Number: 9418842
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294181             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bianca Brahamsha bbrahamsha@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418842  Brahamsha    Certain unicellular cyanobacteria of the genus
              Synechococcus exhibit a unique form of prokaryotic motility.  Unlike other
              motile cyanobacteria which move by gliding on surfaces, these motile
              Synechococcus sp. are capable of swimming in liquids.  Moreover, although the
              swimming behavior of Synechococcus resembles that of flagellated bacteria,
              numerous ultrastructural studies have so far revealed no organelles of motility
              and the actual mechanism of swimming remains a mystery.  At issue are such
              fundamental questions as how organisms convert chemical energy into motion. 
              The mechanism of swimming is being addressed at the genetic and biochemical
              levels.  Mutants impaired in motility are being obtained by interposon and
              chemical mutagenesis.  The mutations are being complemented by conjugation of a
              genomic bank of wild-type Synechococcus into the mutant strains.  The genes
              responsible will be cloned, their nucleotide sequences determined, and their
              products localized.  A protease-sensitive cell-surface component(s) implicated
              in motility is being purified, and the gene(s) encoding it will be isolated,
              sequenced and inactivated.  To accomplish this Dr. Brahamsha is making use of
              the following recent developments in her laboratory:  1) an agar plating
              technique that allows the discrimination between motile and non-motile colonies
              and will make possible the selection of non-motile mutants; 2) the ability to
              introduce DNA into marine motile Synechococcus sp. and to get recombination
              into the chromosome; 3) the availability of both a replicative and a suicide
              vector; and 4) the indication that there is a protease-sensitive cell-surface
              component(s) that is involved in the ability to swim in liquids.  %%%  The
              results of this research should provide insights into the mechanisms by which
              organisms convert chemical energy into motion.
