Title       : Collaborative Research: (GRGC) Testing the Hypothesis of a Cretaceous
               Supertethyan Climate Zone in the Caribbean Province
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1996   
File        : a9418081

Award Number: 9418081
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claudia Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric J. Barron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Arthur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1304,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418081          Johnson            This proposal focuses on testing the
              stability of cretaceous  climates in the Caribbean Province by analyzing
              integrated high-  resolution stratigraphic, sedimentologic, paleobiologic and 
              geochemical data, in conjunction with climate simulations, to test   the
              hypothesis of a warmer and more saline core tropical climate  zone -
              Supertethys (Kauffman and Johnson, 1988) - and to define its  temporal and
              spatial characteristics.  Tests will be made along two  north-south transects
              spanning the entire Cretaceous paleotropics  and its margins, plotted on the
              Caribbean plate reconstructions of  Pindell and Barrett (1990), and will
              utilize a series of three time  slices representing different stages of
              Cretaceous climate-ocean  history (Late Albian, Early Turonian, Early
              Maastrichtian).  These  time slices will span    the interval for which
              paleobiogeographic  and reef diversity data (Johnson, 1993; 1994, in press)
              propose two  episodes of development and an intervening period of collapse of 
              Supertethys.  One transect will extend from New Mexico  through  west Texas,
              Mexico, Central American and western Venezuela (Fig.1);  the second will extend
              from Oklahoma through central Texas, and  Greater Antilles, Trinidad, the
              Dutch, West Indies, and eastern  Venezuela to northern Brazil (Fig.1).  For
              each time slice,  detailed facies analyses of shallow water platform sequences
              will  be used to independently determine areas of net evaporation,  upwelling ,
              etc.  Stable isotope analyses of unaltered rudisted  bivalve shell material,
              early marine cements, and foraminifer tests  where available, will allow
              definition of relative sea surface  (photic zone) temperature/salinity, and
              characterization of north  to south thermal gradients.  Paleobiological data
              along the  transects will include species and generic dispersion maps, 
              taxonomic and ecologic analyses of community composition and  structure,
              statistically predicted latitudinal diversity gradients,  and analyses of pal
              eobiogeographic dispersion, dispersal pathways,  and the taxonomic composition
              and boundary characteristics of  paleobiogeographic units.  A partial
              stratigraphic and  paleobiologic  data base exists for each transect and time
              slice,  enhancing the efficiency of the proposed research.  Integration of 
              these data sets for each time slice  will allow identification, and  where
              present, characterization of the supertropical Caribbean  climate zone
              (Supertethys), its dynamic evolution during the  Cretaceous greenhouse
              interval, its effect on the evolution,  diversification, and extinction of
              tropical organisms/ecosystems,  the structure and chemistry of tropical
              Cretaceous seas, and the  evolution of Cretaceous paleoclimates.  These data
              will be directly  applied to testing and modifying Cretaceous climate
              simulations  generated using the Semtner-Chervin eddy-resolving ocean general 
              circulation model (Semtner and Chervin, 1988) and the GENESIS  atmospheric
              general circulation model (Pollard and Thompson  1993a,b) for these same time
              intervals.
