Title       : Regulation of GlnR (the glnRA repressor) in Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9418699

Award Number: 9418699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold J. Schreier Schreier@umbi.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             u e_L                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       S       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    u e_L   u
              e_L        4 @                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       ;   <   =   >   ?   @   A   B   C   D   E                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9418699
              Schreier The molecular mechanism of regulation of glutamine synthetase (GS)
              synthesis in Bacillus subtilis will be studied.  GS is essential for
              introducing ammonium ions into the mainstream of nitrogen metabolism.  In B.
              subtilis, regulation of GS occurs primarily at the level of transcription, and
              control appears to be unique among the numerous bacterial regulatory systems
              studied to date.  It has been established that GS itself is involved in
              control, but the role the enzyme plays in this capacity is unknown.  In
              addition, GS expression is negatively affected by a transcriptional regulatory
              protein called GlnR.  Encoded by glnR, which precedes the GS structural gene,
              glnA in a dicistronic operon, GlnR inhibits transcription by binding to two
              operators adjacent to and within the glnRA promoter; how GlnR activity is
              regulated is not known.  The proposed research will determine the mechanisms
              involved in regulating transcription from the glnRA promoter and including the
              following objectives: (a) since GlnR appears to be affected by glutamate and
              several (-keto acids,  experiments will be per formed to characterize these
              interactions both biochemically and physiologically; (b) the relationship
              between GS and GlnR will be examined; (c) mutant phenotypes in GS and GlnR will
              be also characterized both biochemically in in vitro, as well as in in vivo
              studies. %%% This is an award to continue studies on the regulation of nitrogen
              metabolism in Bacillus subtilis, which is a spore-forming bacterium important
              to the biotechnology industry.  Work has focused on the pathway involved in
              ammonia assimilation and experiments have been performed to characterize the
              factors involved in controlling synthesis of glutamine synthetase (GS).  GS is
              a critical enzyme in metabolism since it operated to support the incorporation
              of ammonia by GS into the cell.  This results in the production of glutamine,
              an amino acid central to metabolism.  In addition to providing nitrogen for
              approximately 80% of the nitrogen-containing compounds in the cell, glutamine
              bridges carbon and nitrogen metabolism through a variety of pathways.  Because
              B. subtilis is also able to reverse this process and change many
              nitrogen-containing compounds back to ammonia and simple non-nitrogenous carbon
              components, the route of ammonia assimilation and release is important in
              understanding how the organism grows.  Studies have shown that the control of
              GS production in B. subtilis occurs in a manner unique among bacteria.  The
              enzyme appears to act in concert with a regulatory protein called GlnR to
              influence its own formation.  Nothing is known about how GS and GlnR interact
              or about the nature of the signals that they respond to.  Consequently,
              experiments will be designed to focus on these issues. ***                     
                               Oh     +'  0                                       $       H  
                  l                                               D       h                  
                                              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                  
                                  Schreier, Harold J.                 Robert Uffen           
                           Shelley A. Graves           @     Y   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a
              t i o n                           (                                            
                    :                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 K                          @       ^L                          @    g ^_L   
                                                                                             
                            @      _                                    Microsoft Word 6.0   
                                                                4                            
                                                                        ;                    
                                                                                             
                                                  e =       e                   S            
                                                            j       j   j       j       j    
                j       j                                                                    
                    1                                                                   '    
                )       )       )   #   L               l           T       D                
                        j                                                                    
                                  j       j                                                  
                                  j               j               '                       ~  
                          j       j       j       j               '                          
                                                                                             
                9418699 Schreier The molecular mechanism of regulation of glu
