Title       : Evolution of Pollen Development in Orchids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9418015

Award Number: 9418015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy C. Brown rcb@louisiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Betty E. Lemmon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Louisiana at Lafay
	      104 University Circle
	      Lafayette, LA  705032701    337/482-6203

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9169,9183,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             t fB                 C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       *       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    t fB    t
              fB                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                 Oh     +'  0                
                                    D       h                                               @
                    d                                                          
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                      
              P:\CELL\ABSTRACT\9418015.ASC                                        Una Solomon
                                      Una   e =       e               /   *                  
              /                                       j       j   j       j       j       j  
                  j                                                                       M  
              C                                                                              
                                                  /           T       F   M                  
                  j                                                                         M
                            j       j                                                        
                            j               j                                       ~        
                    j       j       j       j                           7                    
                                                                                         
              9418015 Brown and Lemmon Pollen development in orchids is a promising new
              system for studying ontogenetic aspects of plant evolution.  Precise nulcear
              and cytoplasmic divisions occur in both meiosis and pollen mitosis in the
              absence of a preprophase band of microtubules (PBB).  In addition,
              microsporocytes differ in that karyokinesis and cytokinesis may be temporally
              uncoupled resulting in a brief coenocytic stage before simultaneous
              quadripartioning into a tetrad of microspores. In simulatneous cytokinesis,
              phragmoplasts develop between non-sister as well as siter nuclei providing
              additonal information on phragmoplast development and the determination of
              division plane.  On the basis of recent comparative studies we have  put forth
              the hypothesis that the direct control of division plane in cells lacking PPBs
              is a function of nuclear-based radial microtubule systems (RMS) that define
              domains of cytoplasm.  The nuclear cytoplasmic domain model assumes that
              spindle alignment, and therefore placement of nuclei, stems from establishment
              of division polarity which, in turn may be subject to various levels of contol.
               We propose comparative, developmental and experimental studies of the
              organization and functional interactions among cytoskeletal elements
              (microtubules and F actin), organelles,  and endomembranes in pollen
              development.  Since the cytokinetic apparatus in microsporogenesis is much more
              variable than histogenesis, we will use comparative studies to identify
              commonalities that underlie events of pollen development.  Both the
              microsprorocytes and pollen of orchids are amenable to modern methods of
              immunocytochemstry and electron microscopy.  The generative pole microtubule
              system (GPMS), which we recently discovered in the exineless pollen of moth
              orchids, provides a targetable structural marker for drug perturbation sutdies
              aimed at understanding the establishment of polarity and organization of
              microtubles of the unequal first division in pollen that is critical to
              development of the male gametophyte. %%%           This is a proposal by highly
              regarded senior investigators working on cytoskeletal involvement in
              establishing planes of cell division and on the formation of cytoplasmic
              domains which may orient division.  The system they have selected, pollen
              formation in orchids,  is chosen because underlying mechanisms are often
              revealed by thematic variation. The orchid family offers much variety in mode
              of meiotic and mitotic cytokinesis and in the availability of complex hybrids
              which undergo faulty meiosis during pollen formation. Pollen division is
              particularly interesting because the structure which determines the future site
              of cell division, the pre prophase band of microtubules, is missing. The goa ls
              of the proposal are to 1) investigate the establishment of division polarity in
              meiosis and pollen mitosis, 2) investigate the relationship of the radial
              microtubule system associated with the cell nucleus to the organization of the
              microtubules involved in  laying down the daughter cell wall during division ,
              3) establish if cytoplasmic domains defined by co-extensive microtubules
              control the division plane during meiosis and pollen mitosis, and 4) relate the
              data on pollen development to the evolution of  the diverse pollen types found
              in the Orchidaceae. With regard to objectives (2) and (3), this work has the
              potential to reveal the importance of nuclearassociated microtubules in
              microtubule growth and initiation in plants in general.  Its identification as
              a microtubule organizing center (MTOC)cell biology. The microtubules of plants
              have been shown to have a dramatic influence on plant cell shape and size. The
              cortical array associated with the plasma membrane helps determines the axis of
              cell extension, while the array associated with the cell division plane helps
              determine the morphogenesis of plant tissues. These phenomena are the bases for
              the production of potent, selective herbicides which take advantage of the
              differences between plant, animal, and fungal cytoskeletal assembly. Work 
              proposed here will offer additional insight into those mechanisms unique to
              plants which control cytoskeletal assembly.  In addition, insights gained by
              this analysis of cytoskeletal involvement inthe nature of  pollen formation in
              plants will contribute fundamentally to our knowledge about plant reproduction.
              ***                                     ;
