Title       : Isotopic Evolution of Proterozoic Sediments and Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  1995    
File        : a9418445

Award Number: 9418445
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stein B. Jacobsen jacobsen@neodymium.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jacobsen  9418445   It is proposed to continue research on the isotopic
              variations in C, Sr and Nd in well-characterized and well-preserved
              stratigraphic samples from successions spanning the entire Neoproterozoic
              (.54-1.0 Ga) as well as some slightly older strata (1.0-1.1 Ga).  It is also
              proposed to develop a method for determination of temporal variations in the
              S-isotopic record of Neoproterozoic seawater by measurement of S bound as trace
              sulfate in carbonate rocks.   Global change during the Neoproterozoic is record
              of strong C- and Sr-isotopic variations in paleoseawater recorded in marine
              carbonates.  Precise isotopic characterization of sequences is also a powerful
              tool for precise inter-correlation of strata world-wide.  Inter-correlation of
              S, C, Sr, and Nd isotopic variations based on the same samples is essential for
              understanding forcings in the global system that drive the isotopic variations
              in the Neoproterozoic.  A three year work statement describes developmental
              work in mass spectrometry for S and application of our standard techniques to a
              variety of sequences for C, Sr, and Nd isotopes.  Three year salary support for
              this project, described in the following project description is requested for
              one graduate student, 50% support for one research associate and one month per
              year for the PI.  All samples are available from collaborators or in house. 
              Sample selections will be made in collaboration with research groups who are,
              or have been, involved in active research on the stratigraphic sections.  In
              this proposal we request funding for laboratory work in order to : 1) establish
              a detailed record of C, Sr, and Nd isotopic variations as well as Ce-anomalies
              in Neoproterozoic seawater based on carefully screened samples of marine
              limestones and phosphorites; 2) understand in detail relationships between the
              two/(three?) major Neoproterozoic glacial events (-.06, -0.75, and -0.9 Ga (?))
              and C-, Sr, S- and Nd-isotopic variations recorded in marine carbonates; 3)
              analyze S isotope s in trace sulfate extracted from unaltered micro-drilled
              carbonate samples.  Study of the carbonate S-isotope record will be useful
              because the fragmentary record of bedded sulfates in Precambrian sedimentary
              successions provides an incomplete basis for understanding secular variations
              in the S-isotopic abundance of seawater through pre-Phanerozic Earth history.  
              The analysis of S isotopes of trace sulfate incorporated in carbonate is now
              possible due to new advances in thermal ionization mass spectrometry which will
              be modified to accommodate the analysis of geological  materials.  Funding is
              requested for development of these micro-techniques in collaboration with Bob
              Kelly of the NIST.  Our standards methods for C, Sr, and Nd isotopes
              measurements are well documented in publications which justify the technical
              objectives of this proposal.   Precise knowledge of rates of isotopic change in
              Neoproterozoic seawater will be used to further understanding of Earth System
              evolution during the time frame of interest.  The following specific objectives
              will be pursued:  1) trace the major mass fluxes in the exogenic geochemical
              cycle and understand the relationship between the evolution of the sedimentary
              reservoir, the oceans and the atmosphere during the Neoproterozoic; 2)
              determine rates of erosion, organic C burial and hydrothermal alteration and
              their relation to global tectonics; 3) investigate the relationship of strong
              isotopic variations to known events of glaciations, phosphorite and banded
              iron-formation deposition; 4) explore whether the balance of atmospheric oxygen
              was coupled to the crustal reservoirs of S and C, or whether, as supported by
              our earlier studies, the C and S cycles were uncoupled leading to wide
              variations in the abundance of atmospheric O2; 5) strengthen the tie between
              isotope-stratigraphic and bio-stratigraphic correlations between these
              Neoproterozoic  successions.   During the Neoproteroic, seawater Nd and Sr
              budgets appear to have changed from dominantly hydrother mal inputs (as in the
              Archean) to dominantly continental (river) inputs.  Modeling based on data
              obtained from past and proposed research will be used to constrain the changes
              in rates of hydrothermal circulation, continental erosion rates, burial rates
              of organic C and variations in the mean age of continental erosion products
              through the Neoproterozoic.  Implications for the evolution of O2 and CO2 in
              the Earth's atmosphere will also be considered.  Previous work in this
              laboratory demonstrated that high resolution Sr and C isotopic curves may be
              obtained for Neoproterozoic sedimentary successions.  The proposed research
              will continue to lead to major breakthroughs in our understanding of
              Neoproterozoic evolution.
