Title       : Expression and Function of a Regulatory Molecular Chaperone During Drosophila
               Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1996   
File        : a9418453

Award Number: 9418453
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard D. Lipshitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              How tissues and cells respond in a spatially and temporally  coordinated fashion
              to developmental cues remains poorly  understood.  Numerous signal transduction
              pathways exist,  the components of which are often ubiquitous.  One level at 
              which specificity in the transduction of a signal may be  achieved is by
              packaging signal transduction molecules, such  as hormone receptors or certain
              kinases, into multicomponent  complexes which function to control their
              intracellular  localization and their activation.  The Hsp90 molecular 
              chaperone has been studied intensively in vertebrates and in  yeast, and has
              been shown to be a key component of several  multicomponent signaling complexes
              - steroid hormone  receptors, src-family kinases, raf kinase - that is required
               for specific localization, activation and/or function of the  transducing
              molecules.  From such cell biological and  biochemical analyses of Hsp90, an
              important regulatory  function during development might be anticipated. 
              However  little is known about the developmental role of any  molecular
              chaperone, Hsp90 included, in the context of a  multicellular organism.  The
              Hsp90 family of molecular  chaperones has a single member in Drosophila, called
              Hsp83.  Work from this laboratory revealed an uncommonly dynamic  spatial and
              temporal expression of Hsp83 RNA during  oogenesis and embryogenesis.  This led
              to the hypothesis  that Hsp83 might regulate the function of more ubiquitous 
              partner proteins during development, potentiating signal  transduction
              processes only in certain tissues and at  particular stages.  The research
              proposed here seeks to  define the specific developmental functions of Hsp83. 
              Maternally synthesized Hsp83 RNA is localized to the  posterior polar plasm, is
              taken up into the pole cells and  Hsp83 is expressed at high levels in the
              primordial germ  cells and the germline through most of development.  Zygotic 
              transcription of Hsp83 is restricted initially to the  anterior third of the
              embryo, and this expression is   regulated directly by the anterior morphogen,
              bicoid.  Subsequently, Hsp83 is expressed in the head, the  neuroblasts and
              nervous system, and the germline of the  embryo.  The cis-regulatory elements
              that control Hsp83  expression in these tissues are being defined in detail. 
              Epitope-tagged transgenic lines have been produced and are  being used to assay
              HSP83 protein expression patterns.  Mutations in Hsp83 are lethal.  Strong
              alleles are embryonic  lethal and die with novel head defects consistent with a
               role for Hsp83 in coordinating head development.  Weaker  alleles result in
              morphologically normal first instar larvae  that are unable to molt to the
              second instar and eventually  die after spending several days in the first
              instar.  This  phenotype is consistent with a role for Hsp83 in the 
              transduction of the hormonal signal that coordinates the  larval molts. 
              Detailed analyses of Hsp83 mutant phenotypes  will be conducted in embryos,
              early larvae, and in the  germline.  Transgenic Hsp83 constructs that are
              deleted for  particular cis-regulatory elements will be sued to target 
              phenotypes to the times and places of interest.  Genetic  tests for interacting
              loci will be conducted in order to  define HSP83's partner proteins in specific
              tissues and at  particular times.  Immunopurification of epitope-tagged  HSP83
              and assays for copurification of partner proteins will  complement the
              genetic-interaction tests.  Taken together,  these studies will provide the
              first analysis of the  developmental functions of the Hsp90 family of
              chaperones.
