Title       : Mineral Transformations in Low-Grade Rocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 25,  1999   
File        : a9418108

Award Number: 9418108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291670             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Peacor drpeacor@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1043,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418108  Peacor    Propose to continue to study processes of transformation in
              fine-grained pelitic rocks and other rocks dominated by clay minerals over the
              range of diagenesis through low-grade metamorphism.  The textural, chemical,
              and structural characteristics of mineral assemblages are being investigated
              with emphasis on transmission and analytical electron microscopy but utilizing
              a full range of techniques including SEM and XRD, and in a context involving
              collaboration with specialists in rock deformation, metamorphic petrology,
              stable and radiogenic isotope analysis and low-temperature geochemistry. 
              Samples are selected from continuous sequences chosen to represent critical
              features and which have been well-characterized by a wide range of field and
              laboratory studies.  Comparison of observations within and between a variety of
              prograde sequences permits processes of mineral transformations, deformation,
              and crystal growth to be defined, especially insofar as solids record evidence
              of crystal/fluid interactions.   Specific topics include:  (1) Nature of
              smectite, I/S, and illite:  Stacking relations (2) Mechanisms for the
              transformation of smectite of illite.  (3) Variations in reaction mechanisms as
              a function of rock type.  (4) Mechanisms of crystal growth in both burial
              diagenetic and low-grade metamorphic regimes (5) Quantitative relation between
              structure and texture as related to cause of changes in illite and chlorite
              crystallinity.  (6) Origins of interlayer cation composition of smectite. 
              These and other topics will be studied using sequences of samples from prograde
              pelitic sequences in the following localities:  Texas Gulf Coast, Southern
              Uplands of Scotland, Welsh sedimentary basin, South Island of New Zealand,
              Nankai Trench, Franciscan Formation of California, Iberian Massif of Spain, and
              the Ketama Unit of the Rift Chain of Morocco.  All sequences are from
              well-characterized sequences that permit characterization of processes over a
              range of types of pelites and over the  full range of diagenesis and low-grade
              metamorphism, leading to documentation of trends and processes.   Focusing
              especially on the roles of fluids and stress, as the collective data appear to
              show that all processes are consistent with Ostwald step-like transitions from
              metastable states toward stable equilibrium, as mediated by fluids, and
              increasingly by deformation induced by tectonic stress with increasing grade,
              with subsequent implications for the use of clay minerals as indicators of
              reaction progress rather than as accurate geothermometers.  ??
