Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical and Statistical Foundations of Chaotic
               Solitons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1995      
File        : a9418780

Award Number: 9418780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: JANICE L ALEXANDER                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49989              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin J. Dudziak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Virginia Commonwealth Univ
	      P.O. Box 980568
	      Richmond, VA  23298    804/828-6772

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9237,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This investigation constitutes an interdisciplinary and  international approach
              to establishing new mathematical tools and  computational models for the study
              of localizable and  nonstationary chaotic attractors with the statistical
              behavior of  solitons.  These attractors, termed chaotic solitons, have been 
              theorized as having a role in simple conservative systems with  direct
              relevance to a wide range of phenomena including  elementary particle
              interactions, atomic clustering, and  biomolecular dynamics such as protein
              folding and cytoskeletal  assembly.  Chaos and solitons have generally been
              portrayed as  being disparate with the consequence that quantum theory and 
              chaos have been generally dissociated.  However, the present line  of research
              points toward mathematical affinities between quantum  field theory and
              multidimensional nonstationary solitons; these  affinities indicate simpler
              methods for describing quantum  processes, derivable from classical chaos and
              network theories.  Algebraic and topological methods for representing the 
              statistical descriptions of attractor field states will be  explored.  
              Extension of one-dimensional chaotic soliton models  into two, three and four
              dimensions with constraints relevant to  observed physics will be a fundamental
              first step.    An extensive amount of theoretical work has been done in 
              particular by a long-standing group of mathematicians at the  Joint Institute
              for Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia, under the  direction of Dr. I.
              Bogolubsky.  A major goal of this proposal is  to consolidate, evaluate, and
              mathematically transform the work  that has grown out of this Russian team into
              mathematics and  computer modeling readily accessible to the U. S.
              mathematical,  statistical, and physics communities.  The proposed effort is 
              based on the belief that it is time-critical to organize efforts  to
              consolidate and extend this work through international  cooperative study.
