Title       : Eleclectron and Proton Transfer Mechanism in the Succinate- Cytochrome c
               Reductase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1997  
File        : a9418694

Award Number: 9418694
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $345000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomoko Ohnishi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9418694  Ohnishi  This research involves studies on the molecular mechanism of
              electron and proton transfer processes in two segments of the respiratory
              chain, (1) the quinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase, and (2) succinate-quinone
              oxidoreductase, with a particular emphasis on their structure-function
              relationships.  1  Quinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase: The Rieske iron-sulfur
              protein plays an essential role in quinol oxidation at the Qo site of
              quinol-cyt. c oxidoreductase. We plan to delineate amino acid residues that are
              involved in quinone binding at the Rieske domain of the Qo pocket. We also plan
              to investigate quinone interactions with its surroundings via hydrogen bonds
              and the weak interaction with the aqueous medium by 17O-quinone EPR and 1H- and
              2H-ENDOR techniques (with Dr. G. Babcock) combined with site directed
              mutagenesis.  2  Succinate-quinone oxidoreductase: We will investigate the
              molecular mechanism of quinone binding and protein architecture of the Qs
              domain utilizing three different bacterial systems, Escherichia coli and
              Bacillus subtilis succinate-quinone reductase (with Drs R. Gennis and L.
              Hederstedt, respectively) and E. coli quinol-fumarate reductase (with Dr. G.
              Cecchini). We will use advanced EPR, ENDOR and genetic engineering techniques.
              The structural implication of these findings will be studied using
              site-directed mutagenesis in combination with various spectroscopic methods
              including EPR and 57Fe-ENDOR (in collaboration with Dr. B. Hoffman's group). A
              soluble 7 kDa Streptomyces griseolus ferredoxin bearing a single trinuclear
              iron-sulfur cluster will be analyzed as a model system for a cluster which is
              not readily converted to a  4Fe-4S  cluster.  %%%  This research covers studies
              on the molecular mechanism of electron and proton transfer in two segments of
              the respiratory chain, the quinol-cytochrome c oxidoreductase, and
              succinate-quinone oxidoreductase, with particular emphasis on their
              structure-function relationships. The strength of this research is the com
              bination of molecular biological approaches with biochemical and biophysical
              techniques. The experimental outcome will provide detailed insight on the
              energy coupling mechanism at two crucial proton and electron interaction sites
              and on a non-energy coupling site.  ***
