Title       : The Copper-Gold Association in Porphyry and Epithermal Systems: Variations in
               Time-Space and Geochemical Evolution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 31,  1996   
File        : a9418301

Award Number: 9418301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Hart                            
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco T. Einaudi marco@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9418301  Einaudi  The link between acid-sulfate alteration and gold deposition 
              in the epithermal environment, and between epithermal- and  porphyry-type
              alteration-mineralization will be studied in  the Potrerillos district, Chile. 
              Documentation of porphyry-  epithermal transitions is difficult because most
              districts  lack exposure of the deep plutonic source region.  The  district was
              chosen because of excellent exposures of these  many ore-types and because in
              many localities they are  superimposed, allowing determination of relative age.
               Absolute timing of igneous and hydrothermal events will be  documented by high
              precision Ar-Ar age dating in the context  of mapped cross-cutting relations. 
              Geochemical factors  affecting fluid evolution and the partitioning of Cu and
              Au  between different environments, will be assessed by detailed  field mapping
              and core logging, and by petrographic,  analytical, and fluid inclusion studies
              in conjunction with  data on phase equilibria.  Deposits known as "Cordilleran 
              base-metal lodes", are superimposed on, and genetically  linked to, porphyry
              copper deposits.  Less well known are  the analogous lode deposits, also
              porphyry-related, that  occur in carbonate wall rocks.  This deposit type, and
              its  link to proximal skarn and to distal quartz-pyrite-gold  replacement
              deposits will be studies in the Superior  district, Arizona by similar methods.
               Results of this  research will contribute to the understanding of sources and 
              physiochemical evolution of crustal fluids linked to  subvolcanic environments.
