Title       : Isolation of DIMBOA Biosynthetic Genes from Maize
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9418155

Award Number: 9418155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Scott Chilton   (Principal Investigator current)
              P H. Sisco  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juan J. Estruch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary-Dell Chilton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9418155  Chilton  The long-term goal of this project is to permit manipulation
              of  genes for biosynthesis of DIMBOA and DIBOA, pesticidal metabolites  of
              maize, to enhance protection of maize and possibly other crops.   To undertake
              such manipulation, all genes in the pathway,  especially regulatory genes, will
              be identified and cloned.  Screening of M2 seed from ems-mutagenized pollen has
              already  identified two mutations in enzymes of the pathway and one  regulatory
              gene.  The regulatory gene is being tagged by transposon  mutagenesis in
              preparation  for cloning.  Such a regulatory gene  could be of direct use in
              maize breeding.  Screening of ems-  mutagenized maize will continue.  Mutants,
              inducers, repressors or  varying expression during development will enable
              isolation of  "high DIMBOA" and "low DIMBOA" mRNA to be used in cDNA cloning.  
              Genes encoding at least three steps involving cytochrome P-450  oxygenases will
              be cloned by a PCR-based strategy using a redundant  primer deduced from the
              conserved haem binding site of P450s.   Transposon tagging will also be used to
              facilitate isolation of  genes of the two pathway steps not involving
              cytochrome P450.    Cloning of pathway and regulatory genes will lead to
              knowledge  permitting alteration of expression of genes that affect the level, 
              timing and plant parts in which DIMBOA is produced.  This should  enable better
              protection of maize and reduction in use of synthetic  pesticides.  %%%  DIMBOA
              is a low molecular weight metabolite synthesized at the time  of germination of
              corn seed.  It protects the young seedling from  predation by most insects,
              bacteria and fungi.  The internal  concentration of this natural pesticide
              decreases in the seedling  after the second week so that DIMBOA is no longer
              capable of  deterring attack by predators and pathogens such as corn smut, 
              stalk rot, corn rootworm, European corn borer and corn earworm.  It  is during
              the period of declining DIMBOA synthesis in the plant  that application of
              external, Synth etic fungicides and insecticides  is required to give high
              grain yield.  This project will identify and isolate the genes controlling 
              biosynthesis of DIBMOA using mutants blocked in various steps of  the
              biosynthetic pathway as well as DIMBOA-deficient mutants and 
              DIMBOA-overproducing mutants.  Characterization of the genes  controlling
              DIMBOA synthesis may permit development of strategies  to alter the
              concentration of DIMBOA, the location of DIMBOA within  the plant, or the
              life-stage during which DIMBOA concentration is  high in order to better
              protect the corn crop with its own internal  defense, and to reduce the amount
              of synthetic chemicals sprayed in  the field.  ***
