Title       : The Infrastructure of Mitochondrial Matrix Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1997   
File        : a9418565

Award Number: 9418565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Srere srere@utsw.swmed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas SW Medical Ctr
	      5323 Harry Hines Blvd
	      Dallas, TX  753909105    214/648-5100

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Srere  9418565  In order to study the problem of metabolite channelling, a
              recent and elegant technique employed  has been to link the DNA for two enzymes
              and to express the fused protein in cells.  We have  used this latter technique
              to prepare a fusion protein of yeast mitochondrial citrate synthase (CS1) 
              yeast mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase (MDH1).  Yeast cells which lack
              mitochondrial  enzyme activity of the Krebs TCA cycle cannot grow on acetate
              (acetate-phenotype).  When  either CS1 or MDH1 is deleted from yeast cells
              (CS1- or MDH1- cells) or when a double  deletion is made (CS1-/MDH1- cells) the
              cells cannot grow on acetate.  The fusion protein  restored growth on acetate
              when placed in yeast cells which lacked CS1, MDH1, and CS1 and  MDH1.  In
              addition, kinetic studies on the purified fusion protein indicated channelling
              of the  intermediate oxalacetate (OAA).  We propose to extend these studies by
              changing the order of  the enzymes; by testing linkers of different lengths and
              sequences; and by using heterologous  enzymes of CS and MDH.  Nonsequential
              fusion proteins of Krebs TCA cycle enzymes will be  made also.  We will
              investigate the in vitro channeling assay using different OAA trapping  systems
              and isotopic methods.  %%%  When cells are broken, one finds apparently mainly
              free enzymes which given rise to the idea  that the cell is essentially a "bag
              of enzymes".  There are many indications, however, that in the  cell,
              sequential metabolic enzymes are in complexes which dissociate upon cell
              rupture.  We  have studied the interactions of sequential enzymes and their
              consequences in a variety of ways,  including biophysical and genetic
              techniques.  This grant proposal is to continue our studies on  a fused two
              sequential enzyme systems, yeast mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase (MDH), and 
              yeast mitochondrial citrate synthase (CS).  This fusion protein was isolated
              and its kinetic  studied.  The results indicated that channeling of the
              intermediate occurred.  We propose to study   the phenomenon by producing a
              series of other fusion proteins of MDH  and CS with changed  order, changed
              linkers, and heterologous MDH and CS.  These studies will serve as models for 
              possible metabolic advantages and regulatory properties of enzyme-enzyme
              interactions in cells.  ***
