Title       : Industrial and Environmental Hygiene Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 25,  2003     
File        : a9418764

Award Number: 9418764
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Harry Mahar                             
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $408472             (Estimated)
Investigator: May Beth Givan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept of Hlth&Human Servs
	      200 Independence Avenue SW
	      Washington, DC  20201    /   -

NSF Program : 5140      OPERATIONS SUPPORT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,1038,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This interagency agreement with the Region III U.S. Public  Health Service, 
              Division of Federal Occupational Health  (DFOH) is intended to provide the
              Safety and Health Office,  Office of Polar Programs (SHO/OPP) technical support
               in a  variety of  occupational and environmental health  disciplines.   This
              Interagency Agreement  provides SHO/OPP  flexibility in obtaining technical
              expertise in a variety of  disciplines on short notice, without going through 
              protracted procurement efforts for individual tasks, since  the DFOH already
              has established similar contractual  arrangements with qualified contractors. 
              By utilizing  similar  contract mechanisms in other government agencies 
              charged with providing similar services,  OPP/NSF is able to  optimize the
              government's efficiency in obtaining contract  technical services while
              minimizing impacts on OPP and  Division of Contracts, Policy and Oversight
              (CPO) staff work  load.  Since it is impossible at this time to assign  all 
              specific task (because of the rapidly changing nature of  OPP's research
              programs),  it is essential that flexibility  in assigning new tasks is
              maintained as programmatic needs  change; the DFOH Interagency Agreement
              provides that  flexibility.    As the Interagency Agreement is established, 
              OPP/NSF funds  will  be committed and obligated to DFOH for the projected 
              total level of effort for the agreement.  Once those funds  are obligated,
              specific tasks can be submitted, with the  obligated account balance drawn down
              as each task is  completed.  In this way,  individual modifications to the 
              Interagency Agreement will not be necessary each time a new  task is assigned. 
                 Specific tasks will be developed by the SHO/OPP and  forwarded to DFOH for
              the development of a project plan and  budget.  DFOH will provide that
              plan/budget for each task to  OPP and NSF/Division of Contract Policy and
              Oversight (CPO)  for review and concurrence.  When agreement is reached, a 
              notice to proceed will be given to DFOH.  Periodic billin g  summaries will be
              provided to OPP and CPO by DFOH.  The  SHO/OPP Technical Liaison is responsible
              for ensuring that  the total obligated amount  for the Interagency Agreement is
               not exceeded as tasks are assigned.    The Region III Division of Federal
              Occupational Health  utilizes in-house staff and contract support to complete
              the  various tasks.  DFOH will oversee the work of their  contractors,
              coordinate those activities with the DFOH staff  assigned to the particular
              task, and be responsible for the  overall  technical product    Tasking will be
              developed by SHO/OPP and provided to DFOH  for  the development of a project
              plan, schedule, and  budget.  Tasking letters will typically include a clear 
              statement of the task required, sufficient background  information on the issue
              to be addressed,  a statement of  deliverables, and a proposed schedule.  An
              independent cost  estimate to complete each task will be developed by SHO but 
              not communicated to DFOH.  When the DFOH project plan and  proposed budget is
              submitted, it will be reviewed by SHO and  CPO, and when agreement is reached,
              CPO will notify DFOH to  proceed.  Any capital equipment purchased to complete
              an  assigned task (e.g., monitoring equipment specific to  contaminant sampling
              in remote sites) will remain the  property of OPP at the termination of the
              task.    The process described above was developed during discussions 
              involving Mr. Jay Terra (USPHS/DFOH),  Mr. Steve Strength  (NSF/DCPO), and Ms
              Gwen Adams (NSF/OPP) and myself.
