Title       : Tracing the Origins of Stereochemical and Metabolic Diversity in Secondary
               Metabolism in Streptomycetes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9418581

Award Number: 9418581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rona Hirschberg                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin A. Reynolds   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marilyn K. Speedie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Baltimore
	      520 West Lombard Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212011627    301/328-7004

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Reynolds  9418581  Streptomyces collinus produces cylohexanecarboxylic acid
              (CHC) from shikimic acid and adds  this unit to the side chain of the
              antifungal agent ansatrienin.  Streptomyces hygroscopicus is  thought to
              produce a 3(R),4(R)-dihydroxy-1(R)-cyclohexanecarboxylic acid (DHCHC) from 
              shikimic acid and to use this compound as the biosynthetic starter unit for the
              formation of the  novel immunosuppressant, FK520.  The long term aims of this
              research are to both investigate  and compare these two pathways.  Preliminary
              in vivo results indicate that the initial steps of  both pathways follow the
              same sequence of enzymes catalyzed reactions but that the  stereochemical
              course of the reduction steps is different.  The unusual secondary metabolic 
              pathways from shikimic acid to CHC and DHCHC therefore present an interesting
              example of  both metabolic similarity and stereochemical diversity.  In this
              research project enoyl CoA  reductases involved in catalyzing the reduction
              steps in both the CHC and CHCHC pathway will  be analyzed from a chemical,
              biochemical, stereochemical and genetic perspective.  Homology  between these
              enzymes will indicate if they have evolved by divergent evolution from a common
               ancestor.  This finding would be unusual based on the observation of the
              stereochemical diversity  (there is no precedent of homologous enoyl CoA
              reductases catalyzing reactions with different  stereochemical courses). 
              Alternatively these reductases might demonstrate no homology  indicating an
              independent evolution of two similar unusual pathways in Streptomyces.  %%% 
              Soil bacteria often produce a vast array of secondary metabolites, complex
              organic molecules that  have pharmaceutical relevance but that serve no
              apparent function in bacteria.  How and why  bacteria came to produce these
              metabolites has been the subject of much research and discussion.   Initial
              evidence has indicated that many of the biochemical pathways which produce
              these are  related on an evolutionary basis.  This resear ch project  concerns
              two different soil bacteria.   Streptomyces collinus converts shikimic acid to
              cyclohexanecarboxylic acid in order to produce  the secondary metabolic
              ansatrienin (an antifungal agent).  Streptomyces hygroscopicus converts 
              shikimic acid to dihydroxycyclohexanecarboxylic acid in order to produce the
              secondary  metabolite immunomycin (an immunosuppressant).  These two
              conversions of shikimic acid are  similar and would be expected to be related
              on an evolutionary basis.  However initial evidence  has suggested that in the
              two bacteria the proteins that catalyze these conversion do so with  different
              stereochemical outcomes (one is "left handed" an the other "right handed"). 
              This  project will determine if these proteins do have a different handedness
              and if they are related.   The discovery that the proteins are related would be
              unusual because of this handedness  difference.  The discovery that the
              proteins are unrelated would also be unusual because it would  indicate that
              the similar conversions of shikimic acid have arisen by convergent rather than 
              divergent evolution.  ***
