Title       : Antarctic Marine Archaebacteria; Biological Properties and Ecological
               Significance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9418442

Award Number: 9418442
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward F. Delong   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Delong  9418442  Archaebacteria are an evolutionarily distinct group of 
              prokaryotes.  Until very recently, archaebacteria were thought to  thrive only
              in a few disparate niches, consisting of either very  hot, very salty, or
              strictly anaerobic environments.  Recent  studies show that pelagic marine
              archaebacteria can constitute a  major fraction (>30%) of Antarctic prokaryote
              biomass in coastal  waters off Palmer Station, Antarctica.  Since surface
              waters off  Palmer Station have yielded the highest biomass estimates of 
              pelagic archaebacteria to date, this area is uniquely suited for  studing these
              unusual microorganisms.  The main objective of the  proposed work is to
              characterize the ecological significance,  distribution and aboundance, and the
              metabolic and physiological  activities, of pelagic marine archaebacteria in
              coastal waters  off Anvers Island, Antarctica.  Molecular biological techniques
               will be used to quantify the spatial and temporal abundance and  variability
              of Antarctic marine archaebacterial species.  Highly  sensitive, semiautomated
              methods will be developed to quantify  archaebacterial group and
              species-specific ribosomal RNA and DNA  in field samples.  To better understand
              their physiological  activities, methods employing "kingdom-specific" metabolic
               inhibitors will be used to estimate the contribution of pelagic 
              archaebacteria to total prokaryotic heterotrophic activity.  The  project will
              provide information on the seasonal and  spatial variability of pelagic
              Antarctic archaebacteria, which  can comprise a major fraction of Antarctic
              coastal prokarytoic  biomass.  Finally, this project will also enhance
              understanding of  the biogeochemical activities and ecological roles of these 
              abundant "archaeoplankton" in coastal Antarctic waters, and may  provide clues
              as to their specific adaptations to the unique  Antarctic environment.
