Title       : Nitric Oxide in Biochemistry and Biology, January 29, - February 3, 1995 in
               Ventura, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1995    
File        : a9418278

Award Number: 9418278
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4000               (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Payne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean LeGall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis J. Ignarro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack R. Lancaster  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Gordon Res Conferences
	      P.O. Box 984
	      West Kingston, RI  028920984    401/783-4011

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A Winter Gordon Conference on Nitric Oxide in Biochemistry and Biology will be
              held on Jan 29-Feb 3, 1995 in Ventura. CA. A great upsurge in research on the
              compound followed discovery during the past decade of the capacity of a variety
              of human and animal cells to oxidize a guanidino nitrogen of L-arginine to form
              nitric oxide (NO) and the further demonstration that NO acts as a cytotoxin in
              phagocytes and activates cGMP formation, which in turn regulates vascular tone,
              platelet aggregation, and neurotransmission, in many other cells.  NO was thus
              named SCIENCE magazine s  Molecule of the Year for 1992 .  Simultaneous
              observations concerning involvement of nitric oxide as an intermediate in
              bacterial denitrification, and kindred events in nature s nitrogen cycle, and
              in erosion of the earth s stratospheric ozone layer combined to add greatly to
              interest in the gas. This Gordon Conference offers an opportunity to bring
              together outstanding scientists to consider and discuss basic chemistry,
              biochemistry, capacity for reaction with other ligands, enzymology, genetic,
              and analytic method s for NO detection. %%% Nitric oxide (NO) is a simple gas
              compound composed of one nitrogen and one oxygen atom.  In large amounts, it is
              deadly, but animals (including humans) continually produce small quantities
              that influence four different types of activities: three by stimulating
              production of the compound cyclic guanosine monophosphate that actually
              regulates the functions.  These are: controlling blood pressure by  relaxing
              veins and arteries; stopping blood-clot formation or dissolving clots; and
              influencing  passage of signals along nerve cells.  NO acts directly in white
              blood cells by killing bacteria and  cancer cells they engulf.  The amino acid
              L-arginine is the source of NO for all these actions.  Out  in nature, NO is
              produced differently; usually as an intermediate in bacterial destruction of
              nitrate,  often used as a crop fertilizer.  The bacteria ordinarily act further
              on the NO, but some leaks out  into the atmosphere, even rising up and eroding
              the stratospheric ozone layer.  Plants and fungi also  produce some NO.  This
              Gordon Conference brings together scientists who will present results of 
              studies of the biochemistry and biology of NO, the ways it is formed and
              measured, and how it reacts  with the biological catalysts we call enzymes,
              particularly those containing metals such as iron and  copper.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
