Title       : An Unusually Small Developmental Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 10,  1995  
File        : a9418291

Award Number: 9418291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Simon Cutting   (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Goldfine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Cutting, Simon                               IBN#9418291  University of
              Pennsylvania  An unusually small developmental protein.     Spore formation in
              the gram-positive bacterium Bacillus subtilis  represents a simple example of
              cellular development that has been  well characterized morphologically,
              physiologically and  genetically.  Interestingly, this prokaryote has certain 
              similarities to development in higher organisms.  Most notable is  the
              formation of two cell types during the course of sporulation.   These two cell
              types (of which one is destined to become the spore)  are, at first, separated
              by only two layers of membrane and are  thus reminiscent of the
              compartmentalized structures found in  eukaryotic cells, (e.g., mitochondria). 
              Similarly, adjacent  daughter cells in a multicullular differentiating organism
              are  separated by only two membrane layers. B. subtilus may be able to  serve
              as a simple model to address how information is communicated  throught
              membranes.  In this proposal the structure and function of  an extremely small
              developmental protein, SpoVM, will be  determined.  The 26 amino acid, 3kD,
              SpoVM protein is crucial for  the development of B. subtilis and is able to
              interact with  phospholipid membranes.  The hypothesis is that SpoVM is
              involved  in intercompartmental communication between the mother and daughter 
              cells. This proposal will investigate the nature of the cell-cell 
              communication process and the role that SpoVM may play.  The  specific aims
              are: to isolate suppressors of a spoVM mutant, to  determine the cellular
              location of the protein, to determine  whether it is an oligomer, to examine
              its structure by CS  spectroscopy and NMR, to carry out liposome binding and
              channel  conductance experiments, to search for interacting proteins, to 
              identify regions of functional importance and to screen for  homologues in
              other spore-forming bacteria.****
