Title       : Middle School Science Enhancement for ESU #9 and #11
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1991       
File        : a9055458

Award Number: 9055458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $379668             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvin C. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donn A. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska Kearney
	      25th Street & 9th Avenue
	      Kearney, NE  68849    308/865-8441

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              69        Life Sciences NEC                       
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This proposal will provide training over a 32-month period to                  
              improve the instructional skills of 60 middle school science                   
              teachers.  The major objectives of the project is to improve                   
              the teaching effectiveness of middle school teachers (4-9) in                  
              Educational Service Units                                                      
              Nebraska. This objective will be fulfilled by means of: (1)                    
              three-week summer workshops and (2) evening sessions                           
              conducted throughout the academic year.                                        
                                                                                             
              The basic purposes of the summer program are to permit a                       
              cadre of teachers to improve their process skills, teaching                    
              methodology, and critical thinking skills by involving them                    
              in a teaching strategy known as the Inquiry Role Approach.                     
              This cadre of teachers will be utilized as resource persons                    
              in their local service unit areas and to assist as team                        
              leaders in workshops and seminars dealing with (a) life,                       
              earth, and physical science content; (b) Inquiry Role                          
              Approach teaching methodology, and (c) schoolyard science.                     
                                                                                             
              The academic year meetings will encompass the disciplines of                   
              life, earth and physical science.  Each discipline will be                     
              organized into a number of content topics designed for an                      
              evening session of three hours.  One-half hour prior to each                   
              evening session, a staff member will be available for                          
              consultation on science content or science curricula.                          
                                                                                             
              In summary, this project is designed to improve the teaching                   
              effectiveness of middle school science teachers by using the                   
              Inquiry Role Approach as the major instructional strategy.                     
              The content of earth, life and physical science will be                        
              emphasized through field trips, class discussions, lectures,                   
              and the individualization of laboratory activities.                            
                                                                                             
              No cost sharing is included in this proposal.
