Title       : Fellowship Program for High School Mathematics Teacher Enhancement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1991     
File        : a9055399

Award Number: 9055399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Spresser                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315662             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Bolger REBOLEGER@FAIR1.FAIRFIELD.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. O'Neill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fairfield University
	      North Benson Road
	      Fairfield, CT  06430    203/255-5411

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Fairfield University seeks funds for a three-year program                      
              for 24 mathematics teachers to improve their mathematical                      
              understanding and pedagogical practices.  The program                          
              consists of six semesters of Saturday courses presenting a                     
              chronological development of mathematics with heavy emphasis                   
              on participant discovery of mathematical concepts,                             
              accompanying computer laboratories, familiarizing                              
              participants with appropriate software, a computer network                     
              linking participants via BITNET for extramural electronic                      
              mail communication, participant development of curricular                      
              units, and participant-hosted Fall conferences for                             
              colleagues.  The evolution of logic, set theory and discrete                   
              mathematics, of geometry -- both Euclidean and                                 
              non-Euclidean, and of calculus and analysis will be                            
              developed, with special consideration to the contributions                     
              of women and non-Western men and cultures to this evolution.                   
              Participants may earn 18 graduate credits.                                     
                                                                                             
              Each participant will serve as mathematical mentor to a                        
              mathematics teacher and an administrator in her/his school,                    
              and staff/peer site visits during each school year will                        
              stimulate a dialogue among mentor and mentees concerning the                   
              mathematics curriculum and the use of computers in teaching                    
              mathematics. Thus an additional 48 second-wave colleagues                      
              will be brought into the program.  In all, 72 teachers and                     
              administrators will be enhanced.  A Journal of Curriculum                      
              Units prepared by participants will be distributed to                          
              participating schools and others for a possible third-wave                     
              enhancement.  Fairfield University and local business                          
              cost-sharing will account for 13% of the NSF budget.                           
                                                                                             
              Seeing the development of mathematics from an historical                       
              perspective and knowing the great contributions of women and                   
              non- Western men and cultures to this development is a key                     
              component to scientific literacy.  This project may serve as                   
              a model enhancement program for promoting this component.
