Title       : Conservation Biology Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1991   
File        : a9055349

Award Number: 9055349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emma L. Walton                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306159             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee H. Metzgar lhm@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Scott M. Lewis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a three year program that includes a summer                    
              workshop offering secondary science and mathematics teachers                   
              an integrated program of biology, mathematics and curriculum                   
              change. The central theme of the workshops is Conservation                     
              Biology. Approximate equal numbers of mathematics and                          
              science teachers will be selected to participate from a                        
              nationwide pool, though preference will be given to teachers                   
              from the Northwest region of the United States. Preference                     
              will also be given to teams of mathematics and science                         
              teachers from the same school or school district.                              
                                                                                             
              During the course of the program, two overlapping workshops                    
              (26 teachers in each, beginning in consecutive summers) will                   
              be conducted. Each workshop will take place over two summers                   
              and include a four week residential summer workshop, an                        
              interim academic year, and a one week residential session                      
              the following summer. The first summer session combines                        
              field work, laboratories, seminars, and lectures in biology,                   
              mathematics and curriculum development. During the                             
              intervening year, participants will test program changes in                    
              their home institutions while interacting with fellow                          
              participants and faculty through a computer network. The                       
              final one week session, during the second summer, provides                     
              opportunities for participants to share successes and                          
              difficulties, develop future plans, and reinforce the                          
              participants' commitment to curriculum development.                            
                                                                                             
              An amount equal to 13% of NSF costs will be provided as cost                   
              sharing
