Title       : Student Belief in Cultural Context: A Logico-Structural, World View
               Investigation of Belief and Culture Among Secondary Science Students....
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9055834

Award Number: 9055834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Raymond J. Hannapel                     
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139592             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W. Cobern   (Principal Investigator current)
              LOUETTE L. MCGRAW  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              MARIA CARDELLE-ELAWAR  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              To date, science educators have not studied what students believe              
              about the world, beliefs rooted and nurtured in students' socio-               
              cultural environments.  If one were speaking of a non-Western,                 
              developing nation, one would speak of students' traditional culture            
              in contrast to the culture of science.  Americans, on the other                
              hand, assume that science is a natural part of American students'              
              culture.  However, there is widespread disinterest in science.                 
              Also, American society is increasingly pluralistc, and there are               
              several cultural subgroups traditionally under represented in                  
              science.  A new approach is for American science educators to                  
              consider the possibility that science is a second culture                      
              experience for many students.  Traditionally, the study of culture             
              is left to the cultural anthropologists.  However, in recent years             
              scholars in several disciplines have undertaken cultural studies in            
              which they investigate the validity of cultural assumptions in                 
              their fields.  Similarly, cultural studies in science education can            
              contribute significantly to our understanding of the barriers to               
              effective science education.  We suggest that it is important for              
              science educators to understand the fundamental, culturally based              
              beliefs about the world that students bring to class, and how these            
              beliefs are supported by students' cultures; because, science                  
              education is successful only to the extent that science can find a             
              niche in the cognitive and socio-cultural milieu of students.                  
              Thus, the  purpose of the proposed research is to gain an                      
              understanding of high school students' fundamental beliefs about               
              the world, and how their personal, cultural environments foster and            
              support those beliefs.  The methodology is ethnographic, involving             
              the extensive interviewing of students.
