Title       : Improving Mathematics Education in Multicultural Classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1996     
File        : a9055432

Award Number: 9055432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan P. Snyder                         
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $787069             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian Weissglass weissgla@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The University of California at Santa Barbara will conduct a                   
              three-year program to develop K through 8 mathematics                          
              education leaders from among existing bilingual and minority                   
              teachers and from among committed teachers in high minority                    
              population schools in the Santa Barbara area.  Eight Cycle I                   
              teachers will be enhanced in implementing a hands-on,                          
              problem-solving approach to mathematics instruction, in                        
              improving their ability to relate to a culturally diverse                      
              student population, in developing effective approaches to                      
              professional development and in developing into teacher                        
              leaders who will in turn conduct such teacher enhancement                      
              activities.  The Cycle I teachers will then help enhance an                    
              additional forty Cycle II teacher-leaders who, together with                   
              the Cycle I group, will then conduct one- to three-day                         
              workshops for an additional 370 third cycle teachers and                       
              administrators.  With informal staff development by the                        
              teacher-leaders at their home schools, a total of 800 to                       
              1,000 teachers will be enhancement.                                            
                                                                                             
              The program will consist of twenty-one days (13 summer and 8                   
              academic year) of leadership seminars each year, with Cycle                    
              I teachers participating in such seminars all three years                      
              and  Cycle two teachers participating in them the second and                   
              third years.  The one- to three-day inservice workshops will                   
              also be held.  The mathematics content of the seminars and                     
              workshops will focus on geometry, spatial sense and                            
              patterns, statistics and probability, measurement and                          
              number.  The percent of cost-sharing by the University of                      
              California at Santa Barbara and the school districts                           
              accounts for 31% of the NSF budget.                                            
                                                                                             
              This project will provide a model, transportable program to                    
              enhance the teaching of mathematics in a multicultural                         
              setting and will document the effectiveness of the model.                      
              Such a model is urgently needed.
