Title       : Inservice Institutes for Junior/Middle School Science Teachers with Presidential
               Awardees as Instructional Mentors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1994     
File        : a9055488

Award Number: 9055488
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1991    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1205676            (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Lewis   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marily M. DeWall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nat Science Tchrs Assoc
	      1840 Wilson Boulevard
	      Arlington, VA  22201    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              49        Environmental NEC                       
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Teams of four Presidential Awardees (PAs) in Science                           
              Teaching will work with a university professor in 3-week                       
              summer institutes for middle school teachers.  Each of four                    
              institutes will be held at a college or university site                        
              facilitated by a site coordinator who is a professor of                        
              science and a team of four (PAs) who will serve as                             
              instructors.  Each PA team will include a chemistry,                           
              physics, biology, and earth science teacher.  Potential                        
              institute sites for 1992 include the State University of New                   
              York, Purchase, University of North Carolina, Wilmington,                      
              Purdue University, West Lafayette, and Southern Oregon State                   
              College, Ashland.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Each institute will accommodate 30 participants for a total                    
              of 360 middle level teachers in the three-year project.  The                   
              institute programs will be structured to include content in                    
              science, teaching methodology, cooperative team building,                      
              and special lectures on leading-edge science topics.  In                       
              addition, special sessions on leadership training,                             
              conducting peer-led workshop, reviewing curriculum                             
              materials, and securing funding will be held.  An                              
              instructional syllabus and a site coordinator's handbook                       
              will be produced to provide program consistency at each                        
              site.                                                                          
                                                                                             
              The aim of APAST/NSTA institutes is to obtain a mix of                         
              science teachers for different geographic areas and a                          
              variety of teaching circumstances to foster an exchange of                     
              experiences and view points.  Teachers will be selected                        
              based on perceived need, leadership potential, and                             
              willingness to secure district funds for follow-up                             
              activities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              At the workshops, participants will prepare lesson plans                       
              based on content learned at the institutes.  Compilations of                   
              the teaching materials will be distributed to all                              
              participants, site coordinators, and members of APAST.  In                     
              addition, all participants will conduct at least one peer-                     
              led inservice workshop in their school districts or at an                      
              educational convention in the fall.  Mini-grants will be                       
              made available to participants who have completed and                          
              returned an inservice report form and have presented a                         
              rationale for the funds as well as an itemized budget and                      
              evidence of cost sharing on the part of their school                           
              district.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              Evaluation will address content and pedagogy gain by                           
              participants through the administration of pre-and post-                       
              standardized science content tests.  In addition, three                        
              teachers in each workshop will be followed over a three year                   
              period as case studies.  The project evaluator will document                   
              professional growth of these selected individuals through                      
              telephone interviews and response forms. Mr. Robert Lewis,                     
              President-elect of APAST and a Presidential Awardee, is the                    
              Principal Investigator and                                                     
              Ms. Marily DeWall of NSTA is the Co-PI.                                        
                                                                                             
              Cost sharing equals 10% of the NSF award.
