Title       : EPSCOR: Workshop: Linux Cluster Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  2003     
File        : a0307194

Award Number: 0307194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W.D. Connolly connolly@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara A. Kucera  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              There is an increasing need for scientists/researchers in the United States who
              are knowledgeable about cluster computing; however, there are few opportunities
              offered at geographically remote locations to acquire this knowledge easily.
              Interested faculty and graduate students throughout the EPSCoR states are
              building their own clusters--ranging from small (8 nodes) to large (128
              nodes)--and teaching themselves as they proceed; this is a slow process.

The
              Linux Cluster Workshop will increase the research and development
              competitiveness of EPSCoR states by enabling computational scientists and
              engineers todevelop applications that achieve maximum performance and
              scalability on Linux clusters of all sizes; system administrators will learn
              about issues related to the administration of Linux clusters in support of
              secure, reliable, and high-performance computing.

Prospective users of Linux
              clusters will find the workshops to be a detailed and informative introduction
              to the process of configuring, acquiring, and using Linux clusters. LCI
              technical materials highlight the information that scientific application
              developers and systems administrators need but cannot readily find
              elsewhere.

This workshop will further the ambitious outreach and education
              efforts of the WESNet
group of seven western EPSCoR states that have been
              collaborating in an effort to
introduce EPSCoR researchers to high-performance
              cluster computing activities. This will be one more step to optimally exploit
              our national talent for science and engineering and develop excellent centers
              of research and learning in every state in the nation.
Students trained on
              these clusters will be better prepared to assume the role of
computational
              scientists in high-performance computing upon graduation.

The Linux Cluster
              workshop will promote high-performance computing among a diverse group of
              EPSCoR researchers in a long-term effort to stimulate new collaborations and
              scientific research opportunities. The home states of these individuals will be
              more competitive in terms of securing new research funding and providing
              intellectual and computational assistance to private sector activities.

