Title       : Complexity of Feasible Computations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0307077

Award Number: 0307077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149817             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Selman selman@cse.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project continues research on the computational complexity of feasible
              computations, with the larger goal being to distinguish complexity classes that
              contain feasibly computable problems from those that do not.  The emphasis is
              to continue investigation into fundamental areas of computational complexity
              theory.

The project advances research on disjoint NP pairs.  Disjoint NP
              pairs are technically equivalent to promise problems, and they were studied
              previously because of their relevance to security issues in cryptography.  This
              project investigates their relevance to propositional proof systems, and solves
              problems that add insight to questions about proof systems.

The project
              continues to investigate multivalued functions as a model of computation. 
              Whereas it has been common practice to study the complexity of computational
              problems by focusing on decision problems alone, it is frequently more natural
              to study the computational complexity of problems directly as multivalued
              partial functions.  

Average-case complexity theory provides a framework for
              the classification of problems according to average-case analyses.  This
              project continues to develop the theory of average-time complexity, for the
              average-case complexity of a problem is frequently a more important measure
              than its worst-case complexity.

Regarding the broader impact of this
              activity, the PI offers advanced graduate courses and seminars that include the
              results of this project.  The PI's graduate students participate fully in the
              activities of this project.  All results are disseminated broadly.  Results are
              submitted to major scientific symposia and to refereed journals

