Title       : FIBR Planning: A Systems Approach to Study Redox Regulation of Functions of
               Photosynthetic Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EF  
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0307212

Award Number: 0307212
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      EF   EMERGING FRONTIERS                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Himadri B. Pakrasi pakrasi@biology2.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bijoy K. Ghosh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph S. Quatrano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 7216      FRONTIERS IN BIO RES (FIBR)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9145,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Redox chemistry is central to the functions of oxygenic photosynthetic organisms
              such as cyanobacteria and plants. In this project, research will be initiated
              on a SYSTEMS analysis of the impact of cellular redox status on the overall
              function of cyanobacteria, with future applications to plants. The focus is on
              four cyanobacterial species, each with a completed sequenced genome. Two
              species, Synechocystis 6803 and Anabaena 7120, are amenable to high-throughput
              genome level manipulations. Although the inventory of genes, transcripts and
              proteins are available for these organisms, they are inadequate to comprehend
              the organizational hierarchy of the complex functions of these cyanobacteria.
              The project will involve a multidisciplinary approach. Expertise of the project
              team spans molecular biology, biochemistry, bioinformatics and systems approach
              in engineering, including nonlinear modeling and control, estimation and
              statistical analysis. Experimental research experience of the team spans model
              systems in cyanobacteria, non-vascular (moss) and vascular plants
              (Arabidopsis). Multiple network models will study interactions between
              molecular components of cyanobacterial cells, formulate working hypotheses, and
              data from such hypotheses will refine the model. This process will generate
              fundamental insights into the organization and function of the redox control
              network in these organisms. This approach to model a network in cyanobacteria,
              then to apply it to plants, will highlight the nature of processes during the
              evolution of land plants.

During this planning period, (a) the team will
              participate in monthly meetings; (b) a workshop will be organized; and (c) the
              plan for a full-length FIBR project will be formulated. Undergraduate, graduate
              and postdoctoral trainees will participate in these activities.

