Title       : Collaborative Research: The Effects of Information on Firm Conduct and Market
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  2003   
File        : a0307682

Award Number: 0307682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 31,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71325              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Leslie pleslie@econ.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is a significant theoretical literature in economics that identifies
              various ways through
which providing more information to consumers may lead to
              improvements in market effciency
and consumer welfare in particular. The
              theoretical insights provide a basis for government
policies that seek to
              increase the amount of information available to consumers. Examples of
such
              policies include food labeling laws, accounting disclosure rules and energy
              effciency labels
on home applicances. Meanwhile existing empirical studies
              into the effects of information to
consumers on firm behavior find small or
              negligible effects, casting doubt on the importance of
such policies. In this
              project, we analyze a regulatory change that provides an appealing context
for
              evaluating the effects of increased product information on firms' product
              quality choices and
disclosure decisions.
In 1998, Los Angeles County
              introduced hygiene quality grade cards to be displayed in restaurant
windows.
              The regulatory change provides an experiment in whether firms are subject to
              volun-
tary disclosure (of hygiene quality) without verifiability, voluntary
              disclosure with verifiability
or mandatory disclosure. Our research indicates
              substantial effects of the increased information
on restaurant hygiene
              quality. We also find that the effects from mandatory disclosure are
              very
similar to the effects from voluntary verifiable disclosure. A possible
              implication of this finding
is that mandatory disclosure laws (which could be
              hard to introduce due to lobbying by indus-
try groups) are less important
              than having the government provide mechanisms/procedures for
firms to
              voluntarily disclose verifiable product information.
The richness of our
              dataset allows us to also analyze how the effects of the grade cards
              differ
across restaurants. This is interesting because we can address
              questions that have received
little or no attention in the existing empirical
              literature, such as: (i) does reputation help firms
to overcome adverse
              selection problems, (ii) do franchised chain-restaurants free-ride on
              chain
reputation, and (iii) what is the effect of the increased product
              information on firms' profitability
and market structure?
