Title       : FIBR: PLANNING- INTEGRATIVE STUDIES OF MUTATION BIOLOGY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EF  
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0307180

Award Number: 0307180
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      EF   EMERGING FRONTIERS                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35187              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles B. Fenster cf25@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew T. Rutter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7216      FRONTIERS IN BIO RES (FIBR)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9145,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Participants: Jon Agren, Joanne Chory, Charles Fenster (PI), Thomas Hansen,
              Alexy Kondrashov, Stephen Mount, Matthew Rutter (coPI), Frank Shaw, Ruth Shaw,
              Stephen Tonsor, Gunter Wagner, Detlef Weigel

Spontaneous mutations are the
              source of new genetic variants, and are the raw material of evolutionary
              change. The outcomes of many evolutionary models depend upon the rate and
              expression of mutations. Because mutation is infrequent, measuring these
              parameters has been restricted to model organisms raised and assayed in large
              numbers in laboratory conditions. However, understanding how mutations
              interface with natural selection and other ecological features of the organism
              requires explicitly quantifying mutation rates and their effects in the wild or
              to specific environmental conditions that the organism is likely to encounter. 
              An accurate description of the properties of the mutation process will provide
              important information about such topics as the rate of emergence of genetic
              disease and their likely severity, and the potential for detrimental mutations
              to lead to the decline and extinction of endangered species.  Knowledge about
              the ways in which specific types of mutation interface with the environment may
              allow us to better use modern genetic techniques to improve crop performance or
              identify genes that may be especially likely to play a role in disease.
              

This FIBR Planning Grant will facilitate a collaborative project to
              investigate mutation properties on evolutionary processes in the plant
              Arabidopsis thaliana.  We are a group of researchers whose expertise includes
              molecular and developmental genetics, theoretical genetics, and field-based
              experimental approaches to the study of plant evolution.  A. thaliana is
              optimal for the study of mutational effects: it is the only genetic model
              organism that does not move, is large enough to easily observe in the wild, and
              widely distributed in natural populations.  Thus, we can utilize predictive
              evolutionary models, cutting-edge molecular tools, established mutation
              accumulation lines, greenhouse and field experiments to connect alterations of
              the genetic code caused by mutation with subsequent changes in survival,
              reproductive success, and population-level evolutionary processes.  The
              planning grant will fund two meetings (in spring and fall of 2003) that will
              define in detail the questions to be investigated. We will create a research
              plan that addresses important and feasible evolutionary questions that link
              molecular genetic and physiological information to the level of the whole
              organism.  Furthermore, we will identify and recruit other researchers who
              would enhance the project.  The outcome of these meetings and collaborations
              will be to prepare and submit a preliminary FIBR proposal in 2003.

