Title       : NSF Tri-National Workshop - Advances in Micro and Nano Technologies for Sensing
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a0307610

Award Number: 0307610
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 15,  2002  
Expires     : November 30,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71635              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay P. Malshe apm2@engr.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dinesh Sood  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,5912,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The next generation of engineered systems and enabling materials are desired to
              have bio-mimetic attributes such as thinking, self organizing, self healing,
              self powered, multifunctional and reconfigurable, on demand
              information-to-knowledge conversion, application specificity, etc.  Novel
              sensing capabilities are required to achieve highly sophisticated actuation and
              system control functions. To deliver such diverse attributes to today's device
              and system platform, advancements in micro and nanotechnology area are
              essential and timely.  
 
NSF Review Criterion 1-Intellectual Merit of the
              Proposed Activity: Innovations in micro and nanotechnology are essential to
              develop the devices, enabling materials and advanced systems, which can foresee
              and anticipate the important events rather than providing merely an after-event
              diagnosis.  In the context, of the above subject it is imperative that the
              "discoveries and innovations in micro and nano technologies for sensing" need
              to be shared and discussed by eminent scientists and engineers on the
              international dais due to complexity and wide range applicability of the
              subject.  Hence, the objective of this proposal is to call for such a focused
              workshop in conjunction with a large conference on "Smart Materials, Nano- and
              Micro- Smart Systems" sponsored by SPIE  (http://spie.org/info/au) in
              Melbourne, Australia. The goal is to invite leading researchers in the related
              areas from America, Australia, and Japan to discuss and develop the subject
              through presentations and panel discussions, which will lead to further
              findings, recommendations and focused research programs/linkages between
              research groups on an international level.  
 
NSF Review Criterion 2-
              Broader Impacts of the proposed activity: The economy of several countries
              depends on the synergy between various technologies via the important common
              features of "sensing" techniques, "sensing" devices and "sensor" control
              systems. Principal research funding agencies such as National Science
              Foundation in USA, Australian research Council in Australia and Japanese
              Society for Promotion of Science  (JSPS) in Japan can play an important role of
              enabler to bring American, Australian and Japanese teams of researchers
              together to provide an impetus to the advancement of sensing technologies to
              build integrated micro- nano- and macro systems. It is proposed to invite about
              20 specialists from USA, about 15 from Japan and about 10 from Australia to
              participate in this workshop dedicated to novel and practical "sensing"
              applications. The efforts of a PI from USA and two co-PI's from Australia and
              Japan are being put together to plan and execute this project of international
              importance and relevance. The outcome of the workshop will be a detailed report
              and a book to be published by a leading publisher in USA. Attendance by
              industry champions may lead to collaborative projects to commercialize novel
              products. 


