Title       : SGER: Immediate Post-fire Response of Soil Biology and Pedogenic Processes at
               the San Dimas Lysimeter Biosequence.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0307029

Award Number: 0307029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Knute Nadelhoffer                       
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2003      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48522              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Graham graham@citrus.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 1306,9237,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Research under relatively stable environmental conditions of the past 16 years
              has shown that biological activity strongly influences soil-forming processes
              at the San Dimas (California) research site. In September 2002, a catastrophic
              wildfire burned virtually all of the San Dimas Experimental Forest in southern
              California.  This wildfire represents an extreme event that is nevertheless
              characteristic of chaparral ecosystems. Because the pre-fire conditions have
              been so thoroughly studied as at San Dimas, a rare opportunity is presented to
              advance the understanding of post-fire soil processes.  This research will
              measure the initial post-fire response of biological communities and soil
              processes by addressing the following hypotheses: (1) Fine-scale variation in
              fuel loads created a fire severity mosaic in which recolonization by
              surface-active soil fauna and microbes will proceed from minimally burned
              patches; (2) Deeper-dwelling fauna were dormant in the dry soil and not
              immediately impacted, but as soils wet up in the coming months, these organisms
              (especially earthworms) will decline because of lost food sources, more severe
              microclimates, and altered soil chemical conditions; and (3) The initial water
              leaching into the soils will be highly alkaline because it passes through
              overlying white ash, and will lead to clay dispersion, destabilization of soil
              aggregates, a flush of waterborne clay, and increased silicate mineral
              weathering rates.  These hypotheses will be tested by detailed field sampling,
              in situ monitoring, and laboratory analyses. These tests will identify
              mechanisms that control the trajectory of soil ecosystem recovery following
              fires.  This research site will continue to serve diverse educational
              institutions through field trips and research opportunities.
