Title       : SGER: Attitudinal antecedents of war
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0307567

Award Number: 0307567
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  2003   
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73357              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy D. Wilson tdw@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin M. Carlsmith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, submitted under the Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER),
              examines the
antecedents of public support for U.S. military incursions into
              foreign states. In particular, it will
examine the factors that motivate U.S.
              citizens to support the proposed invasion of Iraq through
methodologies
              developed in social psychology. The current international situation presents
              a
unique yet perishable opportunity to gather empirical data that address this
              topic. A growing body
of evidence suggests that individuals make punishment
              decisions on the basis of just deserts rather
than utilitarian justifications
              such as deterrence or incapacitation. The present research will
examine
              whether citizens -- contacted through a nationally representative survey --
              respond to
potential military action against sovereign states in a similar
              manner. Specifically, it is
hypothesized that support for war will be
              determined primarily by an individual's perception that
the foreign state is
              deserving of the invasion, and that the invasion represents a morally
              appropriate
and proportional response to prior acts of harm. It is further
              predicted that concerns with
incapacitation (e.g., limiting Iraq's ability to
              wage war), deterrence (e.g., inhibiting other potential
"rogue nations" from
              threatening U.S, interests), and general utility (e.g., economic outcomes)
              will
be only weakly related to attitudes about the invasion. These studies
              represent an important step
forward in tracing individual psychology to
              matters of international relations, and will provide a
test of whether
              micro-level theories of punishment can be extended to include
              macro-level
situations.

