Title       : FIBR: Planning: Proteomic Analysis of Critical Targets of Environmental Stress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EF  
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0307044

Award Number: 0307044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      EF   EMERGING FRONTIERS                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49892              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin E. Feder m-feder@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert F. Bennett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gordon J. Lithgow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bradford W. Gibson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 7216      FRONTIERS IN BIO RES (FIBR)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9145,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed work will discover thermal "weak links" in organisms.  That is, as
              organisms encounter progressively higher temperatures, which are the first
              proteins to be damaged by temperature? To do so, the work will exploit a
              molecular chaperone, a special protein that recognizes and binds to damaged
              proteins.   These chaperones will be isolated - and with them the damaged
              proteins that they bind.  The damaged proteins in turn will be identified by
              peptide mass fingerprinting, a novel, state-of-the-art technique.  The proposed
              work is a pilot project that will seek weak links in populations of a model
              bacterial species, E. coli, that have been evolving at different temperatures,
              and test whether the weak links in low-temperature populations have been
              strengthened in high temperature populations.


The proposed work will set
              the stage for a methodology whereby weak links can be identified for any
              organism whose genome has been characterized, and in relation to any natural or
              anthropogenic stress.  Potentially these weak links determine the ecological
              and evolutionary limits of organisms, the maximum age they can reach,
              susceptibility to disease, etc. - but heretofore it has not been possible to
              identify the weak links themselves.  The project will also be among the first
              to demonstrate the applicability of peptide mass fingerprinting to problems in
              this area of science.





