Title       : Structural Recovery and Physical Aging in Plasticizing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0307084

Award Number: 0307084
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2003       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory B. McKenna greg.mckenna@coe.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : ,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The discovery of anomalous volume recovery in polymer glasses subjected to
              plasticizer-jumps through the glass transition will be explored using three new
              classes of experiment.  First, the kinetics of mass absorption during
              structural recovery will be investigated. Second, the first enthalpy recovery
              experiments after plasticizer-jumps will be performed to determine if the
              observed volume anomalies are also found in the enthalpy part of the glassy
              structure.  This will require development of a unique pressure cell for the
              Calvet calorimeter in the laboratories of the PI. Third, a non-resonant
              dielectric hole burning spectroscopy (NSHB) technique will be developed to
              establish how dynamic heterogeneity of the plasticizer-jump and T-jump created
              glasses compares.   The experimental results will be interpreted within the
              energy landscape paradigm for glass-forming materials. The work will provide
              the first complete set of data that constructs the full range of macroscopic
              variables (volume, enthalpy and concentration) and relates them to a measure of
              the microscopic nature of the material (NSHB) during the evolution of glassy
              structure or physical aging. Finally, the development of the NSHB capabilities
              at Texas Tech University will be the first such apparatus in the United
              States.
%%%
The graduate students and post-doctoral researcher will perform
              the proposed research under the direct supervision of the PI. The proposed work
              is expected to provide excellent training for the graduate student and
              post-doctoral associate in cutting edge research. As part of their training,
              the graduate student and post-doc will attend and present their research
              results at national or regional meetings. In addition to providing good
              training for students, the results of the project will be incorporated to the
              extent feasible in both undergraduate and graduate courses taught by the PI.
              Because the research is interdisciplinary, containing multiple aspects of
              polymer materials science (structural recovery and plasticization of glass
              forming materials) and calorimetry as well as fundamental condensed matter
              physics (non-resonant spectral hole burning) the work provides a rare
              educational opportunity for the graduate student and post-doc. They will be
              expected to be familiar with all aspects of the program. In addition, the work
              involves two significant instrument design and construction tasks (pressure
              vessel for calorimeter and dielectric NSHB apparatus) that are important in the
              education of experimental scientists. 
***
