Title       : Conducting an International Workshop on Sustainable Development and Concrete
               Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2003  
File        : a0307261

Award Number: 0307261
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2003     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kejin Wang kejinw@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Conducting an International Workshop on Sustainable Development and Concrete
              Technology

There is increasing concern about the issues such as global
              warming and other ecological changes that have drastically influenced the
              existence of life. Concrete industry is considered as one of the significant
              contributors to these changes. With the exponential growth of human population
              and industrialization, concrete is now used not only for buildings and roads
              but also for other civil infrastructure facilities such as underground mass
              transit facilities, wastewater treatment systems, and marine structures. Every
              year, approximately 1.6 billion tons of portland cement is produced worldwide,
              generating 5% of global carbon dioxide (CO2) emission. Annually, the concrete
              industry consumes 10 billion tons of sand and rock and 1 billion tons of water.
               Concrete greatly impacts the ecology of the planet Earth. 

This proposal is
              to conduct an international workshop to address the above issues. The workshop
              will be hosted by Tsinghua University, in collaboration with other
              organizations. The goals of the workshop are to promote global interaction and
              foster research collaboration so as to develop a better understanding towards
              sustainable development using concrete technology. A steering committee,
              consisting of members from both US and China, will be formed for the workshop
              organization and implementation. US experts, especially women or minorities, on
              cement and concrete materials will be invited to the workshop, eight to ten of
              whom will be selected by the workshop committee and partially be supported by
              the proposed NSF travel grant. 

The China Building Material Academy (CBMA)
              will sponsor and jointly host the workshop with Tsinghua University. The
              Yangtze Survey, Planning, and Design Research Institute will co-sponsor the
              workshop. China Yangtze Power Corporation Ltd. will host and sponsor a field
              trip to Three Gorges. A proceeding of the workshop will be produced.




