Title       : Controlling block Copolymer Order for Patterning in Two Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0307233

Award Number: 0307233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2003     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $584000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Kramer edkramer@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              An experimental program is proposed aimed at discovering methods to achieve good
              translational and orientational order in 2D arrays of block copolymer domains,
              methods that could ultimately lead to nanopatterns that could be transferred to
              underlying substrates.  An assisted self-assembly scheme is proposed whereby
              the edges of regions defined by optical lithography serve to register and
              template the order.  Emphasis will be placed on understanding the ordering and
              disordering processes in melts of both single layer and multilayer films of
              spherical domain block copolymers and their belends with homopolymers in such
              regions.  While most experiments will use locally flat substrates with sharp
              edge structures, the equilibrium order on surfaces with Gaussian curvature
              (positive and negative) will be explored as well.  Assisted self-assembly is
              also expected to work for cylindrical domain block copolymer films with
              cylinders normal to the film surface.  Here controlling they cylinder
              orientation (with electric fields or surface interactions) while maintaining
              lateral templating by edge structures is the major challenge.  These
              experiments will be supplemented with field theoretic numerical simulations of
              2D block copolymer ordering in collaboration with Glenn Fredrickson at UCSB. 
              Strong efforts will be made to involve undergraduates in the research in
              several ways.  A partnership is proposed with faculty at Harvey Mudd College,
              an undergraduate institution in Claremont, CA, that will allow their
              undergraduates to pursue senior research projects that contribute to this
              research.  These students will have access to the outstanding experimental
              facilities at UCSB as well as regular Web conferences with the team at UCSB. 
              At least one undergraduate chemical engineer at UCSB will be involved during
              the academic year and at least one summer participant will be sought from the
              various REU programs on the UCSB campus.  A web site will be developed as a
              learning resource for college and high school teachers, allowing them to teach
              the principles of crystals and defects using the real 2D block copolymer array
              structures as model systems.  Strong emphasis will be placed on developing
              graduate student communication and presentation skills, especially in the
              context of national and even international meetings.  Interactions are expected
              to develop with nanotechnology groups at various industrial concerns interested
              in utilizing the results of this research.
