Title       : FIBR: Planning-Study of Biodiversity and Ecosystem Function in Livestock &
               Wildlife Dominated Savannas of East Africa: Uniting Genomic, Molecular, Species
               and Ecosystem Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EF  
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0307132

Award Number: 0307132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Pamela O'Neil                           
	      EF   EMERGING FRONTIERS                      
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49921              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Coughenour mikec@nrel.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Diana H. Wall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naomi L. Ward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robin Reid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis S. Ojima  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 7216      FRONTIERS IN BIO RES (FIBR)
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9145,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Researchers in genetics, ecosystems, and soils sciences will unite to develop an
              integrative proposal to assess the interrelationships between above and
              belowground biodiversity and ecosystem function in pastoral and wildlife
              dominated savannas in East Africa. The research will: 1) assess the diversity
              of the major components of these ecosystems from microbial genes to landscapes
              and human land uses, 2) relate this diversity to selected ecosystem functions,
              and 3) test basic hypotheses that relate diversity and function of the parts to
              system-level resilience or 'health' in the face of stressors such as land-use
              changes and human population growth. 

These findings will elucidate the
              importance of biodiversity for human well-being, and enhance efforts to
              conserve the Greater Serengeti-Mara and other world-renowned wildlife
              ecosystems that are inhabited by humans who depend on sustainable ecosystem
              services. A symposium will be organized around the themes and objectives of the
              project to convey our current understanding and thoughts for moving forward to
              the broader community and to the public. A planning meeting will be held with
              members of the local East African community to present ideas, obtain their
              feedback, and design the study to provide useful information.

