Title       : Organometallic Complexes of Convex Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  1996   
File        : a9420908

Award Number: 9420908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Rabideau   (Principal Investigator current)
              George G. Stanley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this research is the synthesis and properties of   hydrocarbons and
              organometallic compounds whose carbon   frameworks can be identified on the
              buckministerfullerene   (C-60) surface. These polynuclear aromatic compounds
              with   curved surfaces possess bowl-shaped geometries and consist of   five-
              and six-membered rings. The interesting difference   between these compounds
              and the fullerenes is that, in addition   to having hydrogens, they have both
              convex and concave   surfaces. Thus, with organometallic derivatives one can
              study   the preferences for complexation on either the convex or the   concave
              side of the molecule, differential complexation at   either five- or
              six-membered rings, and numbers and types of   metals complexed, as well as a
              variety of other properties.  With this award, the Synthetic Organic Program is
              supporting   the research of Dr. Peter W. Rabideau and his co-PI, Dr. George  
              G. Stanley, of the Department of Chemistry at Louisiana State   University
              Baton Rouge. Professors Rabideau and Stanley will   focus their work on the
              synthesis and properties of   hydrocarbons and organometallic derivatives whose
              carbon   frameworks can be identified on the buckministerfullerene   surface.
              These polynuclear aromatic compounds with curved   surfaces possess bowl-shaped
              geometries. The examples involving   30 carbons represent an exciting new
              family of hydrocarbons   whose structures represent one-half of
              buckministerfullerene,   and, as such, they are referred to as `buckybowls.`   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
