Title       : Construction and Evaluation of a Step Scanning Interferometric Instrument for
               the Observation of Infrared Circular Dichroism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  1997      
File        : a9420053

Award Number: 9420053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136391             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max Diem   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The following proposal is aimed at developing a prototype  instrument for the
              observation of infrared, or vibrational  Circular Dichroism (VCD), using
              Step-Scanning Fourier  transform (SS-FT) methodology. VCD is a spectroscopic 
              technique, developed originally in the mid 1970's, in which  the differential
              absorption of left and right circularly  polarized indrared light by
              vibrational transitions is  observed.  This effect is very small, yet contains 
              conformational and structural information which cannot be  obtained easily by
              any other spectroscopic method.  The lack  of commercial instrumentation for
              its observation has  restricted the wider application of VCD as a structural 
              tool.    This proposal is intended to produce a new generation of VCD 
              instruments which could serve as blueprints for commercial  VCD spectrometers. 
              The proposed instrument is conceived as  a VCD spectrometer, rather than a
              Fourier Transform infrared  spectrometer to which VCD capabilities were added. 
              A number  of technical innovations will make this instrument very  unique, and
              will extend its capabilities beyond the present  limits of VCD spectroscopy. 
              The applicant's laboratory has  been in the forefront of the development of
              vibrational  optical activity, and has extensive experience with both 
              dispersive and interferomatic spectroscopic methods.  Thus,  this laboratory is
              ideally suited to take a leading role in  development of a new generation of
              VCD spectrometers.    The main thrust of the applicant's research is the 
              determination of the solution conformation of biological  model systems: 
              peptides and small proteins, as well  asoligonucleotides and their interactions
              with drugs.  The  SS- FT-VCD instrument described here will be used in these 
              studies to further reduce VCD data acquisition time, improve  spectral quality
              and permit spectra to be collected from  more dilute aqueous solutions.
