Title       : Physiological Mechanisms of Anoxic Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9420017

Award Number: 9420017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald C. Jackson Donald Jackson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald G. Lawler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9420017  Jackson      The object of this investigation is to understand how a
              specially adapted vertebrate animal, the freshwater turtle, is able to survive
              long periods without oxygen.  Based on this knowledge, the long-term goal is to
              uncover fundamental principles of cellular and organismal function related to
              this problem.  Several experimental approaches will be utilized.  First, at the
              whole animal level, the distribution and excretion of key body fluid
              substances, lactic acid, CO2 and chloride ion will be determined using injected
              radioactively-labelled compounds.  These compounds are all important in
              determining acid-base balance during anoxia and these experiments will clarify
              aspects of the important homeostatic function of blood pH regulation in these
              animals.  Second, heart function in these animals will be studied because of
              the usual sensitivity of this organ to anoxia.  Mechanical properties of small
              strips of cardiac muscle will be studied under conditions that simulate the
              anoxic state of the living animal, utilizing known changes in blood pH, ion
              concentrations, and catecholamine levels in our test solutions.  Third, the
              response of skeletal muscle to long-term anoxia will be studied both in the
              intact animal and in isolated pieces of muscle using the technique of magnetic
              resonance spectroscopy.  Dr. Jackson's object in these experiments is to assess
              the cellular energetics, the capacity to do work, and the recovery from
              activity in the muscles of this animal in the absence of oxygen.  The
              remarkable characteristics of an animal specialist such as the turtle and its
              organ systems make it an ideal preparation for understanding basic principles
              of cellular metabolism and energetics in response to anoxia and acidosis.  Of
              broader significance is understanding how adaptations revealed at the cell or
              organ system level incorporate into the integrative behavior of the intact
              animal.  ***
