Title       : Integrated Technology in Microelectronic Materials and Smart Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9420568

Award Number: 9420568
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory W. Auner gauner@ece.eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pepe Siy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ratna Naik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9420568  Auner    ABSTRACT     The proposed research-curriculum development
              program will use existing materials development research for microelectronic
              devices in combination with integrated electronic circuitry to make "smart
              devices".  Currently we are developing wide bandgap semiconductors and
              magneto-strictive materials for automotive device sensors.  The curriculum will
              develop a hands-on lecture/laboratory sequence to develop new materials using
              existing experimental methodology and to develop the materials into proto-type
              devices.  Students will learn very state-of-the-art growth techniques for
              developing two classes of materials- III-V wide bandgap nitride semiconductors
              and magnetic materials.  The students will use the class 100 clean room
              facilities to develop proto-type sensor devices.  Preliminary work on
              curriculum development in this area has been very successful (high demand)
              using direct study courses.  In addition to sensor         development,
              students will learn how to combine circuitry, for control, calibration, and
              pre-processing of data, on the sensor devices to make them "smart detectors". 
              A VLSI/Device Simulation laboratory will be developed for the course sequence
              to allow students to design and simulate the devices before they fabricate
              them.  An emphasis will be placed on design aspects and teamwork in completing
              the project.  This type of integrated technology where students are trained in
              device design, fabrication and integrated circuitry is what industries in the
              united states need to be competitive.  This type of training is suggested from
              direct consultations with many local high technology industries and most
              particularly from the automobile industry.  Sensor technology has become a
              priority in the automobile industry for auto emissions and control systems. 
              The developed material will be published as a text accompanied by a laboratory
              manual and associated simulation software.  The college of engineering will
              sponsor a workshop after completion of course dev elopment to disseminate this
              course to other universities and institutions.  ***
