Title       : Structure, Function, and Expression of Cold-Adapted Tubulins and
               Microtubule-Dependent Motors from Antarctic Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9420712

Award Number: 9420712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $583319             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. William Detrich ICEMAN@NEU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1167,9117,9169,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Microtubules, which are subcellular "pipe-like" filaments  composed of
              the protein tubulin, and their associated motors,  dynein and kinesin,
              participate in many fundamental cellular  processes, including cell division,
              nerve growth and  regeneration, cell motility, and the organization and
              transport  of organelles within cells.  In these processes, microtubules  serve
              as rigid "railroad tracks" for the movement of motors and  their cargoes
              ("trains"), and the motors themselves are  efficient, high-velocity, regulative
              "locomotives."  The  microtubles and microtubule motors of cold-adapted
              Antarctic  fishes are unique in their capacity to assemble and to function  at
              body temperatures (-2 to +2 oC) well below those of warm-  blooded and
              temperate organisms. The long-range goals of the  proposed research are to
              determine, at the molecular level, the  adaptations that enhance the assembly
              of microtubules, the  expression of tubulin genes, and the activity of
              microtubule  motors from Antarctic fishes in this extreme thermal regime.  The 
              objectives of this project are: 1) to determine the structural  features (e.g.,
              changes in their amino acid sequences) that  enable the tubulins of Antarctic
              fishes to polymerize efficiently  at low temperatures; 2) to characterize the
              structure,  organization, and expression of an alpha-tubulin gene cluster  from
              an Antarctic rockcod, Notothenia coriiceps; and 3) to  examine the biochemical
              adaptations required for efficient  function of Antarctic fish flagellar dynein
              motors at low  temperatures.  Molecular adaptations of the Antarctic fish 
              tubulins will be determined by comparing the amino acid sequences  of alpha-
              and beta-tubulins from Notothenia coriiceps, to those  from its temperate
              relative, the New Zealand black cod,  Notothenia angustata.  Gene expression in
              N. coriiceps will be  analyzed by defining the organization and transcription- 
              regulating elements of an alpha-tubulin gene cluster.  The  structure of the
              cluster will be characterized b y sequence  analysis using standard DNA
              sequencing methods.  Features of N.  coriicepsalpha-tubulin
              transcription-regulating elements  (promoters) that support efficient gene
              expression at cold  temperatures will be assessed by use of reporter gene
              constructs  in primary cell cultures derived from N. coriiceps tissues. 
              Comparison to results obtained with N. angustata promoters should  help to
              delineate elements of alpha-tubulin promoter regions that  are important for
              high-level expression at low temperatures.  Finally, the biochemical
              adaptations required for efficient  function of N. coriiceps flagellar dyneins
              at low temperatures  will be assayed by measurement of the temperature
              dependence of  the motor activities of purified inner- and outer-arm dyneins. 
              For comparison, flagellar dyneins from the temperate trout Salmo  gairdneri
              (and possibly from N. angustata) will also be analyzed.  Taken together, these
              studies should reveal the molecular  adaptations of Antarctic fishes that
              maintain efficient  microtubule assembly, mechano-chemical motor function, and
              gene  expression at low temperatures. In the broadest sense, this  research
              program should advance the molecular understanding of  the cold-adapted mode of
              life,
