Title       : Stomatal Respones in Intact Leaves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1996  
File        : a9420862

Award Number: 9420862
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Mott   (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Haefner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    Mott  9420862  Experiments will be conducted to determine the
              relationships  between the functioning of a single stoma and the responses  of
              stomatal conductance in an intact leaf.  Recent studies  provide evidence that
              stomata in a leaf interact in complex  and unexpected ways such that changes in
              whole leaf stomatal  conductance may not reflect proportional changes for all 
              stomata.  Two levels of stomatal interactions will be  investigated.  First,
              interactions that could lead to  synchronized behavior of all stomata within an
              areole (the  smallest area of the leaf surrounded by veins) will be 
              investigated.  Several studies have shown that such behavior  is relatively
              common (e.g., patchy stomatal closure), and  Dr. Mott has  proposed a hydraulic
              mechanism by which the  movements of stomata within an areole could be
              synchronized.  This hypothesis will be tested using epi-illumination 
              microscopy to observe movements of individual stomata in a  intact leaf.  One
              or more stoma will be induced to open or  close by altering its light
              environment using small glass  fibers.  The response of that stoma and the
              responses of  neighboring stomata will be recorded using video digitizing 
              equipment.    The effect of changes in transpiration for one part of a  leaf on
              stomatal conductance of other parts of the leaf will  be determined using
              gas-exchange techniques.  Changes in  transpiration induced by changes in
              humidity, carbon  dioxide, and light will be used to evalluate the role of 
              hydraulically-based mechanisms in producing the conductance  responses observed
              in preliminary experiments.  Fluorescence  imaging will be used to quantify the
              spatial distribution of  stomatal conductance over the leaf surface.   
              Finally, cellular automaton modeling will be used to  simulate interactions
              among stomata and among areoles and  scale from single stoma dynamics to
              spatial and temporal  variations in whole leaf conductance.  Because the model
              is  computationally demanding, modeling work will be conduct ed  at an NSF
              Supercomputer Center.  Results from the  experiments described above will be
              used to structure the  model, and model predictions will be compared to 
              experimental results to test proposed mechanisms.
