Title       : Diatom Biostratigraphy and Paleoenvironmental History of Cape Roberts Projects
               Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9420062

Award Number: 9420062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159034             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Harwood dharwood1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This award supports a project to charaaterize the diatom  fossils in drill
              core recovered by the Cape Roberts  Project (CRP).  The CRP is a major program
              within the  international Antarctic earth science community, designed  to
              sample Antarctic continental margin strata of late  Cretaceous through
              Paleogene age (30 million to 100  million years ago).  Drilling operations will
              include  continuous coring from a sea ice platform at four sites on  the flank
              of the Victoria Land basin in the western Ross  Sea, during two drilling
              seasons.    This particular project involves initial field-based  paleontologic
              analysis of siliceous microfossils in Cape  Roberts cores.  Core sections will
              be ferried to the Crary  Science and Engineering Center for immediate analysis.
               Diatoms and other siliceous microfossils will provide  rapid age and
              paleoenvironmental information during  drilling operations.  Each season will
              include preparation  of a preliminary biostratigraphic/paleoenvironmental 
              report based on siliceous microfossils. This report will  become part of the
              CRP Initial Reports volume, which will  include the preliminary results from
              other microfossil  groups, lithostratigraphic, magnetostratigraphic, and  other
              analyses.    Analysis of diatoms and other siliceous microfossils in  CRP cores
              will greatly aid in the development of an  integrated biostratigraphy for this
              poorly-known interval  in the southern high latitudes.  Diatoms will provide 
              evidence of envirolmental changes in water depth, primary  productivity,
              presence/absence of sea ice, et cetera.  CRP  cores will provide an excellent
              opportunity to study  adaptation of diatoms to strong polar seasonality and 
              diatom evolution.  They will also offer the possibility of  gaining a bipolar
              perspective on Paleogene high latitude  phytoplankton evolution, by integrating
              CRP studies with  ongoing studies of Paleogene siliceous  microfossils in 
              Arctic strata (for example, Ocean Drilling Program Leg  151).
