Title       : Molecular Mechanisms Controlling Plant Responses to ElevatedCarbon Dioxide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9420054

Award Number: 9420054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1995  
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Seemann   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shu-Hua Cheng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nevada Reno
	      
	      Reno, NV  89557    702/784-1110

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420054  Seemann  The concentration of carbon dioxide in the earth's  atmosphere
              is projected to double by the middle to end of  the 21st century.  This change
              will have substantial effects  on natural and agricultural ecosystems,
              primarily because of  the effect of carbon dioxide on photosynthesis, the major
               biological process in the global carbon cycle.  In many  plant species,
              long-term growth at elevated atmospheric  carbon dioxide results in the
              substantial change in both  absolute photosynthetic capacity and the protein
              composition  of the photosynthetic apparatus.  However, the molecular 
              mechanism(s) by which external carbon dioxide concentration  acts at the level
              of gene expression, are largely unknown.    The overall objective of this
              research is to link carbon  dioxide effects on photosynthetic physiological
              processes  (e.g. leaf gas exchange) and biochemical processes (e.g.  rubisco
              protein level and regulation of activity) to changes  in both rubisco gene
              expression and specific carbohydrate  levels in order to identify molecular
              mechanisms which  control the response of plants to elevated carbon dioxide. 
              Arabidopsis thaliana (wild-type and existing mutants) will  be used as the
              model plant system.  Specific objectives are:    (1) Determine the effect of
              atmospheric carbon dioxide  concentration during different developmental stages
              on  rubisco large subunit (rbcL) and small subunit (rbcS) gene  expression,
              rubisco holoenzyme level, activation state, RuBP  pool size and the response of
              photosynthesis to  intercellular carbon dioxide partial pressure (Ci) in 
              Arabidopsis thaliana grown at and switched between a number  of carbon dioxide
              concentrations (subambient, ambient, twice  ambient, saturating).    (2)
              Identify the cellular signal(s) that function(s) in the  signal transduction
              pathway between atmospheric carbon  dioxide concentration and rubisco gene
              expression by  utilizing (1) mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana with altered 
              source or sink activities (altered leaf carbohydra te  metabolism, no seed
              production, altered root:shoot ratio,  delayed flowereing time) in studies of
              carbon dioxide  effects on rubisco gene expression and photosynthesis, and; 
              (2) transient expression studies of carbohydrate effects on  rbcS promoter-GUS
              constructs.
