Title       : Novel Control of Translation Initiation by Barley Yellow Dwarf Virus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  1997   
File        : a9420806

Award Number: 9420806
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Allen Miller wamiller@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F                                  C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    m       m
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   :   ;   <   =   >   ?   @   A   B   C                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9420806
              Miller  Most viruses have RNA genomes, thus translation, rather than
              transcription serves as an important regulatory step in gene expression. Yet
              the study of translational control has been neglected, especially in plants.
              Barley yellow dwarf virus (BYDV) (PAV serotype) is uniquely rich in novel
              translation mechanisms, making it a valuable model for the study of
              translational control of gene expression By providing "exceptions" to the
              cellular mechanisms of translation, viruses such as BYDV should shed light on
              how translation works. The three phenomena investigated here are particularly
              significant for the following reasons. (i) The location of a sequence, that
              confers cap independent translation over 4.5 kb from the 5' end of the viral
              RNA, defies explanation based on current understanding of translation
              initiation. (ii) A new model for control of initiation at two start codons,
              which may have wide application, will be tested. (iii) A wide variety of
              viruses employ readthrough of stop codons flanked by conserved sequence motifs
              that we identified. Nothiny is known about control of this cla ss of
              readthrough signals. In addition, BYDV is the most economically important virus
              of small grains worldwide. Understanding how its gene expression is controlled
              may lead to methods for controlling this virus as well as medically important
              viruses which share these novel translation mechanisms. %%% The process in
              which the genetic code is decoded and proteins are made is called translation.
              Cellular machinery reads genetic information encoded as a sequence of
              nucleotides in messenger RNA (mRNA, similar to DNA), to synthesize a specific
              protein molecule. A chemical modification called a cap is required at the start
              site of translation on all cellular mRNAs. Some viral mRNAs lack the cap, yet
              are translated very effidently by the host's machinery. The genome of barley
              yellow dwarf virus (BYDV), the most important virus of cereals worldwide, is an
              RNA molecule. It has a sequence, that functionally substitutes for a cap,
              located thousands of nucleotides (several gene lengths) from the translation
              start. Goals: (i) determine how this sequence functions by introducing
              specifically altered forms of BYDV RNA into a cell free translation system or
              plant cells, and monitor protein synthesis;  (ii) determine the structure of
              the sequence and its interactions with cellular molecules; (iii) attach the
              sequence to desired, nonviral genes to enhance their translation in plants.
              This work will help us understand how the genetic code is decoded; design means
              of inhibiting virus infection by selectively disrupting viral protein
              synthesis;  and improve molecular tools for genetic engineering. ***         @ 
                 @                                              Oh     +'  0                 
                                   $       H       l                                         
                   D       h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       marcia
              steinberg                    marcia steinberg            @                     
                           @                                    @    '                       
                      S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n                           (        
                                                        9                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            @     ?                                    
              Microsoft Word 6.0                                                      4      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            e
              3       e                                                                      
                      j       j   j       j       j       j       j                          
                                                          7   1                              
                                                                                             
                          h   T       4   7                       j                          
                                                            7               j       j        
                                                                            j               j
                                                    ~               j       j       j       j
                                        1                                                    
                                                          9420806 Miller  Most viruses have
              RNA genomes, thus translati
