Title       : Research on Ocean-Atmospheric Variability and Ecosystem Response in the Ross Sea
               (ROAVERRS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9420683

Award Number: 9420683
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214216             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacqueline M. Grebmeier jgrebmei@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420683  Grebmeier  Research on Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and Ecosystem
              Response  in the Ross Sea (ROAVERRS)    This project describes an
              interdisciplinary study of meteorologic  forcing phenomena, sea ice dynamics,
              ocean hydrography, primary  productivity, and benthic-pelagic coupling in the
              southwestern  Ross Sea, Antarctica.  The primary goal is to examine how changes
               in aspects of the polar climate system, in this case wind and  temperature,
              influence marine productivity on a large Antarctic  continental shelf.  In the
              Ross Sea, winds off the continent and  mesocyclones influence the spatial and
              temporal distribution of  ice cover as well as upper ocean mixed-layer depth
              and thus  control primary production in sea ice and open water systems.   The
              structure, standing stock and productivity of bottom-dwelling  biological
              communities are also linked to meteorologic processes  through interseasonal
              and interannual variation in horizontal and  vertical fluxes of organic carbon
              produced in the upper ocean.   Linkages between atmospheric, oceanographic, and
              biological  systems will be investigate during a two and half year field  study
              of the southwestern Ross Sea ecosystem.  Direct  measurements include:  (1)
              regional wind and air temperature, (2)  ice cover, ice movement, and sea
              surface temperature, (3)  hydrographic characteristics of the upper ocean and
              primary  productivity in sea ice and upper water column, (4) vertical flux  of
              organic materials and ocean circulation, and (5) abundance,  distribution, and
              respiration rates of biological communities on  the sea floor.  Based on
              archived meteorologic data, these  scientists expect that atmospheric
              variability during the study  period will allow them to monitor changes in
              airflow patterns in  the southwestern Ross Sea and to determine their influence
              on  oceanographic and biological patterns.  This study will  contribute to our
              knowledge of atmospheric and oceanographic  forcing of polar marine ecosystems,
              and hence lead to a better  unde rstanding of the polar marine ecosystem
              response to climate  variability.
