Title       : Development of an Apparatus for Rapid Cryoimmobilization of Living Cells During
               Light Microscopic Observation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  1998    
File        : a9420056

Award Number: 9420056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153712             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marek Malecki MarekMalecki@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hans Ris  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                An apparatus has been designed that allows light microscopic  observation of
              living cell phenomena immediately followed by fast  immobilization of these
              phenomena with the aid of rapid freezing. Then  the ultrastructure of this cell
              cryo-whole-mount can be observed in an  electron microscope using a cryo-stage.
              This apparatus consists of  phase contrast, epifluorescence, and polarized
              light optical systems  assembled onto an optical bench. These optical systems
              are integrated  into one unit with a specimen carrier assembled onto a sliding 
              mechanism delivering the specimen into melting ethane. The unique  feature of
              this apparatus is that it allows us to accomplish the  fundamental goal of
              ultrastructural studies in life sciences, i.e.  direct correlation between
              images of a living cell with images of this  cell's ultrastructure, thus direct
              interpretation of molecular  mechanisms in a living cell.                  
              Using an apparatus prototype, we were able to capture early events  involved in
              adhesion of metastasizing cancer cells. Furthermore, we  have been able to
              discover a very delicate intranuclear cable network  that probably serves as a
              part of the cell distribution or signalling  system.         The goal of this
              project is to build a permanent instrument, to refine  its operation, and to
              prepare its expansion toward new imaging  capabilities by making six
              improvements: (1) addition of an intensified  charge-coupled device (ICCD)
              camera to allow observations on living  cells labelled with specific probes at
              low luminance; (2) addition of a  filter-wheel containing fluorochrome
              excitation and infrared filters,  as well as a multi-band barrier filter to
              ensure the correct register  of images during recording of images of cells
              labelled with multiple  probes; (3) addition of a dedicated computer to control
              shutters and  sliders and to link the apparatus to EtherNet communication; (4) 
              addition of Nomarski optics and motorized specimen stage to provide us  with
              the capability of optical s ectioning; (5) preparation for the  attachment of a
              real-time confocal laser-scanning imaging system and  optical tweezers;
              (6)preparation for the attachment of an atomic force  microscope (AFM).        
                    Development of the proposed instrument is now essential to ensure 
              progress in four research projects; (a) structure and function of the  nuclear
              pore complex; (b) myofibril assembly in mammalian skeletal  muscle and the role
              played by expression of titin gene for this  assembly, (c) actomyosin based
              motility of keratocytes; (d) reduction  in Rhabdomyosarcoma malignancy by
              forced expression of myoD, myogenin  and titin genes.
