Title       : Dissertation Research: Technological Approach to the Acheulian of Mozambique
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1994  
File        : a9420493

Award Number: 9420493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : May 31,  1996        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11850              (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. K. Harris   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Harris    Under the direction of Dr. John W. Harris, Ms. Paola Meneses will 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct  archaeological
              fieldwork along the Umbeluzi and Changalane rivers  in Southern Mozambique and
              analyze the resultant data. Previous  work conducted by Ms. Meneses indicates
              that this area is rich in  lithic remains associated with the Acheulean
              industry which  covers the time span from ca. 1,250,000 to 125,000 years ago.
              The  research consists of three parts. First a survey will be  conducted to
              locate both surface and in situ materials. This will  be followed by limited
              excavation to recover in place artifacts  and to establish geological context.
              As part of this first stage,  a geomorphological stages will be reconstructed
              and a  chronological sequence will be developed. Secondly, lithic  materials
              will be analyzed to determine formal attributes of the  assemblages and to
              compare these with materials from South and  Eastern Africa. Finally an
              experimental approach will be used to  reconstruct the lithic manufacture
              process. On this basis it will  be possible to map the distribution of lithic
              remains across the  reconstructed landscapes and determine how these were used
              by  Acheulean peoples.    Africa provided the geographic cradle for humans and 
              archaeologists wish to understand the processes which led to the  emergence of
              both culturally and physically modern humans.  Surprisingly little is known
              about the 1 million year plus time  interval  covered by the Acheulean and very
              few studies have  employed modern analytic techniques. Ms. Meneses work will
              shed  new light on how humans adapted during this interval. It will  also
              provide data of interest to many archaeologists. Finally,  this grant will
              assist in the training of a promising young  archaeologist.
