Title       : Average Case and Probabilistic Setting of Information-Based Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  1997  
File        : a9420543

Award Number: 9420543
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1995      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $421237             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph F. Traub traub@cs.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Problems with only partial or contaminated information   arise in  many
              disciplines: computer science, physics and chemistry,    control theory, 
              statistics, prediction and estimation, scientific  and   engineering
              computation,  geophysics, decision theory, and  finance.  Furthermore, this  
              information is  often expensive to  obtain.  The goal of information-based  
              complexity is to  create a  computational complexity theory for problems with  
              partial,  contaminated, and priced information, and to apply the   results to 
              solving  specific problems in varied disciplines.  The prime foci  of   this
              project are  the following:    (1) Breaking Intractability:  Many problems   in
              science,  engineering,  and even finance, deal with functions that have   a
              large number,  d, of variables.  However, typical multivariate problems are   
              intractable in the  worst case deterministic setting.  The only  way to break  
              intractability is to  weaken the assurance by  switching to another setting.   
              Randomized, average  case, and  probabilistic settings continue to be studied. 
              In    particular,  it has been proven that multivariate integration and   
              approximation are both  strongly tractable on the average.  The  proof is non- 
              constructive; the problem  of how to sample in d  dimensions to achieve strong 
               tractability is being addressed.   (2) Software Development and Testing: 
              Theoretical   investigations  have  led to algorithms for important problems
              such as high    dimensional integration.  To make these methods widely
              available,  software is being   developed and tested.  Since these methods 
              contain a large amount of inherent   parallelism, the  implementation is being
              done on a workstation network.    Testing  is also planned  on parallel
              computers.  Real-world  problems are used for   testing.  (3) Probabilistic
              Complexity of Piece-Wise Smooth Functions:    Piece-wise smooth  functions
              arise in diverse areas of science and  technology   such as computer  vision,
              image and signal processing,  scientific computation,   meteorology, 
              seismology, and to mography.  Because of negative results of   the worst-case 
              setting these  problems are being studied in the   probabilistic setting.  New 
              algorithms for integration, approximation, and detection of    singular points 
              are being studied and implemented.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
