Title       : SHRIMP: Architectural and Systems Support for Inexpensive, High-Performance
               Multicomputers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 27,  1998     
File        : a9420653

Award Number: 9420653
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mita D. Desai                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 15,  1995     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1549995            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kai Li li@cs.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas W. Clark  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward W. Felten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Lipton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Margaret Martonosi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 4725      EXPERIMENTAL SYSTEMS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2891,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is building a high-performance multiprocessor from  commodity
              desktop computer systems and off-the-shelf interconnects.   Commercial Intel
              Pentium workstation boards, each with attached  memory, disk, and I/O, are
              attached to a Paragon backplane.   Communication uses a new mechanism called
              virtual memory-mapped  communication, which disguises interprocessor
              communication as  write operations to memory.  The node interface maps physical
              pages  in the memories of individual nodes to each other, so that a write  to
              one mapped page results in messages to other nodes that share  the mapped page.
               The operating systems on the individual nodes use  their ordinary virtual
              memory mechanism to support virtual page  mapping.  In addition to this
              word-by-word communication, DMA  transfers are available, with control
              registers located in the  address space of individual processes.  This allows
              high bandwidth  communication that maintains user-level protection.  Research
              to be  addressed in the project includes the achievement of high-bandwith 
              low-latency communication between processes, the structure of an  I/O system
              supported by the new communication mechanism, and  performance evaluation of
              the resulting system.
