Title       : Low Energy Nuclear Physics Using the Princeton Cyclotron And Atomic Physics
               Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9420866

Award Number: 9420866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bradley D. Keister                      
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1114838            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon D. Cates   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank P. Calaprice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Vogelaar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1234      LOW ENERGY NUCLEAR SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9420866  Cates  This proposal describes a nuclear physics program based largely 
              on the use of the Princeton Cyclotron.  There are three major  goals to the
              research: (1) the investigation of parity non-  conservation in nucleon-nucleon
              interactions,(2) searches for  time (T) reversal non-invariance in beta decay,
              and (3) studies  of reactions that are important to stellar structure and 
              evolution.  The firsts and second goal are based entirely on  atomic physics
              techniques, with particular emphasis on optical  pumping and spin exchange
              especially in the development of a  novel polarized 3He beam.  The proposed
              approach involves feeding  polarized 3He gas into the existing inonizer of the
              cyclotron.  Using the polarized 3He beam to study parity non-conservation in 
              nucleon-nucleon interactions, they proposed to use neutron pick-  up reactions
              to make polarized excited states in 21Ne and 19Ne.  In both cases, the excited
              states are members of parity doublets  comprising two closely spaced states
              with identical spin but  opposite parities.  By studying the asymmetries of
              gamma rays  that are emitted wither parallel or anti-parallel to the 
              polarization direction, it is possible to determine the parity  mixing within
              the doublets, providing information on the  effective parity non-conserving
              potential that exists between  nucleons.  The researchers also plan studies of
              T symmetry in the  beta decay of 19Ne and 35K, studying light on the origin of
              T  reversal non-invariance, a phenomena which thus far has only been  observed
              in the kaon system.  An order of magnitude improvement  in the presets limits
              on the D coefficient are anticipated.  Finally studies are proposed of several
              reactions of particular  importance to nuclear astrophysics, to help epsilon
              the observed  abundance's that result from explosive nucleosynthesis and 
              understanding stellar evolution and structure.  ***
