Title       : Maintenance of Tropical Tree Diversity by Herbivores and Pathogens: A Test of
               the Janzen-Connell Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1999       
File        : a9420031

Award Number: 9420031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Phyllis D. Coley coley@biology.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420031  Coley    One of the most striking features of tropical forests is their
              great diversity.  The most widely cited explanation for the maintenance of
              tropical forest tree diversity is the Janzen-Connell hypothesis, which suggests
              that seed predators, herbivores and pathogens maintain diversity by
              preferentially attacking seeds or young trees that are close to conspecific
              adults.  This difference in the rate of attack results in higher juvenile
              mortality near adults and increases the distance between successful conspecific
              recruits.  Thus, the natural enemies of trees are proposed to prevent
              competitive dominance, which allows a greater diversity of tree species to
              persist.  Despite the theoretical importance of the Janzen-Connell hypothesis,
              few studies have looked for the predicted pattern of higher seed or seedling
              mortality near adults.  Even less attention has been directed at understanding
              the predicted mechanism of natural enemies centered on the adults.  This study
              will critically evaluate this hypothesis by asking:  1) whether damage depends
              on distance from adult conspecifics, 2) whether damage negatively impacts
              growth and survival, and 3) whether the herbivore and pathogens responsible for
              the majority of damage are host specialists centered on adults.   
              Understanding the mechanisms which control diversity of tropical forests has
              applications to management of rain forests as well as cultivated plantations. 
              In order not to lose diversity in managed forest reserves, policies should take
              into account the Janzen-Connell effects.  For example, encouraging recruitment
              through plantings or selective cutting should consider distance to nearest
              conspecifics.  Monocultures, such as are typically found in plantations, tend
              to have extremely high levels of damage from insect pests.  Preliminary work
              suggests that one method for limiting damage would be to have mixed planting,
              with a minimum of 50m between any two individuals of the same species.
