Title       : Amphiphilic Peptides & Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  1998   
File        : a9420769

Award Number: 9420769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $541500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Eisenberg david@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9161,9181,9183,AMPP,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Eisenberg  9420769  Once proteins can be designed to carry out specific
              functions, we will be on the way to the  pharmaceuticals of the future.  The
              fundamental methods of this research are aimed at making  protein design a
              practical science.  Genetic engineering has opened the way to designing new
              proteins with diverse uses: catalysts,  drugs, specific toxins, scavengers,
              signals, and biomaterials.  But crucial to these designs is  control of 3-D
              structure.  Protein function depends on structure.  We must be able to design 
              animo acid sequences that fold into predictable three dimensional structures. 
              This project aims to define the problem of the connection of amino acid
              sequence to 3D structure  for two classes of small,  -helical proteins.  These
              are bundles of  -helices, and  -helical coiled-  coils, an important special
              class of  -helical bundles.  For these two classes of proteins, amino  acid
              sequences have been designed to fold and oligomerize in predetermined ways. 
              The main  principle of folding and assembly used in these designs is the
              removal of apolar sidechains from  contact with water, and the exposure of
              charged and polar side chains.  This principle of  segregation according to
              polarity may be termed amphiphilicity.    The main analytical method used is
              x-ray structure determination of the designed proteins.   Designed proteins are
              synthesized (or expressed); purified, crystallized, and structures determined 
              as the basis for the next turn of the design cycle.  One of the main design
              tools used is semi-empirical computational energetics.  A major extension  of
              such methods is termed Profile Refinement.  In Profile Refinement, the
              conformation of a  protein is computed by permitting the protein structure to
              change in such a way that each amino  acid residue, or atomic group, seeks an
              environment within the protein that is most like its  average environment in
              the database of known protein structures.  Profile Refinement is based  on
              principles of amphiphilicity, rather than of c lassical energetics. 
              Nevertheless, Profile  Refinement can be combined with classical energetics,
              perhaps to create a more powerful method  for assessing protein designs, and
              for improving partially correct protein models, derived from  low-resolution
              structure determinations or homology models.  Among designed proteins whose
              structures will be determined is a coiled-coil that is a domain  swapped dimer.
               That is, two tripled coiled-coils from a dimer by exchanging a helix.  The 
              ability to design domain-swapped dimers will simplify methods for designing
              larger oligomeric  proteins.  %%%  This project is aimed at making protein
              design a practical science.  Protein function depends on  structure.  this
              research is focussed on designing amino acid sequences for proteins that fold
              into  predictable three-dimensional structures.  Two classes of protein will be
              designed: bundles of  -  helices, and  -helical coiled-coils.  The proteins
              will be synthesized (or genetically expressed),  crystallized and the
              structures determined.  The results will then be used for a second turn of the 
              design cycle.  The ultimate objective is the design of proteins to carry out
              specific functions.  ***
