Title       : Active Control of Transport in Molecular Assemblies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  1996   
File        : a9420211

Award Number: 9420211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $311878             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul W. Bohn bohn@aries.scs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The ability to control molecular transport through membranes is a crucial aspect
              of the operation  of biological systems.  This research project, supported by
              the Analytical and Surface Chemistry  Program, is designed to develop an
              understanding of the molecular level behavior of ultrathin  organic membranes
              under the influence of electric fields.  This understanding is the basis for
              the  control of molecular transport across these membranes.  Professor Paul
              Bohn and his students  at the University of Illinois will use both optical
              fluorescence and standard ac impedance  measurements to obtain this
              understanding.  The optical waveguide methods developed by the  Principal
              Investigator for the study of the properties of thin organic films will be
              applied to these  measurements.  The goal of the overall research program is to
              be able to design a molecular  gate, operable by applying an electric signal.  
               Transport across organic membranes is the basis for various aspects of
              molecular separation,  gene regulation, process control schemes, and drug
              delivery in the body.  In order to understand  this process on a molecular
              level, a research project which probes the behavior of model organic  thin
              films under the influence of an applied electric field is being pursued. 
              Measurements of the  optical properties and the electrochemical properties of
              these membranes will be carried out, and  the information obtained used to
              develop designs for molecular gating devices.
