Title       : CAREER: Identification and Characterization of Phosphate- Starvation Inducible
               Genes in Rhizobium meliloti
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9420798

Award Number: 9420798
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213412             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. McDermott timmcder@montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
              65        Agricultural                            
Program Ref : 1045,9109,9198,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420798  McDermott  Research Plan:  The literature contains numerous examples 
              that shows the legume-Rhizobium symbiosis readily responds  to the application
              of phosphorus (P) fertilizer, and that  nodulated legumes have a higher P
              requirement for optimum  growth than non-nodulated legumes.  Various symbiotic 
              features of this agronomically important plant-microbe  interaction are
              significantly enhanced by P fertilization.  However, we know little about the
              basis for increased P  requirements of symbiotic nitrogen fixation, or the
              basis of  the P respone, particularly the role of the bacterioids in  this
              response.    In the proposed work, R. meliloti will be used to begin a 
              qualitative and quantitative assessment of Rhizobium genes  that are affected
              by P availability.  R. meliloti, strain  104A14, has been mutated with a
              transposon that carries a  promoterless lacZ gene which behaves as a reporter
              gene when  insertion is in the correct orientation relative to the  active
              promoter.  After extensive screening, 19 mutants were  identified that
              exhibited significantly greater reporter  gene activity when the cells were
              P-stressed relative to  when the cells were provided adeuate P.  The reporter 
              mutants will be further characterized to determine what  role, if any, they
              have in P acquisition, what metabolic  role the wild-type gene may have, and if
              their expression is  influenced by other environmental stimuli.  Further, their
               symbiosis phenotype will be determined with host genotypes  that are either
              P-use efficient or inefficient, and under  conditions where P is either
              limiting or in excess for the  host plant.  Finally, selected mutants will be
              studied at  the sequence level.  The effected gene(s) will be cloned an 
              sequenced to help in their identification.    Education Plan:  The Education
              Plan involves three levels of  instruction: 1) development of new courses, 2)
              traditional  graduate student and posdoctoral scientist training, and 3) 
              specialized undergraduate research training.  The n ew  courses being developed
              include one undergraduate course and  one graduate course, taught in alternate
              years.  A  specialized undergraudate research training program is also 
              described.  The purpose of this program is to identify  talented undergraduate
              students and provide them with one-on-  one training.  The program is geared to
              enhance the training  opportunities for those students who are planning on 
              postgraduate school and a research-oriented career.  The  research conducted by
              these undergraduates will be under the  direct supervision of the PI and will
              part of the work  described in the Research Plan.
