Title       : In Situ Subsurface Remediation Technologies: Integration into an
               Interdisciplinary Engineering Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9420526

Award Number: 9420526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Shonnard drshonna@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alex S. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John S. Gierke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9420526  Shonnard    ABSTRACT     Technology development for remediation of
              contaminated groundwater and soils is an area where improvements are critical
              to the entire nation, not only from the standpoint of environmental protection
              and restoration but also economic competitiveness.  A pool of qualified
              engineers is critical to the success of remediation strategies and waste
              management.  However, current remediation engineering practice and teaching
              lags for behind the results of recent and current research.   To improve the
              implementation of research developments in design practice, we propose to
              develop a new lecture course and a mesoscale laboratory facility for training
              undergraduate and graduate engineering students in in-situ groundwater/soil
              remediation technologies.  The lecture course will feature a participatory
              learning environment with remediation case studeis being provided by industry
              and national laboratory participants as a supplement to the lecture materials. 
              The laboratory facility will contain equipment for experimentation at a range
              of scales (one-dimensional bench-scale to three-dimensional mesoscale systems) 
              with a mesoscale apparatus being the centerpiece of the facility.  The
              experiments conducted in the mesoscale apparatus will be representative of
              field conditions, but will not have the problems inherent in field-scale
              experiments such as high costs, long clean up times, and lack of control.  The
              facility will be integrated into existing and new, undergraudate and graduate
              curricula, and will realize direct benefits from ongoing and planned research
              activities.  The educational activities in the proposed facility will be
              supported by an interdisciplinary team of investigators, bringing expertise
              from Chemical, Environmental, and Geological Engineering.  These courses will
              be offered in the three participating departments (Civil and Environmental
              Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and Geological Engineering), and will draw
              from at least 250 senior-level engineering and  50 graduate students in the
              three departments.  At least 75 students, from the three engineering
              departments will participate in this new curriculum each year.  In addition,
              about 30 minority high school or undergraduate students and one minority
              faculty will be involved in laboratory activities each year.  This project will
              yield graduate engineers that are better able to apply fundamental research
              developments to in situ remediation strategies, design more effective and
              efficient treatment systems, and deal with complex, interdisciplinary problems.
               The facility itself, in conjunction with the educational activities, will lead
              to further advancements in the application of remediation research to real
              world problems.  ***
