Title       : Structure, Systematics, and Phylogenetic/Evolutionary Significance of Upper
               Cretaceous (Turonian) Angiosperm Flowers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9420512

Award Number: 9420512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Crepet wlcl@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin C. Nixon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420512  Crepet   Although flowering plants (angiosperms) now dominate Earth's
              terrestrial ecosystems, there remain questions about their origins,
              phylogenetic relationships, and patterns of evolutionary radiation. Of
              particular significance is the history of the flower itself. The
              characteristics of flowers are important in establishing taxonomic
              relationships among all the groups of angiosperms. They also determine, to a
              great extent, the modes of pollination--an important element in reproductive
              biology and evolution. Thus, discovering aspects of the timing of appearance of
              various floral characteristics would yield important data on the history of key
              characters and of key adaptations. This knowledge would help us understand
              relationships and trends in angiosperm evolution and provide insight into
              origins and radiations.   Dr. William Crepet and Dr. Kevin Nixon of Cornell
              University are investigating a rich assemblage of fossil angiosperm flowers
              from Cretaceous deposits of Turonian age collected in New Jersey. These fossils
              are unusual because of their diversity and their excellent preservation. They
              include forms that constitute the first appearances of an array of floral
              characters such as fused petals, viscin threads in pollen and polyads, and
              anther modifications. Many of these fossils present a mosaic of features known
              from living forms of today, and thus may represent "missing links" that have
              considerable bearing on evolution of present lineages. Fossil studies will
              document the minimum ages of existing lineages and will contribute to
              understanding the appearance of floral features associated with various modes
              of pollination. These patterns may prove useful in evaluating broad hypotheses
              of relationships among angiosperms and in evaluating trends of evolution in
              pollinator specificity.  ??
