Title       : RUI: Perception and Judgement of Abstract Same/Different Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9420756

Award Number: 9420756
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger K. R. Thompson Roger.Thompson@fandm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Oden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Franklin & Marshall Col
	      Office of the Provost
	      Lancaster, PA  176043003    717/291-3911

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9420756                               PI: Thompson; Co-PI: Oden 
              Nontechnical Summary                                            1  Perception 
              and  Judgment of Abstract Same/Different  Relations  by  Monkeys    PI: Roger
              K. R. Thompson,  IBN-9420756    Summary:        William  James  (1890/1981)
              observed  that,   this  sense  of  sameness is the very keel and background of
              our thinking,  vol 1, p  434).  The  fundamental importance of understanding
              the  perception  and  use  of  same/different relations continues to  be 
              recognized  today  by  researchers in both human and non-human cognition.  Only
               humans beyond infancy and adult chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes)  with  a 
              history of language-training can explicitly judge that a pair of  shoes  is 
              the  same as a pair of say, teacups. That is,  they  can  judge  that the
              relationship between the shoes (i.e., identity)  is  the  same as the
              relationship between the teacups. This ability  to  judge  abstract relations
              between relations is fundamental  to  the  ability to reason analogically.   
              Recent  studies by the present investigators suggest  that  adult  rhesus 
              monkeys  (Macaca  mulatta) do  not  even  perceive  these  abstract relations
              of identity and nonidentity and therefore they  apparently  lack  the 
              fundamental  cognitive  pre-requisite  for  judging  relations between
              relations. These initial results  were  obtained  using  the same noninvasive
              behavioral tasks  as  those  used with human infants and chimpanzees. These
              findings point  to  a  fundamental disparity in the ability of humans and apes
              on the  one  hand,  and  monkeys on the other, to perceive and  represent 
              abstract  properties  of  the  world.  The  present  research  is  designed  to
               confirm  and extend these  initial  findings  using  standard behavioral
              procedures including "paired-comparison"  and  "habituation/ dishabituation"
              preference-for-novelty  tasks.  Ten  adult macaque monkeys will be presented
              with pairs of objects  or  video-images  of  biologically   relevant  objects  
              and   events.  Sensitivity   to  abstract  relations  will  be   inferred  
              from  differences in the time the animals spend voluntarily  inspecting  the
              stimulus materials.    The  primary goal in all of the proposed research is not
              to  show  that one species can or cannot perform any given task. Rather  it  is
               to clarify the conditions under which the cited disparity  is  or is not
              manifested. Comparisons between closely related species  like  human, ape and
              monkey can also be informative with  respect  to  understanding  the  evolution
               and  function  of  fundamental  cognitive processes.
