Title       : Molecular Phylogenetics of the Major Lineages of Adephagan Beetles (Insecta:
               Coleoptera), with an Emphasis on Carabid Diversification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1995      
File        : a9420219

Award Number: 9420219
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Maddison beetle@ag.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9420219  MADDISON  This project will reconstruct the phylogeny or pattern of
              relationships of the major lineages of beetles of the suborder Adephaga
              (Insecta: Coleoptera) using molecular sequence data.  Adephagans are a
              geologically old lineage of beetles with members currently found in
              terrestrial, arboreal and aquatic habitats.  With over 30,000 species, they are
              more diverse than mammals, birds and reptiles combined and are among the
              dominant small predators in temperate and arctic regions.  Previous studies
              based on morphological data have yielded a large number of competing hypotheses
              about relationships and the nature of ecological change within the suborder. 
              It is anticipated that molecular data will resolve some of these conflicts. 
              The resolved phylogenetic frame sought with this project is necessary for
              studies of diversification within particular families and tribes, for example
              the rapidly radiating bembidiine carabids, or studies of the structural,
              cytogenetic, biogeographic and ecological diversity in Adephaga as a whole. For
              this project which will use molecular sequence data to explore the
              relationships of adephagan families as well as the relationships of the major
              lineages of ground beetles, 60 focal taxa have been chosen to encompass the
              diversity of the suborder as well as outgroup representatives from the three
              remaining beetle suborders.  The adephagan representative species chosen
              represent major players in the current controversies or conflicting hypotheses
              of relationships.  Taxa have been chosen to challenge the monophyly of each
              family and to minimize the number of long lineages on the phylogeny (as these
              increase the error rate of phylogenetic inference methods).  Portions of three
              genes, totalling about 2,600 base pairs, will be sequenced: 18S ribosomal DNA
              (a nuclear gene), 12S ribosomal DNA (mitochondrial), and one protein-coding
              gene.  In examining a diverse collection of genes, the potential biases caused
              by distinctive modes of change in any one piece will be a voided.  The end
              product of this study is expected to be a well-supported phylogeny or map of
              relationships of adephagan families and the major lineages of carabid beetles,
              that will serve as a foundation for future comparative studies within these
              beetle groups.  %%%  Support of this research will contribute to our knowledge
              of biodiversity of a large number of beetle lineages by establishing
              relationships among major groups.  This information will form an important
              basis for future ecological studies of these groups which include many
              important predators and are thus a major component of a diversity of food webs.
               ***
