Title       : Dissertation Research: Dating and Analysis of the Moorehead Tradition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 21,  1994  
File        : a9420255

Award Number: 9420255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1994   
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10550              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas D. Anderson Douglas_Anderson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Anderson    Under the direction of Dr. Douglas Anderson, Mr. Brian Robinson 
              will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will obtain  radiocarbon
              dates on materials associated with 33 Moorehead  burial tradition sites from
              coastal locations in Maine. While the  existence of this tradition has been
              known for many years and it  has been determined that sites range from ca.
              8,500 to 3,700 B.P.  most individual occurrences are very poorly dated. Mr.
              Robinson  has discovered that materials at many of these sites include  small
              amounts of charcoal; therefore the AMS technique will allow  their age to be
              determined.     The Moorehead tradition is known for its elaborate red ocher 
              human burials which are grouped into clearly defined cemeteries. 
              Archaeologists have focussed attention on this phenomenon because  such a
              degree of elaboration is rare among hunters and gathers  and suggests complex
              levels of social organization among this  Archaic period people. Mr. Robinson
              believes that he can use the  geographical distribution of cemeteries and their
              relationships  both to each other and to important natural resources to 
              reconstruct both social and ecological aspects of this tradition  and to
              determine how these changed over time. However to conduct  such an analysis it
              is necessary to obtain chronological control  over individual sites and this
              research will accomplish this.    This work is important for several reasons.
              It will increase our  understanding of how peoples at a simple level of
              cultural  organization adapted to their social and natural environment. It 
              will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and will  assist in the
              training of a promising young scientist.
