Title       : An Insect Model of Molecular Host-Parasite Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1997      
File        : a9420638

Award Number: 9420638
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Beckage nancy.beckage@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9420638  Beckage    The goal of this project is to determine how parasites
              exploit biochemical mechanisms of host interaction to achieve successful
              development in their host.  Parasites suppress the immune system of the host,
              and escape being recognized as foreign.  In the system under study, a wasp
              parasite (called a parasitoid) lays its eggs in the body cavity of its host,
              the tobacco hornworm, and the wasp develops to maturity and kills its host. 
              Because parasitoids invariably invade their hosts, they are effectively
              exploited in the biological control of many devastating insect pests.  The
              immunological interactions between parasitoids and hosts are important because
              they determine the host range of the parasitoid, and these physiological
              interactions are the focus of this study.  Importantly, the parasitoid Cotesia
              congregata injects a large DNA virus (termed a polydnavirus) into the hemolymph
              of the host during parasitization and deposition of eggs into the hemocoel. 
              The role of the virus is to suppress the host's immune response, much like the
              AIDS virus depresses the mammalian immune response making the host show
              enhanced susceptibility to other parasites and pathogens.  The mechanisms of
              host immunosuppression, and their regulation by the virus, will be explored
              using a variety of biochemical and molecular techniques.  Genetic selection
              techniques will be utilized to generate a "refractory" line of hosts which do
              not support development of the parasite, allowing us to clarify the biochemical
              mechanisms of resistance.  The research provides an excellent framework for
              deciphering how parasites work to achieve successful infection of their host,
              and will provide data of fundamental importance to the fields of immunology,
              physiology, parasitology, virology, entomology, epidemiology, and evolutionary
              biology.  ***
