Title       : Collaborative Research on Processes and Timing of Geomorphic and Hydraulic
               Adjustments During Stream Channel Recovery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 22,  1994 
File        : a9420686

Award Number: 9420686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32942              (Estimated)
Investigator: Francis J. Magilligan Magilligan@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9178,9189,9251,ENVI,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9420686  MAGILLIGAN       Many studies in geography and related disciplines have
               examined the ways that human activities impact on natural  systems.  One of
              the locales where such studies have been  undertaken are streambeds, where
              direct human alteration of  channel characteristics and indirect impacts
              resulting from  changing patterns of land use on nearby lands have had profound
               impacts on processes of erosion and deposition.  Relatively  little attention
              has been focused, however, on the processes that  occur when the impact of
              human activities are removed.  This  collaborative research project will
              examine stream channel  recovery from chronic human disturbance through what is
               effectively a controlled experiment.  The project will document  the rate,
              magnitude, and processes of stream channel recovery  following the elimination
              of cattle grazing from pasture lands  along a number of streams in central and
              eastern Oregon.  During  the first year of work, data on channel morphology,
              streambed  sediment characteristics, fish habitat characteristics, and 
              indicators of fluvial processes will be gathered from six stream  segments. 
              Historical data on the nature and timing of land uses  from written sources and
              remote sensors also will be gathered,  with special attention given to the
              establishment of enclosures  that prevented cattle grazing on nearby lands. 
              These data will  be analyzed and used to develop models of channel recovery. 
              During the second year, field work will be expanded to examine  sites for which
              nearby enclosures were established more recently  and for which sediment,
              geologic, and ecological conditions of  streams are more varied.       This
              project will provide valuable new insights into  streambed recovery processes. 
              It will document differences in  morphologic and hydraulic characteristics
              between restored and  unrestored reaches of streams.  It will test hypotheses
              about the  ways that different factors respond during different phases of  the
              recovery process, and it  will determine the amount of time  necessary to
              achieve restoration.  This information will not only  have significant value to
              researchers, but it will have  considerable immediate utility to land managers
              in both the  public and private sectors.  Because part of the funding for this 
              project is being made through the Research Experiences for  Undergraduates
              Program, the project will provide an excellent  opportunity for promising
              students to directly participate in a  high-quality research project.
