Title       : Stream/Ground Water Ecotones: Hydrology, Biogeochemistry and Ecology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9420510

Award Number: 9420510
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1995   
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $713000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford N. Dahm cdahm@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Maurice Valett  (Principal Investigator former)
              Clifford S. Crawford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Campana  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
               Streams are complex three-dimensional ecosystems in which surface and ground
              water  components are interaction the interface between the surface and
              subsurface affects the transfer of  water and solutes between the stream and
              ground water and  varies in response to variable climate.  The main objectives
              of this research project are to quantify the sources and flow dynamics of water
              at  the ground water/surface water ecotone of headwater streams and to
              determine biogeochemical and  ecological responses resulting from these
              interactions.  Three objectives are central.   First, the  hydrology of the
              ground water/surface water ecotone will be determined.  Three montane
              catchments with  different alluvial sediment types (fine-grained to coarse
              cobble) will be instrumented.  Hydrologic  models that characterize surface
              transport and exchange with the subsurface (OTIS), three-dimensional  flow
              dynamics within the ground water ecotone (MODFLOW), and hillslope routing of
              water from the  upslope to the stream (TOPMODEL) will be used.  These models
              will be used to describe the transient  hydrologic nature of headwater
              catchments and to quantify the temporal variation in ground water/  surface
              water exchange.  Seco nd, the three-dimensional biogeochemical structure of the
              ecotone will  be investigated.  They will describe the vertical distribution of
               biogeochemical processes in  downwelling (ground water rechange) and upwelling
              (ground water discharge) reaches of streams.  In  addition, the will determine
              whether flooding or drying will relocate many microbial processes.  Third, they
              will measure the response of biotic communities to variation in the hydrologic
              exchange.  Specifically, studies will be undertaken to assess the community
              structure and biomass of benthic  algal assemblages, rates of primary
              production and respiration, and controls on algal community  structure and
              succession in the stream-aquifer interface.  The ecotone between surface waters
              and  ground waters is extremely important.  The terrestrial portion, the
              riparian zone is crucial to  improving water quality and wildlife habitat.  The
              aquatic component includes a dynamic subsurface  that regulates nutrient
              content and cycling.  ve. T  varies in response to and discharge verying 1996. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
