Title       : Three-dimensional Structure, Function and Composition of the Kinetochore
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9420772

Award Number: 9420772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce F. McEwen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hlth Res Inc/NY St Dept Hl
	      One University Place
	      Rensselaer, NY  121443456    518/474-2011

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9161,9181,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              _ c                 C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                     . c    
              . c                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                            4   5   6   7   8
                9   :   ;   <   =   >                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            F
                 Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                 9420772
              McEwen  The long-term objective of the research in this proposal is to
              elucidate the molecular mechanisms responsible for chromosome movement during
              mitosis.  When cell of higher animals and plants get ready to divide their DNA
              condenses from its diffuse state into distinct structures called chromosomes. 
              The number and shape of the chromosomes is characteristic of the species.  At
              the onset of mitosis the chromosomes are composed of two chromatics, each of
              which contains an identical copy of the genetic information.  After their
              formation chromosomes bind to a fibrous bipolar spindle, which also forms at
              onset of mitosis, such that the chromatics of a given chromosome kind bind to
              fibers from opposite spindle poles.  Once bound the chromosomes move to the
              center of the spindle.  When all of the chromosomes are lined up at the
              equator, a signal is sent for the chromatids to split apart and move towards
              opposite spindle poles.  The cell then divides in two with each daughter cell
              receiving a complete complement of DNA.  Thus mitosis is the process that
              enables a complete copy of the genetic i nformation to be accurately
              distributed to different cells of a multicellular organism, and for genetic
              information to be transmitted between generations.  For this reason it is one
              of the critically important vital processes of high organisms otherwise the
              cell would be damaged.  Modern research has demonstrated that most of the force
              for chromosome motions is generated from the kinetochore.  The latter is a
              specialized structure found on each chromatid that is responsible for its
              attachment to the spindle fibers.  This proposal will use three-dimensional
              electron  microscopy, computer graphics, improved methods of specimen
              preparation, and video enhanced light microscopy to learn more about how the
              kinetochore work. %%%  This project will seek to determine how the kinetochore
              is constructed, how it interacts with the spindle fibers during chromosome
              motion in different directions, and precisely where certain molecular
              components are located.  The latter include molecules known or thought to be
              capable of generating motion along the spindle fibers.  This information is
              critical for evaluating many of the current hypotheses about how chromosome
              motion is achieved. ***                            ;                           
                                                        Oh     +'  0                         
                           $       H       l                                               D 
                   h                                                  
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                                       9420772    
                                      Shirley   S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n          
                              (                                                   3          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               Parker        
                           Shirley Parker              @    'q:c                           @ 
                   c                           @    ?~ c                                     
                                                                           @                 
                                       Microsoft Word 6.0                                    
                               2                                                             
                                       ;                                                     
                                 e 3       e                                                 
                                           j       j   j       j       j       j       j     
                                                                               @   1         
                                                                                             
                                       "       q   T       7   @                       j     
                                                                                 @           
                 j       j                                                                   
                 j               j                                       ~               j   
                 j       j       j                           :                               
                                                                               9420772 McEwen
               The long-term objective of the research in this proposal is to elucidate the
              molecular mechanisms responsible for chromosome movement during mitosis.  When
              cell of higher animals and plants get ready to divide their DNA condenses from
              its diffuse state into distinct structures called chromosomes.  The number and
              shape of the chromosomes is characteristic of the species.  At the onset of
              mitosis the chromosomes are composed of two chromatics, each of which contains
              an identical copy of the genetic information.  After their formation
              chromosomes bind to
