Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Imaging and Analysis of CorticocorticalProjection
               Development in Organotypic Slice Cultures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1996 
File        : a9600310

Award Number: 9600310
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward S. Ruthazer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510401   Nerve Growth                            
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600310  Ruthazer    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Edward S. Ruthazer
              at the University of Osaka, Osaka, Japan.  Dr. Ruthazer will work with Dr.
              Nobuhiko Yamamoto, Associate  Professor in the  Department of Engineering, on
              research  project entitled, "Imaging and Analysis of Cortico-cortical 
              Projection Development in Organotypic Slice Cultures"    The proposed research
              will develop and apply an in vitro  model of early corticocortical connection
              formation using a  novel callosum-intact cortical slice culture. The research 
              will examine the axon pathfinding and branching process in  living cultures
              made from thick (but optically penetrable)  brain slices that will include both
              cortical hemispheres and  the interconnecting callosal tract.  Single axons
              will be  labeled using vital, non-toxic fluorescent dyes and then  observed
              using scanning laser confocal microscopy over a  period of hours to days as
              they grow through their normal  environment and extend branches to contact the
              target  neurons in the other hemisphere.  In this way, it will be  possible to
              determine at exactly which locations axon  turning and branching occurs, and
              whether the development  involves direct and selective growth toward target
              sites or  a combined process of exuberant branching followed by  selective
              retraction of incorrect branches.  Once the  precise series of developmental
              events has been determined,  direct physical, pharmacological, and eventually
              genetic  manipulations will be used to analyze the specific  biochemical
              interactions that contribute to each step of the  developmental process.  ***
