Title       : Research in Elementary Particle Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9600697

Award Number: 9600697
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Boris Kayser                            
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409728             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Harvey harvey@theory.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter G. O. Freund  (Principal Investigator former)
              Reinhard Oehme  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yoichiro Nambu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1245      THEORETICAL PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Research in theoretical physics will be aimed at  furthering our
              understanding of the laws governing the  interactions of the elementary
              particles at very small  distances. These interactions include the force of
              gravity  and three other fundamental forces. For the non-  gravitational forces
              (electromagnetism, the strong nuclear  force, and the `weak` force responsible
              for certain  radiation processes), we have the powerful `standard model,` 
              which nevertheless leaves a number of questions open.  Foremost among these
              questions are the issue of the origin  of the masses of the elementary
              particles, and the fact that  free quarks are never seen. These problems, and
              in  particular the puzzle of the very large mass of the recently-  discovered
              top quark, will be addressed.  A major effort  will be made to understand the
              basic forces of nature when  they become strong, and the time-honored
              techniques, which  depend on these forces being weak, fail. This effort will 
              include the use of ideas centering on the concept of  `duality` between
              electricity and magnetism, and extensions  of this concept. Related concepts
              arise when, to include  gravity, one pictures the elementary particles as the 
              excited states of extremely small strings. Duality within  string theory, and
              other aspects of sting theory, will be  pursued. The studies to be included in
              the research program  are very important to improving our understanding of the 
              elementary particles and the fundamental forces.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
