Title       : Japan JSPS Program: The Observation of Non-Standard-Model Physics at Lepton
               Colliders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1997  
File        : a9600243

Award Number: 9600243
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Szalapski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MN Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600243  Szalapski    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Robert Szalapski
              at the National Laboratory for High Energy  Physics (KEK), Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr.
              Szalapski will work with  Dr. Kaoru Hagiwara, Associate Professor in the Theory
              Group  at KEK, on a research project entitled "The Observation of  Non-Standard
              Model Physics at Lepton Colliders."    The proposed research will examine a
              number of theoretical  calculations related to the so-called "Standard Model"
              in  physics, the goal being not only to test the Standard Model,  but also to
              understand what lies beyond it.  It is believed  that the behavior of all
              matter in the universe is governed  by four forces.  These forces are
              electromagnetism, the weak  nuclear force, the strong nuclear force and
              gravity.  The  quantum theory of electromag-netism, which we call QED, is  well
              established.  The current theory of the fundamental  forces, an extension of
              QED, is called the Standard Model.  It unifies electromagnetism and the strong
              and weak nuclear  forces in a single theory.  One prediction of the Standard 
              Model is the existence of additional particles called W and  Z bosons; the
              discovery and measurement of which have  provided strong evidence for the
              Standard Model.  However,  some of the most important properties have not yet
              been  measured.  As it will be possible to make these measurements  in the near
              future, it is very important to obtain very  precise theoretical calculations
              to compare with  experimental data.  The proposed research by Dr. Szalapski 
              will expand upon ongoing collaborative experiments with Dr.  Hagiwara, with the
              primary intention being to test theories  related to the validity of the
              Standard Model.  ***
