Title       : Social Change, Subsistence and Sedentism in the Pithouse-to-Pueblo Transition in
               the Southwest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9600581

Award Number: 9600581
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96840              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas R. Rocek rocek@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Thomas Rocek will conduct three
              seasons of archaeological excavation at the site of Dunlap-Salazar  located in
              central New Mexico. Preliminary work by Dr. Rocek indicates that the site dates
              to approximately 500 to 700 A.D.and is marked by a ca. 300 by 400 meter square
              scatter of lithic and ceramics. Small scale excavation has demonstrated the
              presence of both semi-subterranean pit houses and storage pits. Through a
              multiyear program of excavation and analysis Dr. Rocek will collect additional
              information to test preliminary indications that inhabitants were dependent on
              agricultural rather than hunted and gathered food and to reconstruct social
              organization. To accomplish these goals he will locate and expose large enough
              areas of architectural features and their surroundings to examine the
              organization of domestic activities and to obtain increased chronological
              control over the deposits to allow identification of associations between
              dwellings and storage features and among the multiple dwellings on the site.
              Multiple radiocarbon samples will be dated and phytolith and macrobotanical
              analysis will provide detailed information on plants consumed.   When Spanish
              explorers first entered the Southwestern United States in the early 1500s they
              found Native Americans living in large population aggregations in
              hierarchically organized societies and dependent on agriculture. Archaeologists
              wish to understand how this complex level of society developed and much of
              their research in the Southwest has focused on this issue. A crucial changed
              occurred in the mid first millennium AD when the typical semi-subterranean
              pithouse dwellings were abandoned in favor of multistory pueblo houses.  Based
              on data from many excavations it appears that changes in dwelling type,
              settlement pattern, reliance on agriculture and the development of social
              complexity appear closely related and a number of models examine the
              interaction among these variables. In this context the Dunlap-Salazar site is
              particularly interesting because it challenges this assumption. The inhabitants
              of this pithouse village appear to have been highly dependent on agriculture
              but to evince none of the other supposedly related changes. Further work at the
              site will evaluate this hypothesis.  This research is important for several
              reasons. It will shed new light on the variables which led to the rise of
              complex societies. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and
              because many undergraduates will participate in the field research the project
              will contribute to the education of potential young scientists.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
