Title       : Problems in the Spectral Theory of Automorphic Forms and Number Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1997    
File        : a9600111

Award Number: 9600111
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sidney W. Graham                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11139              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daryl Cooper cooper@math.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey W. Stopple  (Principal Investigator former)
              Yiannis Petridis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Stopple    The aim of this investigation is to study certain L-functions on
              their  critical line and to study the finer structure of the spectrum of the 
              Laplace operator on  certain completely integrable systems. The L-functions 
              are complex analytic functions, given by power series in a domain of the 
              complex plane, but their most interesting behavior is on their critical  line,
              which belongs to the region of analytic continuation. The study of  L-functions
              of Rankin-Selberg type that arise from cusp forms of finite  area hyperbolic
              surfaces is related to the general Ramanujan conjecture.  The methods to be
              used belong to the spectral theory of automorphic forms.  The problems in the
              finer structure of the spectrum have recently attracted  attention among
              physicists working on Quantum Chaos. The central problem is   the distribution
              of the spacings between the eigenvalues. The hope is to  bring tools from
              analytic number theory to the study of the pair correlation  function of
              completely integrable systems.    This research falls into the general
              mathematical field of Number Theory.   Number theory has its historical roots
              in the study of the whole numbers,   addressing such questions as those dealing
              with the divisibility of one   whole number by another. It is among the oldest
              branches of mathematics and   was pursued for many centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. However, within   the last half century it has become an
              indispensable tool in diverse   applications in areas such as data transmission
              and processing, and   communication systems.
