Title       : The Upper Paleolithic Settlement of the Transbaikal, Siberia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1998       
File        : a9600664

Award Number: 9600664
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28545              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank (Ted) E. Goebel   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Oregon University
	      1250 Siskiyou Boulevard
	      Ashland, OR  975205001    503/482-3311

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Ted Goebel, in collaboration with
              American and Russian colleagues will conduct archaeological excavations at the
              site of Masterov Kliuch' which is located in the Transbaikal region of Siberia.
              Previous test excavations have revealed five stratigraphically separate
              archaeological components. The lowest three contain Upper Paleolithic materials
              and span the period from ca. 40,000 to 10,000 years ago. In addition to
              excavation, the team will apply a number of specialized techniques that will
              enhance the capture of archaeological information. The entire stratigraphic
              profile will be chronometrically dated through multiple procedures including
              accelerator radiocarbon, luminescence and electron spin resonance. All
              excavated artifacts and ecofacts will be precisely provenienced and
              orientations will be noted to reconstruct site formation processes. Fauna will
              be studied in detail and lithic artifacts analyzed and refitted to trace
              technological manufacturing processes as well as site spatial patterns.  Humans
              first penetrated Siberia during Upper Paleolithic times and the Northern
              Eurasian region constituted the last major habitable area to be settled. Based
              on available information it appears that groups expanded from West to East and
              the stone blade tools characteristic of these groups appear to stop in the
              Transbaikal region. The reason for this is not known and the phenomenon is
              interesting because it may shed light on basic processes of human adaptation.
              This research is significant for several reasons. It will add to our
              understanding of the origins and dispersal of modern humans, especially
              attempts to explain the pattern of human global colonization. It will
              significantly increase our knowledge of the Upper Paleolithic of the Old World.
              Through the application of paleoecological and paleogeographic perspectives,
              the research will add to a growing body of knowledge addressing past human
              adaptive strategies and associated environmental limiting factors affecting
              past and present population distributions. Finally, the project will offer
              unique research experiences for undergraduate students.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
