Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Diffusion in Fluid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1996      
File        : a9600119

Award Number: 9600119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51144              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert C. Fannjiang fannjian@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              960019  Fannjiang    This project concerns the large scale behavior of particle
              dispersion in   incompressible fluid flows. On large scales, particles evolve
              diffusively  or nondiffusively depending on the fluid flows. One of the focuses
              of this   project is the sharp criteria for the diffusive regime. Novel
              variational   methods have been employed to obtain such criteria for steady
              flows.   The extension of the variational methods to unsteady flows and weakly 
              compressible flows are proposed. Furthermore, within the diffusive regime,  the
              influence of fluid velocities on  the transport coefficients, the   effective
              diffusivity, is of both practical and theoretical importance,   particularly
              when the molecular diffusivity is small. As such, the fluid   velocities
              typically enhance the effective diffusivity by orders of magnitude.   The
              variational methods have been successfully applied to obtain nontrivial   power
              laws for convection enhanced diffusion in two-dimensional  steady flows.   It
              remains to be extended to analyze turbulent diffusion in three dimensional  
              random flows and chaotic diffusion in two dimensional unsteady flows. The  
              variational methods also provide naturally a framework for numerical  
              computations of the transport coefficients to which the well established  
              numerical methods for symmetric problems can now be applied. In the  
              non-diffusive regime, being an effective tool for  analyzing physical   
              quantities for finite volume, the variational methods are potentially useful  
              in studying anomalous diffusion in the infinite volume limit. Finally, it is  
              of enormous interest to understand  the diffusion time scale and other  
              transient time scales. The martingale method and the extension of the  
              contractivity estimates (for symmetric processes) to the singularly 
              non-symmetric convection-diffusion processes are proposed to study the time  
              scales problem.  %%%    Since the great scientists A. Einstein and N. Wiener
              laid the theoretical   foundation for the study of the  Brownian motion, great
              effort has been made   to understand the combined effect of the Brownian motion
              on the molecular   scale and the fluid motion on the ordinary scale. Such
              problem is also of   enormous practical importance since most of the mass and
              heat transfer   processes in chemical engineering, ground water contamination
              and global   change in the atmosphere involve both kinds of motion. As it turns
              out, the   typical smallness in  size of molecular Brownian motion, and chaos
              and   randomness in convective motion give rise to numerous interesting
              phenomena   on large scales such as convection enhanced diffusion where the
              size of the   Brownian motion  is greatly enhanced, multiple scales where the
              transport   processes behave differently on different scales, and anomalous
              diffusion for   which an appropriate description is yet to be found. This
              project proposes a   rigorous  framework and effective methods for studying the
              convection-  diffusion problem, which has yielded many important results. This
              and other   hopeful research outcomes will add to our fundamental understanding
               of one   of the most basic transport processes affecting our lives.  ***
