Title       : Design of Multifunctional Nanoscale Information Bearing Units and Processes
               Related to their Use on a Surface
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2000     
File        : a9600138

Award Number: 9600138
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher B. Gorman Chris_Gorman@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1045,1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                9600138  Gorman    It has now become an important but unanswered question as
              to  whether molecules (or macromolecule at the 1-10 nm size scale)  can be
              addressed and reliably store information. New techniques,  particularly
              scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM), will certainly  have use in these
              schemes. Nanolithography of metallic or  semiconducting phases to create
              depressions or mounds on a  surface can represent binary information, but atoms
              can diffuse,  destroying this information. Ideally, information-bearing 
              molecules could be moved into place and anchored to a surface.  Subsequently,
              they could be switched and read without being  influenced by their
              surroundings. In this project, both the  molecular requirements and the process
              requirements for such a  scheme will be addressed. In the former area, a new
              nanoscale  unit will be synthesized. It is designed to be switchable,  isolated
              from nearby units (so that the information it contains  will not become
              scrambled), readable by an STM tip, and easily  positioned on a surface (and
              thus addressable). It is argued that  all of these criteria must be fulfilled
              before a molecule-based  system can function as an information storage device.
              The  molecule designed for this purpose will contain an electroactive  core
              inside a dendrimeric polymer. This hybrid molecule will have  an isolated,
              switchable information unit and simultaneously an  easily tailored size, shape,
              and surface. Simultaneously, in the  process area, methods for using the STM
              tip to perform chemical  transformations on an organic surface (fashioned using
               self-assembled monolayers of organothiols on gold) will be  explored. Rather
              than etching the surface, it is argued that  site-specific reductive desorption
              of the organothiols into a  solution over the surface will permit more
              predictable, reliable  control over positioning of molecules on a surface. Both
              of these  project segments will be directed towards demonstrations of those 
              requirements for molecule-based information  storage on a surface.  %%%  As
              computing elements become smaller and smaller, one must devise  ways to encode
              information in smaller spaces. At least as far as  strictly spatial encoding is
              concerned, the two most obvious  schemes for nanoscale information storage are
              (a) continued  miniaturization of known microscale elements to approach the 
              nanoscale or (b) tailoring existing nanoscale objects  e.g.  molecules  so that
              they can function as information bearing units  (IBUs). In this proposal,
              macromolecular objects will be  described that are tailored to serve as
              switchable, addressable,  and organizable IBUs. It will be argued that only
              such a system  will be suitable for use in nanoscale information encoding 
              schemes.  ***
