Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: VLSI Digital Signal Processing and Multimedia Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9600372

Award Number: 9600372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keshab K. Parhi parhi@ece.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9600372  Parhi    This proposal supports the collaboration of Prof. Keshab K. 
              Parhi of the Department of Electrical Engineering at the  University of
              Minnesota and Dr. Takao Nishitani at the  NEC Computer and Communication
              Laboratories of NEC  Corporation at Kawasaki. This project funding will support
               Dr. Parhi to spend nine months with the NEC Corporation in  Japan. During his
              stay, he will perform research on VLSI  digital signal processing and
              multimedia systems.  Dr. Parhi  has been studying design of high speed and low
              power circuit  and system implementations using VLSI technologies which can  be
              used in multimedia applications such as video compression  and graphics
              manipulation and animation. Dr. Nishitani's  group is developing several
              multimedia products ranging from  video compact disc (CD) system design to RISC
              processors for  digital signal processing (DSP) to beamformer for audio 
              applications to video coding and conferencing. Dr. Parhi  will combine his
              expertise on low power and high speed  design methodologies with applications
              and design activities  carried out at NEC to study high performance
              architecture  development for multimedia systems.    This proposal brings
              together research scientists from two  countries working in the area of VLSI
              digital signal  processing. The U.S. scientist will have the opportunity to 
              learn about algorithms used in and the applications of  multimedia systems.
              This cooperative research will allow Dr.  Parhi to bring back expertise with
              him which can lead to  further research after his return leading to several 
              doctoral and master's degrees.  Therefore, this proposal  fulfills the
              objectives of the Program in its exchange and  transfer of scientific knowledge
              through an international  collaboration.  ***
