Title       : Archaeological Studies at the Chokepukio Site in the Valley of Cuzco, Peru: An
               Investigation of Inca State Origins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1996     
File        : a9600682

Award Number: 9600682
Award Instr.: Fixed Price Award                            
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11245              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon F. McEwan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Denver Art Museum
	      100 W 14th Avenue Parkway
	      Denver, CO  80204    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gordon McEwan and his colleagues
              will conduct one field season of excavation at the site of Chokepukio which is
              located in the Valley of Cuzco in highland Peru. The capital of the Inca empire
              was located as Cuzco and the goal of Dr. McEwan's research is to trace the
              origins and development of this early state. Chokepukio covers a low hill and
              adjacent region. Based on the distribution of architectural and ceramic remains
              it extends over approximately one square kilometer. Dominating Chokepukio is a
              series of huge enclosures which cover the crest of the hill in the center of
              the site. The buildings are, in prehistoric terms, truly enormous - the largest
              enclosure measuring 60 by 80 meters. Many of the walls are preserved to a
              height of 10 to 12 meters. Associated with these structures are large numbers
              of small and moderate-sized houses. Based on his previous work at the site, Dr.
              McEwan knows that the buildings were constructed during the Wari period, likely
              occupied during the ca. 500 year interval between the fall of the Wari and the
              rise of the Inca empires and continued to be used during the Inca period. Thus
              they span the interval when the Inca stated developed and will permit insight
              into the relationship between Inca and Wari peoples. Based on ethnohistoric
              data archaeologists know that Inca public buildings were designed to make
              symbolic statements about social organization and therefore through their
              analysis it is possible to gain insight into how this prehistoric society
              functioned. It appears that the same use of architecture held true in Wari
              times. In his excavation, Dr. McEwan will expose several buildings and analyze
              both architectural form and the artifacts recovered with this reconstructive
              goal in mind.  Since the Inca empire was a functioning entity when the first
              Spanish explorers arrived and written descriptions of it exist, the final
              stages of the Inca are well known. However the Inca lacked writing and
              relatively little is understood about the origins and development of this
              entity. What is particularly intriguing are the similarities between the
              preceding Wari and Inca empires. Although they appear to share architectural
              features in common, they are separated by approximately 500 years in time and
              it is difficult to understand how one may play a role in the rise of the other.
              Since Chokepukio spans this entire interval, the site has the potential to shed
              light on this question.  This research is important for several reasons. It
              will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on
              one of the largest pre-Columbian states in the New World and increase our
              understanding of how social complexity arises.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
