Title       : Cellular Mechanisms of Wingless/Wnt Signaling Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9600539

Award Number: 9600539
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amy Bejsovec   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  9600539  Bejsovec    The Wnt gene family encode secreted growth factor-like
              molecules that regulate cell behavior through cell-cell communication.
              Inappropriate expression of Wnt-l in the mammary glands of adult female mice
              results in mammary tumors, or breast cancer. Normal expression of Wnt-1 in
              developing mouse embryos regulates cell proliferation and specifies cellular
              identities. This proposal exploits the fruitfly, Drosophila melanogaster, as a
              model system to study the cellular mechanisms of Wnt gene action. The
              Drosophila wingless (wg) gene is highly homologous to the mouse Wnt-1 gene and
              performs similar signaling functions that influence cell behavior during
              development.    The powerful genetic system of Drosophila has revealed that wg
              specifies different aspects of embryonic pattern at different times during
              development. These temporally distinct signaling activities are separately
              mutable within the Wg protein, suggesting that structural features of the
              signaling protein influence the cellular response. Furthermore, secretion and
              transport of Wg protein within and between cells appears to be essential to Wg
              function. The nature of the distinct Wg signaling activities and the role of
              intercellular Wg transport will be examined through the directed expression of
              mutant transgenes in living embryos. Mutant Wg molecules that possess defined
              subsets of the normal Wg signaling activities will be expressed either
              ubiquitously, under the control of the heat shock promoter, or in defined
              domains, using the GAL4-UAS binary expression system. The phenotypic
              consequences on embryonic pattern and on molecular markers of wg signaling
              activity will be assessed to determine the cellular basis for the distinct Wg
              signaling activities observed.    In addition, molecules that interact with Wg
              protein during signaling and transport will be identified by characterizing
              mutations that modulate wg signaling function. A small collection of mutations
              that modify the wg mutant phenotype have been isolated  and several mutations
              show features that strongly suggest a direct involvement in the wg signaling
              pathway. These modifier mutations will be characterized genetically and
              molecularly to determine the nature of their interaction with Wg. These two
              approaches, in the genetically tractable Drosophila system, will provide
              insight into the cellular machinery through which Wg/Wnt molecules specify cell
              fate and control cell proliferation.
