Title       : The Political Economy of Stateless Societies During the Late Bronze and Early
               Iron Ages of Thy, Denmark
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9600973

Award Number: 9600973
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100870             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy K. Earle tke299@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Timothy Earle and his colleagues
              will continue their archaeological research on the Thy peninsula which is
              located I northeastern Jutland, Demark.  Past work has indicated that the
              region is rich in archaeological remains including large umber of barrows or
              burial chambers.  In his research to date, Dr. Earle has discovered and
              excavated a umber of sites associated with the Neolithic Period whe settled
              agricultural and village life emerged in Northern Europe.  In this next stage
              of the project, he and his team will focus on the later Bronze Age and Iron Age
              periods.  They wish to obtain detailed information on demography, settlement
              patterns and subsistence practices.  They will also reconstruct forms of social
              and political organizatio and determine how these changed over time.  To
              accomplish these goals, they will conduct broad scale surveys to locate
              architectural features and surface materials.  These later will be collected
              and analyzed.  The team will then select the most promising sites for large
              scale excavation.  Following the development of agriculture and pastoralism in
              many parts of the world, one can trace changes in social organization which
              led, ultimately, to the rise of states.  Early in this process chiefdoms arose
              and anthropologists still do not understand the mechanisms through which this
              happened.  Some ague that populationn growth permitted by a more stable
              subsistence base provided the driving  force while others poit to other factors
              such as the developmet of log distance trade.  Over the course of the Broze and
              Iro Ages in Scandinavia, chiefdoms underwent cycles of rise and decline.  The
              data collected from this area will allow compariso with cases from other parts
              of the world.  From this it should be possible to separate historical
              particulars from the move basic underlying mechanisms.  This research is
              important for several reasons.  It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists.  It will also increase our understanding of the processes which
              led to the rise of complex societies such as our own.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
