Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Endocrine Correlates of Protogynous Atrmaphroditism:
               Importance of Key Steroidogenic Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9600393

Award Number: 9600393
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig E. Morrey morrey@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600393  Morrey    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Craig Morrey at
              the National Institute for Basic Biology,  Okazaki, Japan.  Dr. Morrey will
              work with Dr. Yoshitaka  Nagahama, professor in the Department of Developmental
               Biology, Laboratory for Reproductive Biology, on a project  is entitled
              "Endocrine Correlates of Sex Change: Importance  of Key Steroido-genic
              Enzymes".    The proposed research will analyze sequential, protogynous 
              hermaphroditism in teleost fishes in an effort to understand  the simultaneous
              process of sex determination and sexual  differentiation.  As an individual
              undergoes the transition  from female to male, physiolo-gical pathways must be 
              redetermined.  Similarly, corresponding mechanisms of male  differentiation
              must be activated.  Although steroid  hormones are generally considered
              downstream mediators of  sexual differentiation, the fate of teleost germ cells
              may  be significantly influenced by hormonal profiles.  Consequently, teleost
              sex-determining cascades may be post-  maturationally labile and triggered by
              steroid hormones.  To  begin investigating potential roles for steroid
              hormones,  previous research has focused on expression studies  involving key
              steroidogenic enzymes, particularly cytochrome  P450 aromatase and cytochrome
              P450 11b-hydroxylase.  The  proposed research extends this line of
              investigation in two  ways.  First, translation of messenger RNA of the
              respective  enzymes will be verified using immunocytochemical  techniques. 
              Combined with messenger RNA content, these  results will determine the
              potential for the transitional  gonad to produce steroid hormones by confirming
              the presence  or absence of protein. Second, collaborative efforts  involving
              several different model species will lend insight  into potential similarities
              among systems.  Results of these  comparative studies will determine the
              applicability of a  general model for the role of steroid hormone s in the 
              regulation of sex change.  Overall, the proposed research  will provide a solid
              foundation from which to base future  investigations of the physiological
              mechanisms regulating  sex change in teleosts by providing critical information
               concerning potent mediators of sexual differentiation.  ***
