Title       : Research on Gravitation, Relativity and Cosmology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a9600015

Award Number: 9600015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3061692            (Estimated)
Investigator: David T. Wilkinson dtw@pupgg.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1243      GRAVITATIONAL EXPERIMENTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Princeton experimental program is centered on  measurements of the angular
              distribution of the thermal  cosmic background radiation (the CBR) and its
              spectrum and  absolute temperature.  These are a proving ground for  scenarios
              of galaxy formation; if the scenario is simple we  may find encoded in the
              angular distribution the values of  key cosmological parameters.  The spectrum
              at wavelengths  greater than about 3 cm should be better explored to improve 
              constraints on the history of interactions of matter and  radiation.  This
              group's measurements from Saskatoon detect  the power spectrum of
              irregularities in the CBR on angular  scales from about 0.5 to 3.  They will
              improve these  detections with their ground-based telescope and to build a 
              balloon-borne instrument that produces a map of the  anisotropy.  Better
              measurements of the CBR anisotropy  require more sensitive and stable detectors
              and radiometers.  They will build and test a new 90 Ghz HEMT-based (High 
              Electron Mobility Transistor) radiometer and to develop a  small array of
              broad-band SIS receivers for   90 Ghz.  They  will also continue developing the
              techniques to search for  long-wavelength distortions in the spectrum.    The
              objective of this research is to advance knowledge,  through both theory and
              experiment, of the evolution and  large-scale structure of the universe.  New
              telescopes and  improvements in detector sensitivities over a broad range of 
              energies have yielded a much enlarged fund of data that  confront a multitude
              of options within the standard  cosmological model.  The Princeton group
              expects that within  a decade additions to the data and a careful evaluation of
               the theoretical options the data allow will yield a new test  of general
              relativity theory, and, through an improved check  of consistency of the
              cosmological model, will sharply  restrict models for the formation of galaxies
              and their  large-scale distribution, and perhaps tell us whether the  universe
              is open or closed.  Education is central t o this  research.  The group places
              a strong emphasis on  undergraduate teaching; on average, the group supervises
              six  undergraduates each summer and ten independent research  projects during
              the school year.  Though many go on in  physics, quite a few continue their
              education in medicine,  engineering, or law.  Educating graduate students also
              has  high priority.
