Title       : Dissertation Research: The Site of Naranjal and the Interaction Spheres of the
               Late Preclassic to Early Maya Lowlands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1996       
File        : a9600956

Award Number: 9600956
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9476               (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott L. Fedick   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Scott Fedick, MS Jennifer Mathews will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological research at the
              Mayan site of Naranjal which is located in Mexico's Yucatan peninsula. Based on
              past research it appears that Naranjal predates the Classic Maya period. A
              total of 21 major structures have been identified, most characterized by a
              `megalithic style` which employed large well-dressed stones in construction.
              Many of the blocks are wedge or pie-shaped and over a meter in length. Remains
              of plaster on facing stones indicate that they were thickly coated to from a
              smooth exterior surface and this style is distinctly different in appearance
              from others in different parts of the Mayan area. MS. Mathews' work will focus
              on this phenomenon. She will excavate several structures in order to describe
              in detail  both construction techniques and finished product. Plaster samples
              will be collected and the charcoal inclusions they contain will be extracted
              for radiocarbon dating. Finally comparisons will be made with similar
              structures in other sites in the region.  The Mayan region has long constituted
              a focus for archaeological study because it witnessed the rise of large complex
              societies in a hostile lowland tropical environment. While many sites have been
              carefully excavated, researchers still do not understand in detail how these
              related to each other, the extent of regional interaction and political
              integration at the inter site scale. To what extent were individual units
              grouped together into regional alliances and larger functional groupings? If
              they exist, at what stage in Mayan prehistory did they develop? MS Mathews
              conducts her research in the Northern Mayan region where relatively little is
              known and she wishes to address this basic question. She has noted what appears
              to be a distinct regional architectural style which appears to reflect such a
              regional interaction sphere and she will determine whether or not her guess is
              correct. Through the radiocarbon samples she collects, absolute dates will be
              provided for these structures.  This research is important for several reasons.
              It will shed new light on the process of the development of complex societies.
              It will help to pioneer a new use for radiocarbon dating which may be applied
              to archaeological sites in many parts of the world and finally it will assist
              in training a promising young scientist.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
