Title       : CAREER: Methy1-Accepting Taxis Proteins in Archaea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9600860

Award Number: 9600860
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maqsudul Alam alam@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-00860  Alam    A basic property of living cells is their ability to respond 
              to  specific,  external  chemical  signals  and  to  respond  appropriately.  
              Eubacteria,  like  Escherichia   coli   and  Salmonella  typhimurium, respond
              to  chemical  gradients  by  modulating their swimming patterns towards a more 
              favorable  chemical   environment.   In   eubacteria   a   family    of 
              transmembrane    receptors   called   transducers    mediate  chemotaxis and
              some aspects of their mechanism of action  is  known.  It  is  presumed that
              the Archaea are  more  closely  related  to  eukaryotes  than to  eubacteria. 
              Halobacterium  salinarium,  an Archaeon, responds to chemical, oxygen,  and 
              light  gradients.  A family of putative transducer  proteins  has  been 
              identified in H. salinarium using a site-specific  multiple  antigenic  peptide
              antibody raised  against  a  23  amino  acids  peptide.  This  peptide 
              represents  a  highly  conserved region in eubacterial transducers. A
              complementary  oligonucleotide probe was designed based on  this  conserved 
              region  and  was  used to select thirteen  putative  methyl-  accepting  taxis 
              genes. Based the structural  and  putative  functional   homology  with 
              eubacterial  transducers,   the  putative  transducers fall into three
              structurally  distinct  subfamilies:  a)  a  type  with two  transmembrane 
              segments  connecting large extra- and intracellular domains; b) a type  with  
              two   or   more   transmembrane  segments   with   an  intracellular domain
              only; and c) a type that exists only in  the  cytosol  as  a  soluble
              transducer.  A  combination  of  physiological, genetic, and biochemical
              approaches  will  be  used  to  study  the signal transduction  mechanism  of 
              the  unique transducer proteins in the Archaea H. salinarium.  %%%  A basic
              property of living cells is their ability to respond  to   specific,   external
               chemical  signals   and   respond  appropriately.   Eubacteria,  like 
              Escherichia   coli   and  Salmonella  typhimurium, re spond to  chemical 
              gradients  by  modulating their swimming patterns towards a more  favorable 
              chemical   environment.   In   eubacteria   a   family    of  transmembrane   
              receptors   called   transducers    mediate  chemotaxis and some aspects of
              their mechanism of action  is  known.  It  is  presumed that the Archaea are 
              more  closely  related  to  eukaryotes  than to  eubacteria.  Halobacterium 
              salinarium,  an Archaeon, responds to chemical, oxygen,  and  light  gradients.
               A family of putative transducer  proteins  has  been  identified in H.
              salinarium using a site-specific  multiple  antigenic  peptide  antibody.  A 
              combination   of  physiological, genetic, and biochemical approaches  will  be 
              used  to  study  the signal transduction  mechanism  of  the  unique transducer
              proteins in the Archaea H. salinarium.  ***
