Title       : CAREER: Representing Biological Structure Information for Multiple Uses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  2000     
File        : a9600637

Award Number: 9600637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sylvia J. Spengler                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $523979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russ B. Altman altman@smi.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9139,9184,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The development of technologies to support interpretation of  scientific data is
              a major challenge for bioinformatics. The  information explosion within
              molecular biology has highlighted  the difficulties in maintaining scientific
              models that are  consistent--both internally and with the mass of experimental
              and  theoretical data. Even the most experienced biologists struggle  with the
              task of integrating their own observations with the  published literature in
              order to build coherent models. For any  complex biological phenomenon, the
              large number of relevant  experimental systems and techniques creates a web of
              biological  knowledge with exponential proportions. It is therefore critical 
              that computational technologies exist for the representation and 
              interpretation of multiple, diverse data sources, and for  collaborative
              scientific interpretation of these data sources. It  is further necessary that
              the next generation of  bioinformaticians be trained in the creation and
              extension of  these technologies. The research and education activities 
              proposed here address both these problems. First, we elaborate a  research plan
              to build a prototype for the next generation of  structural information
              resources. The hypothesis of this work is  that computer representations of
              both scientific hypotheses and  the primary data upon which they are based, can
              be used to  support multiple activities, including hypothesis formation, 
              hypothesis exploration and hypothesis testing. Second, we  elaborate a plan for
              creating a track within the Stanford medical  informatics training program that
              is specifically geared towards  training students in the methods of
              bioinformatics.    Dr. Russ Altman is an Assistant Professor in the Section on 
              Medical Informatics (SMI), within the Department of Medicine at  Stanford. He
              also holds a courtesy appointment in the Department  of Computer Science. Dr.
              Altman was recruited to establish a  strong presence of bioinformatics within
              the SMI, and to focus  the traditional stre ngths of the SMI on important
              problems in  basic molecular biology. As such, Dr. Altman has focused on the 
              application of information technology on problems in basic  molecular biology.
              Dr. Altman's goals for this career development  award are twofold:    1. The
              first, research goal, is to create a testbed application  for experimenting
              with the ways in which biologists interact with  structural information. This
              testbed, called RiboWeb, will be an  integrated knowledge base about the 16S
              subunit of the  procaryotic ribosome. The knowledge base will contain
              principled  representations of the published structural data and published 
              structural models, and will allow the data and the models to be  browsed,
              evaluated and used for computation. The resource will be  made available over
              the internet, and will provide immediately  useful functionality for
              investigators working on this important  structure, as well as allowing
              students to experiment with new  information organization, storage and
              retrieval technologies, and  demonstrate their efficacy empirically.    2. The
              second, educational goal, is to develop a pathway in  bioinformatics at
              Stanford that provides a general introduction  to the field of bioinformatics,
              and gives students the skills  necessary to participate in research in projects
              such as the test  bed application described in the research component. This
              pathway  will leverage the formal coursework in computer science,  probability
              and statistics, biology, and social /ethical issues  already provided within
              the Medical Information Sciences (MIS)  PhD/MS program. In addition, this
              pathway will provide a new  course within the MIS training program at Stanford,
              in which  students learn the fundamentals bioinformatics. The unique 
              affiliation with medical informatics will create a population of 
              bioinformaticians who are aware of relevant technologies within  other branches
              of informatics.
