Title       : Molecular Basis of Stability and Folding of Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9600991

Award Number: 9600991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $492000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bertrand Garcia-Moreno bertrand@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600991  Garcia-Morena  The main goal of this research program is to determine
              the  detailed sequence of molecular events that leads to  transitions between
              native and denatured states of proteins.  Dr. Garcia-Moreno is studying the
              energetics of acid  denaturation of staphylococcal nuclease with equilibrium 
              thermodynamic methods.  An extensive collection of mutants  where ionizable
              residues have been substituted by uncharged  amino acids will be used to
              determine the role of individual  ionizable residues.  The emphasis is on
              resolving the  contributions by individual residues because that is the  level
              needed to advance our current understanding of the  mechanisms of stability and
              folding of proteins.  Another  goal is to characterize the physical and
              structural  properties of compact denatured states of nuclease, and to 
              establish the molecular determinants of the electrostatic  effects that poise
              for denaturation by acid.  Dr. Garcia-  Moreno's research is intimately
              interwoven with his teaching  and training of students at the graduate and
              undergraduate  levels.  %%%  The stability of a folded protein is always
              defined relative  to a  protein in a denatured state.  While much is already 
              known about the structure and physico-chemical character of  folded proteins,
              those of denatured proteins remain largely  unexplored.  In order to understand
              fully the relationship  between the structure of a protein and its stability it
              is  necessary to understand better the denatured state.  Denatured proteins do
              not necessarily exist as truly random,  unfolded polypeptides.  Many denatured
              proteins are compact  and retain many of the structural and physical attributes
              of  the fully folded protein.  Dr. Garcia-Moreno hopes to gain  insights about
              the manner in which proteins achieve their  folded state by determining the
              sequence of  events that  leads to transitions between folded and denatured
              proteins.  He will also study some  of the noncovalent forces that  stabilize
              proteins in compact denatured st ates.  Nuclease is  a protein well suited for
              these studies because it is not  very stable and can be coaxed into compact
              denatured states  easily with acid, temperature or chemical denaturants.  Dr. 
              Garcia-Moreno is developing courses in molecular physiology  and in protein
              thermodynamics where graduate and  undergraduate students will learn the
              fundamental of  macromolecular structure, energetics and function by using 
              computers to analyze high resolution structures graphically,  to predict
              energetics from structure, and to simulate  complex phenomena such as the
              conformational transitions  that he will study in the proposed research.  ***
