Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: The Role of Myogenic Regulatory Factors in Controlling
               Skeletal Muscle Development in Avian Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9600331

Award Number: 9600331
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kimiaki Maruyama KMARU@GGPL.ARSUSDA.GOV  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USDA ARS INHL
	      BLDG 467 Room 6 BARC-EAST
	      Beltsville, MD  207052350    /   -

NSF Program : 8270      JAPAN-U.S. FELLOWSHIPS PROG-RE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600331  Maruyama    This award supports the collaboration of Dr. Kimiaki 
              Maruyama of the Gene Evaluation and Mapping Laboratory at  Beltsville
              Agricultural Research Center and Dr. Mitsuru  Naito of the Department of Animal
              Breeding and Genetics,  National Institute of Animal Industry (NIAI).  Project 
              funding will enable Dr. Maruyama to spend one year in Japan,  resident at NIAI,
              to determine cellular functions of  myogenic regulatory factors (MRFs) in
              chicken embryonic  cells and whole embryos.  Dr. Maruyama has previously 
              studied muscle protein  gene expression and the expression of genes encoding
              MRFs  which are implicated in directing embryonic cells to muscle  cell lineage
              and activating muscle protein genes.  Dr. Naito  has successfully cultured
              chicken embryos in vitro to open  an avenue to study gene functions in
              developing embryos.  Dr. Maruyama will combine his expertise with that of Dr. 
              Naito to pursue the research objectives.    This proposal brings together
              research scientists from two  countries working in the area of avian embryo
              development.  The U.S. scientist will have the opportunity to become  familiar
              with research techniques, equipment, and facilities  at NIAI while contributing
              to the overall research effort.  Therefore, this proposal fulfills the
              objectives of the  Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge
               through  international collaboration.
