Title       : International Research Fellow Awards Program: Dynamics of Colloidal Suspensions
               with Attractive Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9600329

Award Number: 9600329
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johan B. Bergenholtz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600329  Bergenholtz      The International Research Fellow Awards Program
              enables  U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour  months
              of research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will fund a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit which will support Dr. Johan B. Bergenholtz's work
               with Professor Rudolf Klein at the Universitat Konstanz in  Germany.        An
              understanding of the fundamental dynamical processes in  colloidal suspensions
              is important to the formulation of  engineering models for the design and
              optimization of  processes involving suspensions of colloidal-sized  particles,
              such as proteins, paints, pigments, and coatings.  This understanding is
              lacking in the case of suspensions and  microemulsions when attractive
              interparticle interactions  are strong.  The proposed research will extend
              existing  dynamical suspension theories, developed for charged  colloidal
              suspensions, to include systems with attractive  interactions.  Dynamic light
              scattering experiments will be  used to assess the success of the theoretical
              developments.  This study will elucidate the suspension dynamics near the 
              percolation transition and will provide a better foundation  for analyzing the
              role of colloidal forces on macroscopic  suspension properties.  ***
