Title       : An Integrative Study of the Functional Interactions Between Primate Hip Joint
               Morphology and Loading Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  2000    
File        : a9600889

Award Number: 9600889
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xingbin Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Laura M. MacLatchy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study proposes to apply advanced engineering methods to study primate hip
              function. The  primate hip joint is a complex structure that serves a wide
              range of purposes. A better  understanding of this structure will not only
              facilitate our knowledge of hip joint function but  also provide important
              evidence about the evolutionary process of early human locomotion.   This is
              because the hip joint underwent substantial reorganization in the transition to
              a bipedal  form of locomotion.  Despite extensive research efforts devoted to
              this structure in the last two  centuries, hip functions remain poorly
              understood.  Up until now, most work has been confined  to the documentation of
              the shape of the hip skeleton and little effort has been invested to  analyze
              the functional implications of observed morphological traits.  This project
              will take a comprehensive approach that has only recently become possible. It
              will  for the first time systematically incorporate external hip morphology,
              internal trabecular bone  density patterns, and functional loads into global
              femoral and acetabular models. It will examine  the relationship between form
              and function in the hip of humans as well as various other large  bodied
              primates.  The objectives of this study are:  (1) To quantify bone density
              patterns in behaviorally diverse monkeys, apes, and humans.  (2) To test
              predictions concerning the biomechanical significance of isolated joint
              features.   (3) To integrate external morphological features, internal
              architecture and joint loads into a  single global model so that the relative
              sensitivity of single variables and sets of variables to  joint forces and
              muscle forces can be investigated.    (4) To use those variables which are
              found to be sound indicators of loading to reconstruct  positional behavior in
              fossil species.    This project will make substantial contributions in the
              following fields:  (1) Comparative Functional Morphology: This study will
              contribute new information to the field  of comparative anatomy by integrating
              data on joint surface geometry, trabecular bone density  and mechanical
              loading.  (2) Paleoanthropology: This study will extend our current
              understanding of form/function  relationships in the hip of living primates and
              provide paleontologists with new tools to  reconstruct positional behavior in
              extinct species.   (3) Methodological Contribution: The integration of modern
              bone remodeling theories with  computer and bioengineering technologies is a
              new approach in biological anthropology and will  help to establish new
              research frontiers.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
