Title       : CAREER: Studies of Actin and Myosin Function During DirectedVacuole Movement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9600867

Award Number: 9600867
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois S. Weisman lois-weisman@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-00867  Weisman    This project is concerned with understanding the molecular
              basis of organelle movement during cell division, particularly with vacuole
              movement from the mother cell into the bud, in the yeast Saccharomyces
              cerevisiae. It has been demonstrated that Class V myosin and profillin are
              required for the migration of vacuole from the mother cell into the bud. This
              grant will investigate how Class V myosin interact with the membrane of the
              vacuole and determine if as yet unidentified components are required for
              vacuolar movement. Presumably, the myosin tail attaches to the vacuolar
              membrane. This will be determined by generating mutants of the myosin tail,
              expressing these in yeast, and examining the phenotype. Also, it will be
              determined if actin can move along isolated and fluorescently-labeled vacuole.
              This will be done using well established techniques for studying actin-based
              motility. Differentiation of many cell-type involves the polarization of their
              cytoplasmic organelles. It is likely that these studies will add to our
              knowledge of organelle partitioning in higher eukaryotes. It is likely also
              that the molecular basis of cellular polarization will bear some similarity
              with the molecular basis of organelle partitioning. The educational component
              of this CAREER grant involves the application of methods used mainly in small
              seminar courses to large lecture class. The educational component is designed
              to increase student motivation to learn and to make student learning a more
              active process. This will be done by asking questions during the lecture and by
              assigning scientific papers that will be discussed during the lecture. It is
              hoped that by involving students in these discussions they will learn the value
              of discovering new information and the ability to ask important, focused
              questions.  %%%  During the budding of S. cerevisiae, how are organelles moved
              from the mother cell into the bud? Are components of the cytoskeleton involved
              in this process? These are questions that w ill be investigated by this grant.
              Differentiation of various cell type involves the polarization of their
              cytoplasmic organelles. As yet, we know little about the molecular mechanism of
              this process. The goals of the educational component of this grant are designed
              to give students the excitement of discovering new information and the ability
              to analyze scientific data.  ***
