Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9600065

Award Number: 9600065
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64998              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Taylor met@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Taylor  9600065    Prof. Taylor will investigate problems in partial
              differential equations, with particular attention to four areas.  One involves
              the further development of microlocal analysis as a tool in nonlinear partial
              differential equations.  A basic component of this theory is the
              paradifferential operator calculus, which allows one to represent a nonlinear
              function F(u) as the sum of a linear operator applied to u and a remainder. 
              Recent developments highlight the desirability of extending the scope of this
              theory, in ways which bear on the study of solutions to nonlinear partial
              differential equations with low regularity.  The second involves the use of
              analysis on Morrey spaces.  Created originally to analyze solutions to
              nonlinear elliptic equations, Morrey spaces have proved useful for other sorts
              of equations, such as the Navier-Stokes equations for viscous fluid flow. 
              Taylor plans to pursue a systematic study of the applicability of Morrey spaces
              to nonlinear PDE.  A particular example is the extension of the Morrey space
              analysis to Navier-Stokes equations on a region with boundary.  The third area
              concerns an inverse scattering problem: the problem of describing an unknown
              obstacle in terms of observations of how it scatters waves.  Microlocal
              analysis is brought to bear on the problem of describing features of such an
              obstacle, on a length scale comparable to the wave length used to illuminate
              the obstacle. The fourth area concerns analysis of diffraction of waves by a
              boundary.  In particular, various Airy operators arise in this study, and while
              many basic properties are well understood, a number of natural problems from
              mathematical physics, including propagation of electromagnetic waves, give rise
              to problems about the Airy operator calculus which need to be resolved.    A
              central theme in these studies is the propagation of waves, both linear and
              nonlinear.  A number of types of waves are considered, including sound waves,
              waves in water, light waves and other  electromagnetic waves, and vibrations in
              the ground and in other solids.  How these waves propagate through space and
              interact with objects, often in the form of boundaries, is a rich source of
              problems.  Of equal interest are inverse problems, how to tell about the space
              in which waves propagate, from a knowledge of the nature of their propagation. 
              Understanding these inverse problems is helpful in a variety of practical
              problems, ranging from nondestructive medical imaging to finding special
              structures under ground and under water.
