Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Prevention of Intimal Hyperplasia by Controlled Release of
               Cyclosporin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9600404

Award Number: 9600404
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy A. Richey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              63        Life Science Other Medical              
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600404  Richey    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Tracy Richey at
              the Research Center of Biomedical  Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.
               Dr. Richey  will work with Dr. Yoshito Ikada, Professor at the Research 
              Center of Biomedical  Engineering, on a research project  entitled, "Prevention
              of Intimal Hyperplasia by Controlled  Release of Cyclosporine."    The proposed
              research will examine techniques to reduce  intimal hyperplasia in vein grafts
              using a controlled  release device containing cyclosporine, an
              immunosuppressant  drug.  A major chronic complication of vein grafts used for 
              heart bypass surgery involves the continued thickening of  the vessel wall,
              termed intimal hyperplasia, that decreases  blood flow and can eventually lead
              to graft occlusion.  The  specific causes of intimal hyperplasia are poorly 
              understood, but likely involve a combination of hemodynamic,  growth and
              immunological factors.  During the project, a  controlled release device will
              administer the required  amount of cyclosporine at the implant site, the
              intention  being to reduce or check the harmful side effects of  the 
              aformentioned factors.  As a further step, biodegradable  films will be
              prepared from polyesters using a solvent  casting technique, and the release
              rate and physical state  of the incorporated drugs will be determined.  Long
              term  improvement of bypass graft techniques using a controlled  release device
              would be immediately beneficial to patients  and the health care industry
              alike, with the facilities at  Kyoto University offering a unique combination
              of technology  and equipment required for this project.  ***
