Title       : FASEB Conference on Enzymes that Act on Nucleic Acids to be held in Saxtons
               River, Vermont in June 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1996       
File        : a9600055

Award Number: 9600055
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph Heitman   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marlene Belfort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600055  Heitman  The subject of this conference is the structure, mechanism,
              biological roles and practical applications of enzymes that act on DNA and RNA.
               Included are both protein and RNA enzymes that act on nucleic acids.  While
              focused on cleavage and modification of nucleic acids, the meeting is designed
              to attract a broad cross-disciplinary spectrum of scientists from the U.S. and
              abroad.  These include  chemists biochemists, structural and molecular
              biologists, geneticists and cell biologists.  This meeting  will be  the second
              meeting of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB)
              in this general topic area, the last having been held in 1993.  Since then,
              there has been an explosion in our understanding of the structure, mechanism
              and regulatory  potential of  these molecules.  The upcoming FASEB meeting is
              therefore both timely and topical. The organizers have selected discussion
              leaders for the 9 sessions, in addition to the keynote speaker for an
              additional session.  Speakers range from Nobel prize-winners at the forefront
              of their fields to accomplished young scientists destined to make inroads in
              their specialty areas.  The topics to be covered at the meeting are as 
              follows:  Nuclease Structure and Function; Modifying Enzymes - Biochemistry and
              Genetics; Restriction Systems; Synthetic Enzymes; Endonucleases of Mobile
              Elements; Endonucleases in  Recombination and Repair;  Catalysis of and by RNA;
              Biological Roles of Nucleic Acid Modifications; and Nucleases in Genome
              Research.  Additionally, there will be a poster competition which will give
              students and post docs with winning posters the opportunity to present a talk. 
              Although specialty meetings are held in the different program areas, this
              particular interdisciplinary mix of topics is unprecedented, and promises a
              unique opportunity for fertile scientific exchange between scientists with
              interests in both basic research and biotechnology  %%%  Nucleic acids, DNA and
              RNA, are the molecules of life.  DNA  forms the genetic material, the blueprint
              of each living cell.  Messages are sent from the DNA to the cell via RNA. 
              Biological catalysts called enzymes are required for the DNA to be duplicated,
              copied into RNA, and modified to perform the cellular functions in an orderly
              and coherent way.  The enzymes that act on  nucleic acids, the pivotal
              molecules in cellular  information flow, form the topic of this meeting. 
              Confirmed speakers include a broad cross-disciplinary spectrum of scientists
              from the US and abroad.  These scientists are at the forefront of their field,
              be they Nobel  laureates (of which there are two on the program) or
              accomplished young researchers, starting to make breakthroughs in their
              specialty areas.  To promote the careers of  young scientists, graduate
              students and postdoctoral fellows will be selected at the meeting to also give
              platform talks.  In addition, poster sessions will accommodate work that cannot
              be included in the platform  presentations, thereby broadening the scope of 
              the meeting.  The interdisciplinary mix of scientists at the meeting will
              include chemists, biochemists, structural and molecular biologists, geneticists
              and cell biologists from academic, government and industrial settings.  The
              meeting, which is sponsored by the Federation of American Societies of
              Experimental Biology (FASEB), therefore promises a unique opportunity for
              fertile scientific exchange between scientific exchange between scientists with
              a broad range of interests in both basic research and biotechnology.  ***
