Title       : The Late Guangala Phase and the Origins of the Coastal Ecuadorian League of
               Merchants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1996       
File        : a9600661

Award Number: 9600661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4850               (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria A. Masucci mmasucci@drew.drew.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drew University
	      36 Madison Avenue
	      Madison, NJ  079401434    201/377-3000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Maria Masucci will conduct neutron
              activation analysis of archaeological ceramic materials collected in the
              southwestern portion of Ecuador. She will focus on sherds which date from the
              Late Guangala Phase (A.D. 600-800) and conduct a complementary series of
              analyses. These include petrographic thin section analysis in combination with
              neutron activation and elemental electron microprobe analyses to provide
              complementary textural, mineralogical and elemental data. The results of these
              studies will then be compared and integrated with previously collected data.
              This work will shed light on details of the ceramic manufacturing process and
              also allow the clay in finished vessels to be traced back to raw material
              source areas. This information in turn will permit Dr. Masucci to reconstruct
              the economic and political interactions among individual Guangala Phase
              communities and determine how they changed over time.  The Andean region was
              home to one of the world's great civilizations which saw the incorporation of
              large numbers of individuals into a state comparable in size to those which
              exist in the region today. Centralized authorities commanded enough labor to
              erect monumental constructions and maintain an extensive road system.
              Archaeologists wish to understand the processes which lead to the rise of
              complex societies and many believe that trade, and relative inequities which
              developed through it may have played an important part. While much is known
              about the prehistory of Peru, relatively less information is available for
              Equador, its northern neighbor. The Guangala Phase appears to mark a period of
              incipient political centralization and therefore the results of Dr. Masucci's
              work should shed light on the state development process.  This project will
              produce data of interest to a large number of archaeologists. It will also help
              to develop analytic techniques which may be applied in many archaeological
              situations.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
