Title       : VIIIth International Conference on the Na+/K+-ATPase August 26-30, 1996, Mar del
               Plata, Argentina
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1996      
File        : a9600420

Award Number: 9600420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Gadsby gadsby@rockvax.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5911,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600420  Gadsby    The VIIIth International Conference on the Na/K-ATPase (and
              related transport ATPases), in Mar del Plata, Argentina, August 26-30 1996,
              continues the series of Na/K-ATPase conferences that have been held in Europe
              or America every three or so years since 1973. Following the tradition of the
              previous conferences, the meeting will feature the latest information on the
              molecular structure, transport mechanism, and regulatory properties of the
              Na/K-ATPase. Appropriate knowledge gleaned from other cation transport ATPases
              (e.g. Ca-ATPases, H-ATPases, and H/K-ATPase) will be included to inform
              progress in Na/K-ATPase research. The conference program comprises nine
              symposia, each addressing a particular topic, and three evening workshops, and
              has been organized to promote critical discussion and interdisciplinary
              exchange among the two hundred or so crystallographers,
              cryo-electronmicroscopists, biochemists, cell biologists, molecular biologists,
              biophysicists, physiologists, and pharmacologists registered. To encourage
              informal intellectual interchange, the majority of the presentations will be in
              the form of posters which will remain displayed throughout the entire meeting.
              To facilitate broad dissemination of the topics and data presented, the
              conference proceedings will be published in the widely read form of an Annals
              of the New York Academy of Sciences.   %%%   Following the tradition of the
              seven previous conferences, the VIIIth International Conference on the
              NalK-ATPase (and related transport ATPases), to be held in Argentina this
              August, will highlight the most recent advances in our understanding of what
              these ubiquitous, and vitally important, microscopic pumps look like, how they
              work, and how their function can be controlled. The Na/K-ATPase is perhaps more
              widely known as the sodium (Na) pump, or the sodium/potassium (Na/K) exchange
              pump, since it extrudes Na ions from cells while taking up K ions. The Na/K
              pump thus maintains the concentration gradients of Na and K io ns across cell
              membranes that are essential, for example, for all nerve and muscle activity,
              for signalling between cells, for uptake of nutrients, and for salt and water
              balance. Relevant information gleaned from studies of other, related, ion pumps
              (e.g. those that transport calcium ions or protons) will be included in the
              conference where it might help the progress of Na/K-ATPase research. This
              interdisciplinary conference will last five days and will be attended by some
              two hundred scientists from the international biomedical research community. To
              maximize the potential for fruitful interactions and discussion, the meeting
              will feature nine topical symposia, but the majority of the latest research
              results will be presented in the form of posters which will be accessible all
              day, every day. This format is intended to promote informal interchange and
              hence foster international collaboration. To enable even non attendees to
              benefit from this meeting, the conference proceedings will be published in the
              highly visible, and broadly distributed, form of an Annals of the New York
              Academy of Sciences.    ***
