Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Magnetic Resonance Imaging of Swollen Polymer Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1996  
File        : a9600333

Award Number: 9600333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shulamith Schlick schlicks@udmercy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600333  Schlick    This award supports the collaboration between Shulamith 
              Schlick of the Department of Chemistry, University of  Detroit Mercy (UDM) and
              Isao Ando of the Department of  Polymer Chemistry, Tokyo Institute of
              Technology (TIT).  Project funding will allow Dr. Schlick to spend four months 
              in residence at TIT, in order to study swollen polymer  networks by nuclear
              magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)  techniques, and to assess the effect of
              network structure on  gel heterogeneities and response to meahanical and
              electric  stimuli. Dr. Ando and co-workers at TIT have solved the  difficulties
              inherent in MRI of solid state-like samples, by  imaging the highly mobile
              solvent (especially water)  molecules present in swollen polymer networks. The
              images  obtained from the solvent molecules can then be interpreted  in terms
              of network properties. Dr. Schlick has developed  electron spin resonance
              imaging in two dimensions (2D ESRI),  for imaging of polymeric materials and
              polymer-supported  catalytic systems. This method has been used recently to 
              measure the translational diffusion of small and polymeric  tracers in
              hydrogels that have excellent biological  tolerance and good mechanical
              properties, and that are  especially useful for the production of contact
              lenses. This  proposal will therefore combine the expertise of scientists  in
              two countries, Japan and US, in the field of non-  destructive evaluation of
              materials by magnetic resonance  imaging techniques. The familiarity of the US
              scientist with  polymeric systems and ESRI, together with the expertise of  the
              Japanese group in polymer physics and MRI, are  considered key elements for the
              success of the collaborative  research plan.  ***
