Title       : CAREER: Inheritance and Maternal Effect of Parental Care Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1997       
File        : a9600775

Award Number: 9600775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175457             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund D. Brodie   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9169,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                       ABSTRACT    PI:  Brodie  Proposal
              Number:  9600775    CAREER Award: Inheritance and Maternal Effects of Parental 
              Care Behavior       Evolution is necessarily a genetic process. While much 
              insight into behavioral  ecology has been made without  consideration of
              patterns of inheritance, there  is much to  be gained from a genetic
              perspective.  In particular,  parental care  behavior is a category of trait
              that is  likely to have complex effects on   offspring characters and fitness,
              and thereby on the  evolutionary process.   Understanding the importance and 
              origin of parental care in species as diverse  as insects  and humans depends
              on a knowledge of the underlying genetics  of the  behavior.   Mothers and
              other relatives often  influence the expression of traits in offspring through
              the  care they provide.  The importance of these so-called 'non-  genetic
              maternal effects' in determining offspring traits is  well known.  However,
              maternal effects have generally been  considered evolutionarily uninteresting,
              because only  genetic components of traits respond to natural selection.  In
              the last 5-10 years, theoretical advances have changed  this view, suggesting
              that non-genetic maternal effects can  drive evolution. Because many maternal
              effects are thought  to stem from  parental care behavior, this new body of
              theory suggests  that the evolutionary origins and consequences of behavior 
              may be more complex than previously imagined.  Despite these  exciting
              implications, maternal effects of behavior have  rarely been studied in natural
              systems.   Strawberry arrow  poison frogs (Dendrobates pumilio) present a
              unique and  fascinating system in which to quantify parental care  behavior and
              its effect on offspring characters.  Male frogs  attract females to a
              territory, where 3-6 eggs are laid on  land.  For the next 10-15 days, the male
              guards and  periodically waters the eggs until  tadpoles emerge.  The female
              then returns and individually  transports ea ch tadpole to a separate rearing
              site, usually  a water-filled plant axil.  For the next 3 months, the  female
              visits each tadpole every few days, and lays  unfertilized eggs for her
              offspring to eat.  Tadpoles have  specialized mouth parts and can only eat
              eggs.  This  specialized parental care lends itself to simple  quantification. 
              D. pumilio are easily bred and raised in  captivity.  The proposed work
              combines studies of  inheritance and maternal effects under captive conditions 
              with studies of fitness consequences of parental care in  nature to address the
              evolutionary consequences of parental  care behavior.  Complex breeding designs
              that include cross-  fostering offspring among unrelated parents will be used
              to  quantify the maternal effect of both male and female  parental care on
              offspring traits including development and  morphology.  Two generations of
              frogs will reared in the  laboratory so that the inheritance of parental care
              behavior  itself can be understood.  A separate field project will  investigate
              how paternal and maternal care influence  offspring phenotypes and survival
              under natural conditions.  The three phases of this study - inheritance,
              maternal  effects  and fitness consequences - will combine to offer new insight
               into the evolution of parental care.   The proposed research will generate and
              maintain a large  captive colony of strawberry arrow poison frogs at the 
              University of Kentucky that will be a valuable resource for  formal
              undergraduate education and public outreach.  A small  walk-in rainforest room
              will be constructed to generate a  hands-on learning experience.  The frog
              colony also will be  used in exercises incorporated into several large upper 
              level courses.  The use of this colony in undergraduate  classes will also
              provide a direct example of the  kinds of biodiversity present in tropical
              rainforests to  students who would otherwise never be exposed.  Additionally,
              undergraduate students will be heavily  involved at all levels of this
              research.   A number of  undergraduates will be employed by this project to
              assist  with data collection and colony maintenance. Regular  laboratory
              meetings will involve students at every step of  work, so that they experience
              the full process of science  from the generation of hypotheses to the design
              and  execution of experiments to the tedium of behavioral data  collection.The
              Dendrobates colony also provides a rare  opportunity for  undergraduates to
              conduct independent research on behavior.
