Title       : Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Strawberry Notch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1999      
File        : a9600391

Award Number: 9600391
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $627328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Utpal Banerjee banerjee@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600391  Banerjee      The Notch signaling pathway has been found to function in
              Drosophila, C elegans and mammals to promote cell-cell interactions that lead
              to the adoption of specific cell fates.  Notch is a transmembrane receptor;
              many components of the Notch pathway have been identified, including ligands
              such as Serrate and Delta as well as downstream cytoplasmic and nuclear
              components such as Deltex and Suppressor of Hairless respectively.  Previous
              studies in Dr. Banerjee's laboratory have shown that the strawberry notch (sno)
              gene functions as a positive component of the Notch signal transduction
              pathway.  He has now clmned the sno gene and shown that it encodes a novel
              nuclear protein expressed in all epidermal cells.  Analysis of expression
              patterns has suggested that sno functions downstream of  Notch in controlling
              the transcription of several transcription factors that are important for the
              development of the wing margin.  These studies have suggested that Sno
              functions in a subset of Notch functions:  those that lead to induction of
              cellular identity, but not in those that involve lateral inhibition.  As part
              of this proposal, he will further investigate the function of sno in the Notch
              pathway.  He will test the hypothesis that Sno responds to a signal from
              Serrate and therefore allows the regulation of wing margin genes directly.  He
              will determine if sno functions in a similar pathway initiated by Delta during
              oogenesis.  Additionally, proteins that interact with Sno will be identified 
              using biochemical and two hybrid screening approaches.  In particular, he will
              test the possibility, suggested by extensive genetic analysis, that Sno may
              interact directly with the protein encoded by the Suppressor of Hairless gene
              that also functions downstream of Notch to regulate the transcription of the
              same proteins that are also controlled by Sno.  He has also devised a genetic
              selection technique for the isolation of other genes that interact closely with
              Sno.  One promising mutant has b een isolated and the screen will be extended
              to identify other genes in the pathway.  Finally, in an exciting development,
              he has identified human and C elegans genes, isolated as part of genome
              projects, that share a strong degree of similarity to the sno gene.  He plans
              to set up collaborations with mammalian and C.elegans developmental biology
              laboratories to determine if a conservation of Sno function in these diverse
              species is also evident, as seems to be the case for many other members of the
              Notch pathway.
