Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Problems in Algebraic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9600274

Award Number: 9600274
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian W. Curtin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600274  Curtin      This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Brian Curtin at
              the University of Kyushu, Fukuoka, Japan.  Dr. Curtin will work with Dr. Eiichi
              Bannai, professor in  the Department of Mathematics, on a research project 
              entitled "Some Problems of Algebraic Combinatorics."    The proposed research
              will examine association schemes using  subsonstituent algebra and focusing on
              connections among the  thin condition, the Q-polynomial property, the
              2-homogeneous  condition, and spin models. The focus of the research will  be
              on spin models, association schemes, and their  connections.  Spin models arose
              in the study of knots and  links.  It has recently been shown that any spin
              model is  contained in an association scheme.  In almost every case,  the
              scheme involved satisfies two conditions -- the thin  condition and the
              Q-polynomial condition.  Drs. Bannai and  Curtin propose to study schemes with
              both properties from  the perspective of the subconstituent algebra, their goal
               being to determine which of these schemes contain spin  models.  Spin models
              have recently received a great deal of  attention among researchers at Kyushu
              University, but until  now have not been studied from the perspective of the 
              subconstituent algebra. As association schemes provide the  basic framework in
              the development of codes and designs,  research into these basic models will
              likely result in  practical benefits beyond initial theoretical explorations. 
              ***
