Title       : The Use of Non-Aqueous Media to Probe Oxyferryl Metalloenzyme Intermediates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9600847

Award Number: 9600847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $321077             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Mabrouk p.mabrouk@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600847  Mabrouk  In the research component of the program, spectroscopic
              studies, using uv-visible, circular dichroism, electron spin resonance and
              Raman spectroscopies, will be performed the characterize the geometric and
              electronic structure and redox properties of oxyferryl enzyme intermediates in
              organic solvents.  Study of direct interfacial electron transfer between these
              intermediates and solid electrode substrates will be investigated, using cyclic
              voltammetry and chronoamperometry, as a means of probing the relationship
              between metalloenzyme intermediate structure and redox function in enzyme
              catalysis.  Oxyfedrryl intermediates in the peroxidase and cytochrome P 450
              enzymic pathways will be the focus of these studies.  The implications of this
              research include the ability to characterize the structure an redox properties
              of normally inaccessible enzyme intermedicates and the development of viable
              commercial catalytic electrocatalytic devices based on enzyme chemistry.  In
              the educational component of this program, efforts will  iclude modernization
              of the course curriculum and teaching methodology used in undergraduate
              Quantitative Analysis involving a "discovery"-based approach, expansion of
              current efforts to introduce undergraduate and graduate students to the
              scientific literature, and development of an integrated teaching/research
              program, which involves high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, that
              can serve as a holistic model of the scientific enterprise.  %%%  My research
              is focussed on studies that probe on a molecular level how enzyme active site
              structure is related to function for, in particular, horseradish peroxidase and
              cytochrome P450, enzymes that play important roles in biosynthesis, metabolism,
              and detoxfication.  We have found that by dissolving enzymes in organic
              solvents it is possible to generate highly reactive oxyferryl enzyme
              intermediates inaccessible to study in aqueous solution.  We have also shown
              that in organic solvents we can use electochemi call methods to learn about the
              redox character of enzymes.  We now intend to use a wide range of spectroscopic
              and electrochemical methods to probe the oxyferryl intermediates in horseradish
              peroxidase and cytochrome P 450.  The implications include the ability to map
              out individual steps in an enzyme's catalytic cycle and to develop viable
              (electro) catalytic methods based on enzyme chemistry.  My educational efforts
              have been  focused on involving students as early as possible in the research
              experience.  This has involved redesigning the undergraduate Quantitative
              analysis course, designing projects and assignments that introduce students at
              all levels to the scientific literature, and opening my research laboratory to
              high school and undergraduate as well as graduate students.  During the next
              four years, I intend to author a major textbook/lab manual for Quantitative
              Analysis, expand my efforts to make students   comfortable with the primary
              scientific literature, and develop an integrated teaching/research program,
              that can serve as a holistic model of the scientific enterprise.  ***
