Title       : 1996 Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Mouse Molecular Genetics; August
               28-September 1, 1996; Cold Spring Harbor, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1996    
File        : a9600696

Award Number: 9600696
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Terri I. Grodzicker grodzick@cshl.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cold Spring Harbor Lab
	      P.O. Box 100
	      Cold Spring Harbor, NY  11724    /   -

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Grozicker   96-00696         The use of the mouse as a model system for
              understanding normal development and disease processes has increased
              dramatically over the last few years. This is due to sophisticated techniques
              which enable the manipulation of the mouse genome and the emergence of a high
              resolution map which enables scans of the entire genome for loci of interest.  
                  The goal of the proposed Cold Spring Harbor Conference on Mouse Molecular
              Genetics to be held August 28 - September 1, 1996, is to bring together a
              diverse group of scientists studying various molecular and genetic aspects of
              mammalian development and disease. This conference is expected to attract
              approximately 400 scientists from around the world. This annual meeting (the
              ninth in a series) will provide a format for the exchange of ideas and
              information among both junior and senior scientists, for the discussion of the
              latest research findings and technical advances towards the study of mammalian
              development and disease, and fosters scientific collaboration.       Seven
              topics (eight sessions) have been selected for detailed discussion as a
              reflection of the most advanced and interesting areas of study in mouse
              molecular genetics (Genetics, Patterning, Signals & Receptors, Organogenesis,
              Tumorigenesis, Neural Development and Embryogenesis). Two established
              scientists per session are invited to present a relatively global perspective
              of their work (one of which will also act as the chairperson for that session),
              while the remainder of the talks will  be selected from the submitted
              abstracts. Other participants will be able to present their research in one of
              the two poster sessions to be held during the conference. This format allows
              the participation of many junior scientists, giving them a format to present
              their latest work.
