Title       : Japan JSPS Program: In Vitro Evaluation of a Phospholipid Polymer for Medical
               Device Applications: International Research Fellow Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9600325

Award Number: 9600325
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7300               (Estimated)
Investigator: Betsy N. Williams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600325  Williams    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Betsy
              Newton-Williams at the Institute of Medical and Dental  Engineering, Tokyo
              Medical and Dental University, Tokyo,  Japan. Dr. Newton-Williams will work
              with Dr. Nobuo  Nakabayashi, Director of the Division of Organic Materials,  on
              a research project entitled "In Vitro Evaluation of a  Phospholipid Polymer for
              Medical Device Applications."      The proposed research will evaluate the use
              of  (methacryloyloxyethyl phosphorylcholine) MPC copolymers as a  surface
              enhancement to improve the performance of implants  and inhibiting bacterial
              adhesion and cell attachment.  The  success of  percutaneous implant devices
              has been limited  due to attachment of the skin cells to the implant and 
              excessive tissue growth around the implant.  The implants  also fail due to
              infection when bacteria adhere to the  implant surface and gain access to the
              underlying tissue  through the area between the skin and the implant.  The 
              objective of this research is to improve implant performance  through the
              incorporation of  an MPC copolymer and the  prevention of cell and bacterial
              attachment.  Different  methods of incorporating MPC polymers onto the surface
              of  the bulk material will be examined.  The distribution of MPC  and the
              integrity of the MPC on the material surface will be  evaluated during
              research, as well as in vitro protein  adsorption, cellular attachment, and
              bacterial adherence.  ***
