Title       : Regional Open-Air Survey in the French Midi-Pyrenees
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9600901

Award Number: 9600901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35603              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret W. Conkey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Margaret Conkey and her colleagues
              will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork in the Pyrenees region of
              southern France. For the last several years the group has conducted preliminary
              surveys and located surface material which date to Magdalenian times, about
              16,000 to 13,000 years ago. Based on the distribution of such artifacts it is
              possible to reconstruct prehistoric settlement patterns and the distribution of
              people and activities across the landscape. During the current project the
              group will expand this work and carry out very intensive survey of carefully
              selected areas. Limited test excavations will be conducted to locate materials
              in sealed stratigraphic contexts and a program of lake coring will be continued
              to recover pollen which permits the reconstruction of past climates. 
              Magdalenian peoples are responsible for the cave paintings at sites such as
              Lascaux and for beautiful carved bone plaques and figurines. These also were
              the first groups to concentrate on subsistence resources such as fish and these
              behaviors laid the path which led to the domestication of plants and animals.
              Although archaeologists have excavated Magdalenian sites for over a century,
              almost all research has focused on cave and rockshelter deposits and very
              little is known about other habitation contexts. On the basis of available
              knowledge it is not possible to reconstruct demography or settlement patterns
              and Dr. Conkey's research with its focus on open air occurrences is designed to
              fill this gap. The Pyrenees region is which she works has both cave paintings
              and rock shelters and her work will provide an important counterpart to these. 
              Late Paleolithic peoples equipped with stone tools and dependent on hunted and
              gathered resources expanded the environmental range inhabited by humans and
              were able to survive at relatively high altitudes. Dr. Conkey and her research
              team work in such an area and the project will thus shed light on the limits of
              human adaptability.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
