Title       : Hydrodynamics & Magnetohydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9600060

Award Number: 9600060
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce E. Turkington turk@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1303,9146,EGCH,MANU,
Abstract    :
                9600060  Turkington      Recent progress with statistical equilibrium models
              of ideal fluid  turbulence suggests that they have greater predictive power
              than  previously believed.  Unlike traditional homogeneous turbulence  theory,
              these models capture the essential features of the long-lived,  large-scale
              structures that form in the process of turbulent  relaxation.  Moreover, they
              furnish definite macroscopic equations for  the coherent structures that
              persist amidst the microscopic disorder.  The proposed investigations address
              the formulation, justification and  solution of these statistical equilibrium
              models.  The goal of the  work is to answer fundamental questions about
              prototype models drawn  from hydrodynamics and magnetohydrodynamics.  Both
              analytical and  numerical methods are employed.  On the theoretical side,
              continuum  and lattice models are constructed, and their properties are 
              established using a synthesis of x-space and k-space methods.  This  approach
              is expected to yield new theories of turbulent relaxation for  uniform and
              stratified fluids, and incompressible magnetofluids in two  and three
              dimensions.  On the computational side, optimization methods  are designed to
              solve the constrained maximum entropy problems that  govern the various models.
               These numerical methods are implemented to  reveal the predictions of the
              models, especially in settings where  experiments or simulations are available
              for comparison.    %%%    Turbulent fluid flow remains one of the unsolved
              puzzles of physical  science.  A satisfactory theoretical understanding of it
              would  provide much more powerful means of computing the behavior of fluid 
              motions than is presently available.  Such computations are needed in  numerous
              applied fields, from aerodynamic design to weather  prediction.  Similarly, the
              modeling of plasmas (hot, ionized gases),  such as arise in fusion energy
              research, requires a theory of  turbulence for electrically-conducting fluids
              in magnetic fields.  The  proposed work see ks to develop the mathematical
              tools necessary to  calculate the persistent, predominant states of these fluid
              and  magnetofluid systems without resolving the full complexity of their 
              detailed behavior.  Tools of this kind, which are built from basic  concepts in
              statistical physics, are currently available only   in some simplified systems.
               The motivation for the investigations is to  extend the range of applications
              of these tools and to support them  by complete theories and effective
              computational methods.       ***
