Title       : CAREER: Visual Perception and Memory in Infancy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9600724

Award Number: 9600724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382753             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ramesh S. Bhatt rbhatt@ukcc.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              70        Psychology                              
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600724  BHATT    What information do infants extract from their environments
              and  how does this information affect their subsequent behavior?  This 
              research will explore this question by examining basic mechanisms  of object
              perception, memory, and developmental changes in the  interface between
              perception and memory in 3- and 6-month-olds.    One prominent class of models
              of object perception assumes that a  limited set of fundamental features
              underlies all of object  perception and that, in adults, information about such
              individual  features is registered in parallel across the visual field during 
              the initial stages of object perception.  Evidence for these  propositions
              comes from the extensive study of pop-out effects in  adults.  The term
              "pop-out" refers to the phenomenon that an  object in a visual display that
              differs from surrounding objects  in terms of individual features is perceived
              effortlessly.  A  series of studies will examine whether infants exhibit
              adult-like  pop-out effects, the conditions that engender pop-out effects in 
              infancy, and whether the features viewed as building blocks of  object
              recognition in adults also play a similar role in infancy.    In addition to
              the detection of features, the perception of  relations among features is also
              critical for object recognition.   A set of studies will examine the stimulus
              conditions that  facilitate the encoding and memory of relational information
              in  infancy.  Also, prior research has revealed that, although  infants do
              remember both features and feature relations, they  forget feature relations
              sooner than the individual features that  comprise these  relations.  A series
              of studies will analyze  possible memory retrieval and interference mechanisms
              that  underlie this dissociation.    In addition to the physical aspects of
              stimuli, object  recognition is also  mediated by "top-down" processes such as 
              expectancies and the ability to selectively inhibit responding to  stimuli.  A
              final set of studies will examine devel opmental  changes during the first half
              year of life in these processes.    This research will contribute to the
              generation of a  comprehensive model of early perceptual and cognitive
              development  in normal infants, against which comparisons can be made to 
              describe, analyze, and mitigate various disorders, such as  attention deficit
              disorder and hyperactivity.      Exceptional education activities will include
              development of  audio-visual teaching materials and lab manuals to enhance both
               research methods and survey courses in developmental psychology,  and special
              activities designed to provide minority high school  and undergraduate students
              the opportunity to participate in  research projects.    ***
