Title       : CAREER: Prosodic Phrasing and Feature Specification as Determinants of Phonetic
               Form
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1999   
File        : a9600930

Award Number: 9600930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203612             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie K. Huffman Marie.Huffman@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9178,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project will integrate innovation in teaching with important basic
              research on  vocal  cord function in human speech.  The research component of
              the project will examine the ways in which  linguistic phrasing--position in a
              sentence, differences in sentence structure, etc.--affects the  quality of
              sounds, particularly the way the vocal cords move, during speech.  Many
              previous studies  have not given adequate attention to the possible effects
              that differences in sentence structure could  have on the timing of articulator
              movements for speech.  As a result, important generalizations may  have been
              missed about the way that variations in vocal cord function are used in the
              world s  languages.  This project will be one of the first large scale research
              studies which combines careful  control  of linguistic phrasing with carefully
              planned cross-language comparisons of vocal cord  position and movement during
              speech production.  The result of the research will be a clearer  understanding
              of the similarities and differences between languages in speech production.    
                The similarities between languages will further our understanding of the
              innate common linguistic  abilities of all humans.  The differences will make
              clearer some of the speech production skills which  must be acquired by
              individuals learning a new language.  The teaching portion of the project
              involves  developing a new curriculum for basic education  in  phonetics, using
              the research results as the core  of a laboratory-centered course.   Students
              will develop basic skills in speech acoustics and  physiology by collecting
              their own data  on vocal cord function, its coordination with other speech 
              articulators, its acoustic manifestations, etc., and comparing their data with
              that of the larger  corpus generated in  the research portion of the project. 
              By participating in analysis of data  pertinent to current research questions
              in the field, students will gain first hand knowledge of how  scientific
              methods are applied t o the study of human language, and they will have a more
              active    and collaborative educational experience.
