Title       : FASEB Conference: "Transport ATPases" will be held at Copper Mountain, Colorado
               from 8-19-96 to 8-22-96
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1996      
File        : a9600496

Award Number: 9600496
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonio Scarpa   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600496  Scarpa/Carafoli  This is an application for partial funding of the
              first summer conference on "Transport ATPases" to be held under the auspices of
              the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB) from
              August 19-22, 1996 at Copper Mountain, Colorado. The conference has the major
              aim of bringing together one hundred and fifty investigators from a large
              number of disciplines working on different aspects of various ATPases to
              exchange ideas and the latest information on structure, function and regulation
              of these important enzymes. These scientists represent a cadre of disciplines
              which include biochemistry, biology, biophysics, chemistry, genetics, molecular
              biology, pharmacology, physics and physiology. Transport ATPases are widely
              distributed in cells and subcellular organelles. In the forward transport mode,
              they utilize chemical energy il the form of ATP to build ionic gradients. This
              energy transduction is key to excitability, contractility, secretion, and
              overall cell function. The amount of ATP (and therefore nutrients and oxygen)
              consumed by these ATPases is extremely large. Immense progress that has taken
              place in this field is evident: several ATPases have been cloned; isozymes have
              been found; hormonal regulation of expression has been documented; several
              structural insights have been provided by x-ray diffraction, low angle
              diffraction and site-directed mutagenesis; new transport ATPases such as the
              one for Mg2+ transport have been described and characterized. This conference
              will focus on the variations in structure, regulation and physiological
              significance among different ATPases which have been described during the last
              few years. The interactive environment should greatly stimulate collaborative
              efforts and help identify new directions for future research in addition to new
              tools and approaches, already successful for established ATPases, which may be
              applied to newly discovered transporting enzymes.  %%%  Transport ATPases are
              proteins that are capabl e of utilizing the energy stored in ATP to transport
              various ions or molecules across cellular membranes.  This form of energy
              transduction is involved in many biological processes, such as nerve
              conduction, muscle contraction, secretion, and overall cellular homeostasis. 
              This meeting will try to integrate knowledge on the various transport ATPases
              in the hopes of finding unifying features as well as novel approaches to the
              study of newly discovered transporting enzymes.  ***
