Title       : U.S.-Netherlands Cooperative Research on the Structure of a Turbulent Boundary
               Layer with Suction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  1996      
File        : a9600213

Award Number: 9600213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10240              (Estimated)
Investigator: Minami Yoda minami.yoda@me.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0207000   Transportation                          
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,5948,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports Assistant Professor Minami Yoda of  Georgia Institute of
              Technology to collaborate in mechanical  engineering research with Professor
              F.T.M. Nieuwstadt of the  Laboratory of Aeroand Hydrodynamics of the Delft
              University  of Technology, The Netherlands.  Using particle imaging 
              velocimetry, they will carry out a study of a turbulent  boundary layer with
              and without suction in the vicinity of a  few holes of a diameter of ten
              percent of the local boundary  layer thickness.  The Dutch laboratory has
              excellent  experimental facilities for this research, and the  experience with
              their set-up to be gained by the US PI will  provide the basis for deciding
              whether and how to establish  similar facilities at Georgia Tech.  The two
              laboratories  bring to the research effort complementary expertise in both 
              hydrodynamic systems and specialized instrumentation: Delft  in bounded flows
              and the application of particle imaging  velocimetry and Georgia Tech in free
              shear flow control and  laser-induced fluorescence.  Turbulence increases drag
              (and operating cost) on moving  surfaces such as airplane wings.  Suction is
              known to re-  laminarize and delay the separation of turbulent boundary 
              layers, but too much suction can actually increase the  separation.  Suction
              through large holes or slots has been  widely studied; smaller holes work
              better, but the cost of  implementing has been found not to be worth the
              savings in  drag.  While new technology now permits economical  production of
              minutely perforated surfaces, relatively  little is known about the effect of
              suction on such small  holes on the boundary layer structure.  This work will
              help  to clarify how such suction affects the coherent structures  in the
              boundary layers, and increase understanding of  `aerodynamic roughness`, where
              strong suction levels  actually cause separation.                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
