Title       : Cooperative Research in Asymptotic Analysis and Nonparametric Statistical
               Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  1996       
File        : a9600245

Award Number: 9600245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafail Z. Khasminskii rafail@math.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              G. George Yin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Khasminskii and Yin    This proposal presents a joint effort of researchers at
              Wayne State University and visiting scientists from Russia. The proposed
              research project encompasses two parts: the study of singularly perturbed
              stochastic systems, and nonparametric statistical analysis. Motivated by
              various problems in production planning of manufacturing systems, the PIs and
              their Russian colleagues will study singularly perturbed jump-diffusions, and
              related problems in homogenization. Problems to be investigated include ones
              where the diffusion component changes in a fast pace and the jump process vary
              slowly, and where the jump process is the dominating force and the diffusion
              changes relatively slowly. For the homogenization problem, the emphasis is on
              the evolution of the probability distribution of fast and slow components of
              the processes. Concerning the second part of the proposed project, the emphasis
              is on asymptotically minimax procedures. The problems to be investigated
              include: studying the asymptotic behavior of the minimax mean square risk for
              recovering an infinite dimensional vector from noisy data, deriving conditions
              on the Fisher information matrix under which an asymptotically exact lower
              bound can be derived for mean square risk for general estimation problems,
              obtaining lower bounds for density estimation problems, and uniform lower
              bounds for integrated mean square risk for recovering a smooth regression
              function from noisy data, finding asymptotically minimax estimators for
              interpolation problems, investigating filtering problems under non-Gaussian
              noise, and proving that a linear estimator is asymptotically minimax up to the 
              second order in the Bayesian risk expansion.    The proposed project presents
              an effort of cooperative research between researchers from Wayne State
              University and outstanding experts from Russia.  The results of their research
              in singularly perturbed stochastic systems and nonparametric statistical
              estimation problems should be useful for many appl ications in manufacturing
              systems, data analysis, control and optimization of complex systems. This
              cooperative research project is expected to foster the establishment of a
              long-term collaboration among the researchers.
