Title       : U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Numerial Solution of High Speed
               Network Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9600422

Award Number: 9600422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yousef Saad saad@cs.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ahmed H. Sameh  (Principal Investigator former)
              Harry G. Perros  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Stewart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5918,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative  research in numeric
              computation with the French National  Institute for Research in Computer
              Science and Applied  Mathematics (INRIA).  The U.S. investigators are Ahmed
              Sameh  and Yousef Saad from the University of Minnesota, Harry  Perros and
              William J. Stewart from North Carolina State  University; and the French
              investigators are Brigitte  Plateau, INRIA (Rhone/Alpes), Bernard Philippe,
              INRIA  (Rennes), and Denis Trystram, University of Grenoble.  The  objective of
              their research is to evaluate the performance  of crucial aspects of high-speed
              communication networks.  They propose to evaluate the effectiveness of
              Stochastic  Automata Networks (SANs) as a modeling technology for the  analysis
              of telecommunications systems and development and  deployment of high-speed
              networks.  They will apply the  approach to one aspect of modeling high-speed
              networks,  namely performance analysis of packet delay and loss in a 
              high-speed multiplexer.  This multiplexer has been developed  to provide
              flexibility in integrating multi-media traffic.  The U.S. investigators bring
              to this collaboration expertise  in numerical modeling, networking, and
              parallel processing.  This is completed by the French investigators' expertise
              in  Stochastic Automata Networks.  Over the last decade, they  developed the
              theory underlying SANs.  The project will  advance our understanding of SANs
              and their effectiveness in  modeling performance of high-speed communication
              networks.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
