Title       : 1996 FASEB Summer Research Conference on the Mechanisms of Maturation, Function
               and Decay in the Prokaryotic RNA World to be held at Copper Mountain, CO June
               30 - July 5, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  1996      
File        : a9600464

Award Number: 9600464
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shiladitya DasSarma                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2000               (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Mackie gamackie@unixg.ubc.ca  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9179,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600464  Mackie  The 1996 FASEB Summer Research Conference on the Mechanisms  of
               Maturation, Function and Decay in the Prokaryotic RNA World  will be  held at
              Copper Mountain, Colorado, June 30 - July 5, 1996.  The  principal aim of this
              conference is to encourage the  participants who  are investigating biological
              roles of RNAs in diverse  prokaryotic  organisms to address the key mechanistic
              and structure-  function  questions which will dominate the field in the coming
              years.  The focus  on mechanistic and structure-function problems is essential 
              if the  specific biological processes mediated by RNA-RNA and RNA  protein 
              interactions are to be thoroughly understood.  %%%  The meeting focus is timely
              in view of the immense diversity  and  current relevance of prokaryotic
              organisms as paradigms for  translation, RNA processing, modification and
              decay, and  their  regulation. Moreover, recent advances in elucidating the 
              structures of  RNA and RNA-protein complexes by biophysical techniques are 
              paralleling  the rapid pace of purifying the enzymes and substrates  involved
              in RNA  maturation, translation and decay. Accordingly,  presentations and 
              discussions at the conference will focus on RNA-RNA and RNA-  protein 
              interactions, formulation of mechanistic questions, and the  development  of
              new experimental approaches to understanding the  structural basis  for the
              biological functions of these interactions. In turn,  this  conference will
              serve to spur future mechanism-centered  experimentation  on these diverse
              systems. Attendance at the conference will  be limited to 155  participants.
              The speakers will be invited from among the  most productive and  innovative
              individuals in the field. Time has also been  allotted to permit several 
              selected outstanding younger scientists including junior  faculty, 
              postdoctoral fellows and senior graduate students to give  oral  presentations.
              The format at this conference has been chosen  to allow  a good balance between
              the two 3 hour oral sessions eac h day  and free  afternoon time for
              discussions and posters. Moreover, each  participant  is expected to attend the
              entire conference. The organizers  are  encouraging speakers to avoid
              presentations of previously  published  work but to focus on ongoing research,
              problem areas, and  emerging  models. It is the expectation of the organizers
              that this  theme will  encourage provocative presentations, lively discussion
              and  will  accordingly focus each participant's future research.  ***
