Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Schrodinger Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9600056

Award Number: 9600056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62499              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira W. Herbst iwh@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  Herbst    The basic objective of this project is to shed light on the
              mathematics and physics of quantum mechanical systems.  Three basic areas are
              singled out for research:  magnetic fields in quantum theory, the quantum
              theory of constrained systems, and embedded eigenvalues.  The magnetic field
              problems of interest involve large magnetic field and the existence of a
              limiting behavior of the Hamiltonian operator (in particular its spectrum) in
              this limit.  Spin zero as well as spin 1/2 particles will be considered.  In
              classical mechanics, constraints in configuration space can be imposed by a
              limiting procedure, and as this limit is taken the orbit of the system in
              configuration space approaches the orbit of the constrained system.  In quantum
              mechanics, this is far from clear.  This research project is aimed at
              clarifying the situation.  Many researchers have shown that embedded  
              eigenvalues of quantum mechanical Hamiltonians are unstable.  They tend to
              disappear under perturbation.  Part of this project is to understand the
              manifold of perturbations which prevent the disappearance of these eigenvalues.
                 When a spinless quantum mechanical particle interacts with a magnetic field,
              it acquires a zero point energy just by virtue of its being in a non-zero
              field.  This zero point energy is large for large field and has the effect of
              excluding particles with reasonable energies.  Thus, the geometry of the
              regions where the magnetic field is zero is very important when the field is
              large.  This situation will be investigated in the spin zero case as well as  
              the spin 1/2 case (electrons) which is much more difficult.  Confining a
              particle to a surface in quantum mechanics can be a difficult procedure since
              the uncertainty principle would predict infinite momentum fluctuations
              perpendicular to the surface.  Yet constrained systems seem to exist.  This
              problem will also be investigated.  Finally, if a channel to freedom is open
              for a particle (even if it requires tunneling through a ba rrier), then only in
              very special situations will a particle be bound.  It is the purpose of part of
              this project to understand the structure of those barriers which will
              nevertheless bind a particle.
