Title       : Japan STA Program: Effect of Stress on Osteoblast/ Hempatocyte Cell Regeneration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9600233

Award Number: 9600233
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9600               (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank F. Espinosa ironman@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              63        Life Science Other Medical              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600233  Espinosa    This award supports a 12 month Science and Technology
              Agency  of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Frank  Espinosa at the
              National Industrial Research Center of  Nagoya, Nagoya, Japan.  Dr. Espinosa
              will work with Dr.  Takahiro Suzuki, Senior Researcher at  the Center, on a 
              research project entitled, "The Effect of Stress on  Osteoplast/Hepatocyte Cell
              Regeneration."    The proposed research will elucidate how mechanical stress 
              from fluid flow influences bone regeneration related to  cases of chronic
              rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis.  Biocompatible materials are currently
              used in an array of  implant devices; in particular, bioceramics are used in 
              joint replacement in patients with the aforementioned  problems.  Recent
              technology has provided better control  over mechanical strength and solubility
              of these materials  in the body, the latter advancement promoting the 
              regeneration of natural bone and permitting bioceramic  devices to be implanted
              permanently. This in turn allows  patients to forego secondary surgery
              (required with other  medical materials) for removing implanted material once 
              healing of the skeletal structure has occurred..  One of the  main goals of the
              research is to better understand the  natural bone regeneration process,
              leading to better  implementation of implanted materials and potentially 
              reducing imflammation of surrounding tissues.  An apparatus  and data
              acquisition system to measure stress and to monitor  bone cell growth will be
              built and used in this study.  This  analysis will provide substantial insight
              as to how bone  regenerates as well as suggestions for the development of 
              artificial transplant materials for other body organs.  ***
