Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship: Mechanics of Granular Material
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1998  
File        : a9600466

Award Number: 9600466
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59891              (Estimated)
Investigator: Morteza M. Mehrabadi mmm@mech.me.tulane.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600466  Mehrabadi    This award supports the collaboration of Professor Morteza
               M. Mehrabadi of the Department of Mechanical Engineering at  Tulane University
              and Professor Yuji Kishino of the  Department of Civil Engineering at Tohoku
              University in  Sendai, Japan.  Project funding will enable Dr. Mehrabadi to 
              spend six months in Japan, resident at Tohoku University, in  order to study
              topics in mechanics of granular materials  including a study of the influence
              of microstructure on  their macroscopic behavior. Tohoku University which has
              been  the site of two U.S.-Japan seminars on the continuum and  statistical
              approaches in the mechanics of granular  materials, has had a traditionally
              strong research program  in this field.  Professor Mehrabadi and his coworkers
              have  previously developed important analytical results and  algorithms for the
              description of stress, fabric, and strain  in granular materials.  He and his
              students have also  developed a unique method to simulate granular media using 
              the Linear Programming.  Professor Kishino has developed his  own numerical
              simulation model and has many interesting  ideas with regard to modeling of the
              granular material  response. Using his simulation model, he has characterized 
              the dissipation mechanism in a granular assembly by means of  a set of
              geometrical and statistical quantities.  He has  also developed micromechanical
              models of the liquifaction  phenomena and strain localization. In this project,
               Professor Mehrabadi will combine his expertise with that of  Professor Kishino
              to develop and validate an improved  simulation model for studying the
              influence of  microstructure on the mechanical response of granular media.   
              This proposal brings together research scientists from two  countries working
              in the area of mechanics of granular  materials.  The U. S. scientist will have
              the opportunity to  become familiar with the experimental facilities and 
              research methods provided by the Tohoku University while  contributing to the
              overall  research effort. Therefore, this  proposal fulfills the objectives of
              the Program in its  exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an 
              international collaboration.  ***
