Title       : CAREER: Analysis of a Novel Nuclear Double Kinase, and Development of Teaching
               and Mentoring Initiatives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9600587

Award Number: 9600587
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kristen M. Johansen kristen@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-00587  Johansen    The organization of the nucleus is exceedingly complex and
              is intricately interrelated with gene expression, cell differentiation, and
              cell division. During each cell cycle, the chromosomes must be faithfully
              replicated, the complex nuclear matrix must be duplicated and reorganized, and
              microtubule assembly must be coordinated. Studying nuclear reorganization
              events that occur during mitosis should provide significance insights into cell
              cycle control and into the role of nuclear organization in nuclear functions.
              Therefore, it is important that as yet unknown components of the nuclear
              structure be identified as well as the regulatory molecules involved in the
              process of reorganization. A monoclonal antibody, mAb2A, has been isolated and
              has been shown to label Drosophila nuclei in a cell cycle-specific pattern: The
              antibody recognizes a nuclear meshwork at interphase, a spindle-like structure
              during prophase, and the mitotic spindle at metaphase. This antibody recognizes
              a novel nuclear protein, JIL-1, that contains two ser-thr-like catalytic
              domains bounded by a moderate (15 KD) C-terminus and a large (90KD) N-terminal
              domain. This tandem kinase domain coupled with its cell-cycle specific
              localization pattern in the nucleus suggests that JIL-1 may be involved in
              signal transduction events regulating and/or responding to mitotic events. The
              identifications of mutants in JIL-1 in combination with perturbation studies
              with molecular and biochemical analysis will hopefully provide insights into
              the function of JIL-1 and possibly identify the signal transduction pathway(s)
              in which it operates. The educational component of the CAREER proposal employs
              two broad approaches: First, a more formalized development of courses that
              target larger groups of students and are designed to improve accessibility and
              understanding of genetics to major in the life sciences; Second, a very
              individualized approach counseling students in planning their careers and
              personally working with them on  independent research projects.  %%%  The
              organization of the nucleus is exceedingly complex and is intricately
              interrelated with gene expression, cell differentiation, and cell division.
              During each cell cycle, the chromosomes must be faithfully replicated, the
              complex nuclear matrix must be duplicated and reorganized, and microtubule
              assembly must be coordinated. Studying nuclear reorganization events that occur
              during mitosis should provide significance insights into cell cycle control and
              into the role of nuclear organization in nuclear functions. Therefore, it is
              important that as yet unknown components of the nuclear structure be identified
              as well as the regulatory molecules involved in the process of reorganization.
              The educational component of this CAREER proposal employs two broad approaches:
              First, a more formalized development of courses that target larger groups of
              students and are designed to improve accessibility and understanding of
              genetics to major in the life sciences; Second, a very individualized approach
              counseling students in planning their careers and personally working with them
              on independent research projects.  ***
