Title       : Dissertation Research: Quantification of Enthesopathies and its Application to
               Labor Patterns in the Archaeological Record
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1996     
File        : a9600036

Award Number: 9600036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7895               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A R. Kennedy kak10@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Kenneth Kennedy MS Cynthia Wilczak will collect data
              for her doctoral dissertation. She will study MOS (measures of occupational
              stress) enthesopathies to develop an analytic tool which may be useful in the
              analysis of human skeletal material recovered in archaeological contexts.
              Enthesopathies are changes to bone which result from repeated stresses. When
              bone is subjected to stresses caused by muscle use it may respond by increasing
              in size at the point of the muscle attachment. Because certain tasks or
              occupations require repeated use of specific muscles, it is possible in some
              instances to reconstruct muscle use and then infer task specific activities
              through examination of bones. However no good techniques exist to quantify
              enthesopathies and the most immediate goal of this research is to adapt
              videoanalysis techniques to this end. In the attempt to identify enthesopathies
              one must take into account that absolute size can affect bone configuration and
              it is necessary to eliminate this cause of variation if one wishes to examine
              MOS. MS Wilczak will use methods of regression analysis to elucidate the
              scaling factors which affect muscle insertion size and determine if similar
              scaling factors are seen at all insertion sites. She will then apply the
              technique to a series of skeletal populations with different known subsistence
              technologies to see if the approach can, in fact, provide useful archaeological
              information.  This research is important for a number of reasons. It will help
              to develop a tool which can be employed not only in anthropology but in
              forensic sciences as well. A number of archaeological questions can be directly
              addressed through application of this technique and researchers, for example,
              will be able to examine degree of occupational specialization and the
              development of social hierarchies in cases where skeletal materials are
              available. Finally the grant will contribute to the training of a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
