Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Transport and Emplacement of Large Volume Pyroclastic
               Flows-the Shikotsu Pyroclastic Flow Hokkaido, Japan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9600307

Award Number: 9600307
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Randall Soderquist                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Baer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9600273  Morling    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Beth Morling in
              the Department of Psychology, Kyoto  University, Kyoto, Japan.  Dr. Morling
              will work with Dr.  Shinobu Kitayama, professor in the Division of Integrated 
              Human Studies, on a research project entitled, "Cross-  Cultural Concepts of
              Psychological Control."    The proposed research will: 1) develop a positive,
              active  description of self-directed control by collecting examples  of control
              in Japan; 2) examine cross-cultural data to  ascertain whether self-directed
              control is indeed more  common in Japan or in the United States, and; 3)
              investigate  the positively framed conception of self-directed control  and its
              relationship to emotional and mental well-being.  Recent research in social
              psychology has established that  feelings of control over the environment
              contribute to  mental and physical health, the primary research question  being
              which strategies individuals use to adapt to external  realities.  Preliminary
              studies in Japan suggest that self-  directed control strategies are more
              widely used than other  adjustment strategies, and because these are not
              emphasized  in Western culture, they remain understudied.  The research  will
              provide significant insight into the creation of  psychological confidence,
              competence, and well-being in  Japan, with the results likely to provide
              lessons for  strategies of social adaptation across cultures.  ***
