Title       : Dynamics-Function Relationships of Glyoxalase I
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9600968

Award Number: 9600968
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin J. Stone mastone@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600968  Stone  The goal of the research is investigate the functional 
              relevance of active site dynamics in the enzyme glyoxalase I  (Glx I). 
              Heteronuclear NMR relaxation data will be used to  calculate parameters
              describing the internal motions on fast  (ps-ns) and slower (-ms) time scales. 
              Comparison of the  free enzyme with the enzyme bound to reaction product and to
               transition state analog inhibitors will indicate the changes  in active site
              dynamics that occur along the reaction  coordinate of the enzyme-calatyzed
              reaction.  The role of  enzyme dynamics in controlling and limiting functional 
              kinetics will be investigated by correlating the rates of  Glx I catalytic
              turnover and of ligand association and  dissociation with the millisecond time
              scale dynamics.  The  proposed educational activities involve formal teaching 
              responsibilities at Indiana University as well as: (1)  undergraduate
              biochemistry curriculum development; (2)  graduate level molecular modeling
              workshops; (3) graduate  education in written comprehension and expression of 
              scientific ideas; (4) a practical course in NMR relaxation  and dynamics
              analysis for NMR professionals; and (5)  mentorship of graduate, undergraduate
              and high school  students.  %%%  Enzymes are protein molecules that catalyze
              (increase the  rate of) chemical  reactions.  They are involved in many 
              important biochemical and industrial processes.  The  proposed research will
              investigate the motions that occur in  enzyme molecules and the relationship
              between these motions  and the function of the enzyme.  In the long term such 
              studies may enable us to design new enzymes or to design  molecules.  The
              proposed educational activities involve  formal teaching responsibilities at
              Indiana University as  well as: (1) assessment and modification of the 
              undergraduate biochemistry curriculum to improve the  preparation of students
              for their target careers; (2) use of  manual and computerized model building as
              graduate level  educational aids; (3) developme nt of graduate courses in the 
              critical reading of research articles and the clear, concise  written
              presentation of scientific ideas; (4) composition of  a practical course for
              scientists interested in studying  motions in proteins; and (5) mentorship of
              graduate,  undergraduate and high school students including a specific  focus
              on minority students.  ***
