Title       : CAREER: Immunological Development In A Marsupial
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9600875

Award Number: 9600875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Randolph Addison                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Miller rdmiller@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              96-00875  Miller    The development of specific immune responses, such as
              generating antibodies, is an unique and fascinating aspect in the evolution of
              vertebrates. Immunology is an exciting area in biology for students and for the
              public, in general. This is caused in part by the daily reminders of new
              emerging diseases, such as the Ebola virus and Hantaviruses as well as the
              continuing AIDS epidemic. Most of what is known about the development and
              function of the immune system has been obtained from muridaes and from humans,
              little is known about the development of immunocompetence in other vertebrates.
              The objectives of the grant are to analyze immunological development at a
              molecular level in a model marsupial species, the short tailed opossum
              Monodelphis domestica. Immunocompetence in marsupials develops postnatally
              whereas in placental mammals this occurs early in the prenatal period. Little
              is known about the development of the immune response in marsupials. Toward
              understanding this process in marsupials, opossum genes that are apparently
              involved in lymphocyte development have been cloned and characterized and
              expression analysis of these genes during development has been initiated. This
              grant also outlines plans to integrate an active research program in
              comparative immunology that involves undergraduates and graduates as well as a
              research and educational program involving a local instructor and students at a
              nearby community college. This program is set in the unique environment created
              by the Albuquerque community and the University of New Mexico, which is one of
              the largest minority research institutions in the country. An important aspect
              of this educational plan is the use of this research project to foster an
              active collaboration with the biology faculty of the local community college. 
              %%%  The generation of antibodies in the immune response is an unique and
              fascinating aspect in the evolution of vertebrates. While much is known about
              the development and function of the immune  systems of murid rodents and of
              humans, little is known about the development of immunocompetence in other
              vertebrates. For example, how does immunocompetence develops in marsupials,
              which occurs postnatally, in contrast to development in placental mammals,
              which occurs early in the prenatal period? The educational component of this
              grant will foster an active collaboration with the biology faculty at the local
              community college. This collaboration will involve working with students,
              primarily minority, who enter four year University from the two year college
              without having been exposed to active research programs. Cross-institution
              course development is also providing exposure to research active faculty for
              these students.  ***
