Title       : Cell-Cell Communication and Gene Regulation by Quorum Sensing in the Symbiotic
               Nitrogen-Fixing Bacterium Rhizobium leguminosarum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9600766

Award Number: 9600766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hector E. Flores                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kendall M. Gray kgray@chuma.cas.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600766  Gray  The purpose of this research is to characterize the quorum
              sensing regulatory system of the symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacterium Rhizobium
              leguminosarum.  Quorum sensing is a conserved mechanism of population
              density-dependent gene activation in Gram-negative bacteria.  In quorum
              sensing, a self-produced extracellular signal molecule called autoinducer
              interacts with a transcriptional activator protein to activate the expression
              of specific genes. R. Ieguminosarum produces a unique autoinducer that,
              together with the transcriptional activator RhiR, activates an operon of
              rhizosphere-expressed genes (rhiABC) and an unidentified locus that causes an
              inhibition of cell growth.  Both rhiR and rhiABC are encoded by Sym plasmids
              unique to pea-nodulating biovars of R. Ieguminosarum.  The growth-inhibiting
              function appears to be unique to one specific isolate of the Sym plasmid,
              pRLlJI, which also encodes a repressor function that blocks normal production
              of autoinducer.  We have recently discovered two additional R. Ieguminosarum
              autoinducers, the production of which is unaffected by this pRLlJI-encoded
              repressor.  The newly-identified R. Ieguminosarum signals activate rhiABC with
              RhiR, but do not activate growth inhibition.  We have also discovered a unique
              autoinducer produced by the related species R. meliloti, for which no function
              is currently known.  The specific objectives of this research are: 1) to
              characterize the molecular structures of the two newly-identified R.
              Ieguminosarum autoinducers, as well as the autoinducer produced by R. meliloti;
              2) to identify the pRLlJI-encoded gene that blocks autoinducer synthesis and
              elucidate its mechanism of action; and 3) to investigate the role of quorum
              sensing in the conjugal transfer of pRLlJI.  This research addresses
              fundamental questions of intercellular communication, environmental sensing,
              and gene regulation in Rhizobium.  Due to the extreme conservation of quorum
              sensing regulators, the results of this research may have direct ap plications
              to other symbiotic or pathogenic bacterial systems as well. The results of this
              work will be integrated into an existing course in Microbial Physiology &
              Genetics, and represent an essential component in the development of a new
              course on the biology of Bacteria as Multicellular Organisms. As part of a
              career commitment to innovative instruction, the P.I. is also developing an
              independent research exercise as part of the laboratory curriculum for
              Microbial Physiology & Genetics.  %%%  Bacteria of the genus Rhizobium are of
              considerable ecological and economic importance as a biological source of fixed
              nitrogen. These bacteria typically form complex symbiotic associations with the
              roots of specific host plants such as peas and alfalfa. This research project
              is an investigation into the molecular aspects of intercellular signaling,
              cell-cell communication, and gene activation in one species of Rhizobium, R.
              Ieguminosarum.  The molecular structures of specific gene-activating signal
              molecules produced by the bacteria will be determined, and the genes that
              regulate production of these different signals will be studied. The possible
              role of these signal molecules in mediating genetic exchange among populations
              of bacteria will also be determined. The results of this work should increase
              our understanding of the regulatory biology of these important bacteria and
              provide new insights into the effects of extracellular signals on their
              symbiotic lifestyle.  ***
