Title       : Americas Program: Receptor Modeling of Atmospheric Deposition at the Great Lakes
               Integrated Atmospheric Deposition (IADN) Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1996       
File        : a9600384

Award Number: 9600384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Harold Stolberg                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7891               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheldon Landsberger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600384  Landsberger    This Americas Program award will fund travel expenses to
               Canada for Dr. Sheldon Landsberger, University of Illinois,  Urbana-Champaign,
              to conduct a study on the atmospheric  deposition of toxic materials in the
              Great Lakes.  His  collaborator will be Dr. Raymond Meyer Hoff,  of the 
              Atmospheric Environment Service (AES) of Canada.  The main  objective is to
              develop a multi-element data set on air  samples collected by the U.S.-Canada
              Integrated Atmospheric  Deposition Network (IADN).  The IADN has stations on
              site on  each of the Great Lakes to provide an estimate of overall  regional
              inputs of toxic materials, including trace metals,  from the atmosphere to the
              Lakes.  A program of chemical  analysis and receptor modeling is proposed in
              which samples  obtained at the IADN sites will be used to estimate the  sources
              and source/regions of trace elements deposition in  the Great Lakes, and the
              effects of specific urban areas on  the airborne particulate matter
              compositions.    The atmospheric concentrations of many toxic trace elements 
              in the Great Lakes area has risen dramatically in recent  decades to the point
              where they pose a potential threat to  public health and the environment. 
              Atmospheric deposition  of toxic materials downwind from large urban areas is a
               potentially important input to the Lakes which has not been  addressed by the
              IADN.  The proposed research will directly  address this problem through a
              source-receptor modeling  program for particle-size distribution.  ***
