Title       : NSF-CGP Fellowship Program: Reliable Logic Circuit Systems Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1996  
File        : a9600044

Award Number: 9600044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jien-Chung Lo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600044  Lo    This award supports the collaboration of Professor Jien-  Chung
              Lo of the Department of Electrical and Computer  Engineering, University of
              Rhode Island with Professor Eiji  Fujiwara  of the Department of Computer
              Science, Tokyo Institute of  Technology.  Dr. Lo is to spend three months at
              Tokyo  Institute of Technology, with the project funding, to  perform
              collaborated research in reliable design of logic  circuits and VLSI systems. 
              The ever decreasing circuit  size, the increasing packaging density and the
              massive  commercial demands that have been observed in the past  decade call
              for innovative design methods to provide  reliable computer usages more
              efficiently and more  effectively.  Lo and Fujiwara have both previously
              studied  the efficient design of reliable logic circuits and VLSI  systems. 
              They have collaborated in a breakthrough work of  defining the quantitative
              measurements of reliable designs.  This work has opened several new research
              opportunities to  be explored during this proposed visit.    This proposed
              research visit will enhance the research in  both U.S. and Japan by bringing
              together researchers from  both countries in the area of reliable design of
              logic  circuits and VLSI systems.  Recent result and information  exchange
              between the researchers from both countries on this  subject can be expected. 
              Furthermore, this project fulfills  the objectives of transfer of scientific
              knowledge through  international collaboration between U.S. and Japan.  ***
