Title       : CAREER: Predator Inspection Behavior and the Evolution of Cooperation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  2000  
File        : a9600457

Award Number: 9600457
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen H. Vessey                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee Alan Dugatkin lee.dugatkin@louisville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Louisville Res Fdn
	      2301 S. Third St.
	      Louisville, KY  40292    502/852-8367

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9150,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT                                  PI: 
              Dugatkin  Proposal Number:       The study of cooperative behavior is hardly a
              recent  endeavor.  Great thinkers - Aristotle, Hobbes, and Darwin,  to name a
              few - have pondered over the existence of  cooperation in both humans and
              non-human animals.  Although  there are many different categories of
              cooperative behavior,  reciprocal altruism has received, by far, the most 
              attention. In order to model reciprocity, researchers have  adapted the
              mathematical theory of games and added an  evolutionary element to this
              technique.  It has, however,  been difficult to test models of reciprocity .
              Part of the  difficulty, no doubt, was finding a reasonable ecological 
              scenario in which animals were hypothesized to use  reciprocal altruism, and
              then devising controlled  experiments to examine which strategies animals
              invoke in  such systems.  Without question predator inspection behavior  has
              become the paradigmatic case for systematically  examining reciprocity and the
              evolution of cooperation.  Predator inspection in animals is essentially
              analogous to  guard duty in the army and an ideal system within which to  study
              cooperation.  I will employ field studies, laboratory  experiments, and the
              creation of new mathematical models to  examine: 1) the costs of predator
              inspection and how such  costs relate to reciprocity and the evolution of 
              cooperation, 2) how assortative interactions favor the  evolution of
              cooperation, 3) cultural transmission, predator  inspection and the evolution
              of cooperation, and  4) the  evolution of cooperation in large groups.   An
              incorporation  of 'natural selection thinking' into human behavioral 
              experiments could have a large impact on studies of human  cooperation. Before
              such bold statements can be supported,  however, animal experiments should be
              undertaken to test  evolutionary models of cooperation.  If such experiments
              are  successful, there is great reason for optimism with respect  to human co
              operation, because strong precedence exists for  incorporating evolutionary
              models designed to examine  cooperation in non-humans into the human realm. 
              The  experiments I outlined above are the first step in this  direction.
