Title       : CAREER: Protein Export in Escherichia coli
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a9600851

Award Number: 9600851
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Flower   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,1045,9150,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              96-00851  Flower    Proteins destined for secretion are synthesized in precursor
              form with an amino terminal extension, the signal sequence. The latter is
              decoded by the protein export machinery which consists of sec proteins that are
              localized in the cytoplasm and in the membrane. Successful export of a protein
              requires sequential interactions among the various sec proteins. The long term
              goals of this research are to understand the functions of the sec proteins and
              to elucidate the requirements for productive interactions among the sec
              components. Escherichia coli is the model organism chosen for these studies.
              The translocation process in E. coli shares many similarities with the protein
              translocation event that is observed in the endoplasmic reticulum of higher
              organisms. The investigator will use a combination of genetic and biochemical
              methods to gain insights into protein export. The project has the following
              objectives: a) To use an in vitro system to study altered translocation
              processes in suppressor forms of SecE and SecY; b) To study SecA interactions
              with precursor proteins that have mutated signal sequences; and c) To generate
              synthetic lethal mutants of sec components to identify interacting domains. The
              educational component of this CAREER grant involves modernization of courses
              that are taught to students. To enhance comprehension of scientific concepts,
              teaching will also be performed within a laboratory. Also, mentoring of
              American Indian and Alaskan Natives will be made possible through Outreach
              programs.  %%%  Proteins destined for secretion are synthesized in precursor
              form with an amino terminal extension, the signal sequence. The latter is
              decoded by the protein export machinery which consists of sec proteins that are
              localized in the cytoplasm and in the membrane. Successful export of a protein
              requires sequential interactions among the various sec proteins. The long term
              goals of this research are to understand the functions of the sec proteins and
              to elucidate the requ irements for productive interactions among the sec
              components. Escherichia coli is the model organism chosen for these studies.
              The translocation process in E. coli shares many similarities with the protein
              translocation event that is observed in the endoplasmic reticulum of higher
              organisms. The investigator will use a combination of genetic and biochemical
              methods to gain insights into protein export. The educational component of this
              CAREER award involves modernization of courses that are taught to students. To
              enhance comprehension of scientific concepts, teaching will also be performed
              within a laboratory. Also, mentoring of American Indian and Alaskan Natives
              will be made possible through Outreach programs.  ***
