Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Macroscopic Structures in Nonlinear Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1996     
File        : a9600080

Award Number: 9600080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67317              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Jerrard rjerrard@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Jerrard    Jerrard will work on three classes of problems. Two of
              these grow out of joint work carried out by Jerrard in collaboration with H.M
              Soner. Jerrad and Soner examined the dynamics of topological defects in
              solutions of Ginzburg-Landau (GL) systems taking values in the plane. They
              showed that, under an appropriate scaling limit and for appropriate initial
              data, the energy density of solutions concentrates around codimension 2
              manifolds, and they characterized the evolution of these manifolds. In planar
              domains, these singular manifolds are simply singular points which evolve via a
              system of ordinary differential equations; in higher dimensional domains, one
              obtains in the limit manifolds which evolve via codimension 2 mean curvature
              flow. Jerrard now proposes to study a number of questions about dynamics of
              point defects of solutions of evolution equations of GL type, related to his
              earlier work.  In particular, he wants to look at dynamics of point defects in
              GL Schroedinger equations and in generalized GL systems in higher dimensions.
              Secondly, he plans to look at problems concerning the evolution of line defects
              or, more generally, singular manifolds of dimension greater than 1 and
              codimension at least 2. These would include questions about evolution of line
              defects in GL Schroedinger equations.  A third, completely different class of
              problems has to do with developing a framework within which one can make sense
              of level set equations in which certain standard monotonicity assumptions on
              the coefficients are violated. Heuristically, such an equation would specify
              that every level set evolves by some geometric rule, but that different level
              sets evolve by different rules. Such equations are of mixed
              parabolic/hyperbolic type. A notion of weak solution would need to combine
              viscosity solution techniques with entropy conditions, and would probably also
              require some other ingredients.    The problems described above are drawn from
              two areas: physics of superconductors and sup erfluids, and image progessing.
              Ginzburg-Landau systems are a widely-used mathematical model for certain kinds
              of superconductors and superfluids, and they   seem to agree quite well with
              experiment. Some classes of superconducting materials, including many high
              temperature superconductors, exhibit small islands of normal,
              nonsuperconducting behavior within a larger superconducting matrix. These
              islands are known as vortices, and they can have a negative impact on the
              performance of superconductors. A major focus of this propsal is to attempt to
              understand, from a mathematical viewpoint, the behavior of these
              Ginzburg-Landau vortices. Similar vortices are seen in superfluids, such as
              liquid helium. Finally, a major problem in image processing is to eliminate
              "meaningless" noise, while retaining contrasts that carry some significant
              information.  Many image processing schemes amount to finding a solution of
              some   differential equation, which takes a given image as the input and
              produces the processed image as a solution. In this framework, it is useful to
              try to have a well-developed mathematical theory for equations which have the
              effect of smoothing out small irregularities in the given image, while
              sharpening major contrasts. This is the other main area in which Jerrard
              proposes to work.
