Title       : The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference on Horizontal Gene Transfer Sept. 12-15, 1996,
               South Lake Tahoe, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1996  
File        : a9600142

Award Number: 9600142
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Syvanen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Clarence I. Kado  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Syvanen  9600142  The Fallen Leaf Lake Conference, initiated in 1985, is a
              bienneally held international meeting devoted to the molecular biology and
              genetics of microorganisms found in the environment.  Past meetings have
              emphasized bacteria that grow on plants and in the soil.  The 1996 conference
              will expand upon topics that have been previously covered to  multidisciplinary
              area of horizontal gene transfer.  The conference will therefore include  and
              area of high priority in the assessment of risk in the release of genetically
              engineered microoganisms as well as explore a subject with profound theoretical
              implications.  The Fallen Leaf Lake Conferences offer the special opportunity
              is provided during the course of the conference for informal exchanges between
              participants.  These conferences have an international complexion (for example,
              the typical conference has participants from Europe, Asis, Australia, South
              America, and the Middle East) and therefore the conference provides excellent
              opportunities for graduate students and post docs to interact with
              internationally recognized experts.  The conference will bring together a
              variety of people who have thought about horizontal gene transfer problems but
              from different perspectives.  A multidisciplinary meeting will be needed to
              cover these different perspectives -- agricultural, medical and environmental
              microbiology, comparative systematics, virology, molecular evolution and even
              some paleontology.  This will cover, for example, work in controlled field
              experiments that have measured movement of altered genes in genetically
              engineered organisms to native species, epidemiological surveys of during
              resistant genes in human pathogens and phylogenetic analyses of extant
              organisms that show the role of horizontal gene transfer in their history.  In
              addition, a number of evolutionist will be invited to discuss evolutionary
              patterns and trends, with special emphasis on some problems in systematics and
              phylogenetics of plants.
