Title       : CAREER: Research and Educational Innovation on Making Sense of Biodiversity Loss
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1999      
File        : a9600985

Award Number: 9600985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $203631             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Proctor jproctor@geog.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 1045,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This CAREER project investigates how people make descriptive, explanatory, and
              moral sense of biodiversity loss at local to global scales.  The objective of
              the research component is to begin to clarify and compare conceptions of
              environmental change held by two major actors in contemporary biodiversity
              protection efforts:  the scientists who play a key role in establishing
              conservation strategies and the people who live in communities where the
              strategies are being implemented.  The research will examine the descriptions
              of environmental change, explanations of major human driving forces, and
              evaluations of moral significance.  It will consider global, regional, and
              local scales:  the empirical focus for the latter will be a UN. Biosphere
              Reserve located in the US. Pacific Northwest.  The conceptual basis stems from
              contemporary cultural geography and human dimensions of global environmental
              change theory.  Major methodological components, which will be evaluated as a
              part of the program, include visualization-based group interviews, narrative
              analysis of biodiversity literature and map representations, and a survey.  The
              educational objective is to develop World Wide Web (WWW) based learning
              resources and opportunities for interaction beween students in college-level
              geography programs as well as for people living in sites where biodiversity
              conservation efforts are taking place.  Components include development of
              collaborative WWW networks, information resources for the study site, an
              interactive module on cultural dimensions of biodiversity loss and
              conservation, and the conversion of existing human dimensions modules from the
              American Association of Geographers to WWW format.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
