Title       : Supplement to LSAMP Award
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a9600115

Award Number: 9600115
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5029881            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis Dale ldale@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9600115  Dale    The Alabama Alliance for Minority Participation Program Phase I
               began in 1991, as a response to a national need to increase the  number of
              underrepresented minorities receiving undergraduate  degrees in science,
              engineering and mathematics (SEM).  Initial  Alliance Members included eight
              Historically Black Colleges and  Universities:  Alabama A&M University, Alabama
              State University,  Miles College, Oakwood College, Stillman College, Talladega 
              College, Tougaloo College, Tuskegee University, one majority  institution,
              University of Alabama at Birmingham; and two  businesses.  The Coca-Cola
              Foundation and International Business  Machines (IBM).  Conceived and initiated
              by ten black faculty at  these institutions with Ph.D. degrees in science and
              mathematics,   Alliance programs were designed to attract minorities to careers
              in  SEM disciplines, increase retention rates, and increase the quality  and
              quantity of underrepresented minorities receiving degrees in  SEM disciplines. 
              These programs included:  (1) AMP Scholars  Program, (2) Summer Research
              Internships, (3) AMP Drop-In Centers,  (4) AMP Mentoring Programs, (5) Faculty
              and Student Conferences,  (6) Alabama AMP Retention Study, and (7) Alabama AMP
              Science Day.   The Alliance was successful in increasing the number of
              graduates  in SEM disciplines, improving the quality of science education at 
              participation institutions, and increasing the student retention  rates of
              program participants at participating institutions.  AAMP  Phase I built a
              solid foundation for AAMP Phase II.  This  foundation will allow the Alliance
              to affect minority student  advancement through the critical decision points at
              the transition  between high school and college, 2-year and 4-year colleges and
               undergraduate and graduate school.  In addition, collaborations  between the
              Alliance and National Laboratories and the Alabama  DOE/EPSCoR Program are
              planned.  Moreover, this foundation will  allow AAMP Phase II to address the
              problem of underrepres entation  of minorities in the mathematics and science
              teaching profession.   AAMP Phase II will include the following additional
              programs:  (1)  A Graduate School Bridge Program - designed to ease the
              transition  of minority students from college to graduate programs; (2) Summer 
              Bridge Program - designed to ease the transition of minority  students from
              high school and junior colleges to college; (3) AAMP  Research Outreach Program
              - designed to provide research experience  for minority students at National
              Laboratories and Research  Clusters of the Alabama DOE/EPSCoR Program, and (4)
              AAMP Teacher  Preparation Program - designed to attract minorities to the 
              mathematics and science teaching profession, to prepare them for  certification
              requirements, and to provide research experience in  teacher education.  During
              the last three years, all of the major  state universities joined AAMP.  This
              action will enhance the  success of AAMP Phase II and its impact on the higher
              education  system in Alabama.  AAMP Phase II will expand and goal of AAMP 
              Phase I to include graduate SEM degrees and undergraduate degrees  in
              mathematics and science education. The project will provide  significant
              cost-sharing, appropriate dissemination of activities,  and employ evaluation
              and assessment activities.
