Title       : The Dynamics of Economic and Sociopolitical Structure in Late Prehistoric
               Hawai'i: An Emergent 'Archaic State'
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9600693

Award Number: 9600693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96711              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick V. Kirch kirch@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Patrick Kirch and his colleagues
              will conduct one season of fieldwork at archaeological sites located on the
              Hawaiian islands of Moloka'i and Maui. In past research this team and others
              have located a number of house compounds and ritual structures which date from
              the period between A.D. 1200 - 1795 and these will form the focus for
              excavation. The team will collect both cultural and ecofactual data to:
              determine variability in territorial settlement patterns over time; reconstruct
              the chronology of settlement and land use;  analyze architectural, food
              resource and prestige-good variation within household units; determine the
              distribution of non-local stone resources between territorial units; examine
              the agricultural and marine resource production base which supported the
              economy; learn how ritual architecture changed over time and space; and study
              the environmental effects of intensive land use.   For many years
              anthropologists have used Polynesia as a unique test case to determine how
              state level societies evolved. The Polynesian islands were settled by a single
              cultural group over a relatively short period and at the time of contact they
              evidenced forms of social organization which varied greatly in complexity.
              Through carefully controlled comparisons scientists have attempted to place
              them in a developmental sequence and to explain the different stages reached in
              environmental terms. The highest degree of complexity was reached in Hawaii and
              ethnographers believe that in late prehistoric times a state level of
              organization was achieved. Dr. Kirch wishes to examine this process. He
              correctly notes that only archaeology can produce the data which can trace this
              step by step, and the goal of the research is to recover such information. 
              This research is important for several reasons. It will yield insight into the
              processes of state formation an will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
