Title       : Expanding the Interpretation of Oldowan Archaeofaunas with Comprehensive Bone
               Modification Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1998      
File        : a9600732

Award Number: 9600732
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59716              (Estimated)
Investigator: Salvatore D. Capaldo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Salvatore Capaldo will study
              archaeological materials stored in the National Museum of Kenya. He will
              examine faunal remains which date to between 1.6 and 1.8 million years in age
              and were excavated from the site of Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. Because the
              first physical byproducts of human behavior date to just over 2 million years
              ago, the Olduvai materials are important because they document an early stage
              in the development of humans. At Olduvai archaeologists have uncovered numerous
              areas in which stone tools and animal bones have been found in close spatial
              association. For many years scientists believed that these concentrations
              constituted `sites` where hunters brought the bodies of prey animals and then
              butchered and ate them. However careful study of the faunal remains revealed
              toothmarks of hyenas and other animals and the `hunter` model became difficult
              to support. It is possible, for example that the prey were first killed by
              non-human carnivores and that humans scavenged the bones for the remaining
              scraps of meat and marrow. It is also possible that many of the carnivore
              toothmarks post-date hominid intervention. In experimental work, Dr. Capaldo
              and his colleagues have developed techniques for distinguishing between hominid
              and non-hominid bone modification and to reconstruct the order in which these
              took place. He will apply these procedures to a series of Olduvai assemblages. 
               Archaeologists wish to understand when distinctively human behavioral traits
              emerged for this will shed light on the processes which led to the observable
              range of human behaviors. Some believe that hominids of early Olduvai times
              possessed a behavioral repertory which  shared much with recent humans while
              others disagree. Archaeologists want to know whether these early people were
              able to hunt large animals on their own or whether they were dependent of meat
              scavenged from carnivore kills. Dr. Capaldo's research should help to answer
              this question. The results will be of interest to many archaeologists. The work
              will also assist in refining analytic techniques of potential wide
              applicability.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
