Title       : International Research Fellow Awards Program: Late Quaternary Changes of
               Vegetation and Climate in Northern Australia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1998     
File        : a9600284

Award Number: 9600284
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42180              (Estimated)
Investigator: Beverly J. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : DC Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1303,5912,5956,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9600284  Johnson      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour  months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a fifteen-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Beverly J. Johnson, which will consist  of
              a twelve-month research project working with Professor  Allan R. Chivas at the
              University of Wollongong in  Australia, and a three month re-entry award at the
               University of Colorado to work with Professor Gifford H.  Miller.       
              Vegetation in northern Australia is heavily influenced by  the intensity of the
              monsoon and appears to have the  potential to influence the intensity of the
              monsoon.  An  evaluation of the vegetation regimes responding to  variations in
              the monsoon both prior to and after human  arrival in conjunction with the
              fire-history of this area  will allow for an evaluation of the role humans
              played on  vegation and subsequent climate change in the continental  interior.
               Dr. Johnson will analyze the stable isotope  geochemistry of organic compounds
              extracted from core  material in the Gulf of Carpentaria.  The techniques 
              proposed in this study provide some of the most powerful  methods for tracking
              paleovegetation in marine vegetation  currently known.  If the predicted
              vegetation changes are  measured, they will provide evidence linking the
              effects of  human burning on vegetation and climate change in the  Australian
              interior.  Paleovegetation records reconstructed  from the sediments in the
              Gulf will provide the ground  truthing data necessary to verify the
              paleoclimate models.        Upon her return to the United States, Dr. Johnson
              will  complete any remaining analyses and write up the results of  her
              research.  She will receive additional support for her  re-entry period through
              a grant from NSF's ATM program.        ***
