Title       : Molecular and Genetic Characterization of a Class II Flagellar Operon in
               Bacillus subtilis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9600932

Award Number: 9600932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498567             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leticia M. Marquez-Magana marquez@sfsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Francisco State Univ
	      1600 Holloway Ave
	      San Francisco, CA  941321722    415/338-7091

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,1228,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Marquez-Magana  96-00932  The overall objective of this Career Development Plan
              is to create a balanced (50/50) effort between research and teaching.  In this
              way the principal investigator (P.I.) intends to serve the community  as a role
              model for students considering a career in science.  The proposed research
              activities focus on the molecular and genetic characterization of the fla/che
              operon, a large flagellar transcription unit in Bacillus subtilis, and the
              regulation of its expression.  Although much of the DNA that makes up the
              fla/che transcription unit has been cloned, sequenced, and characterized
              genetically, the promoter element(s) that initiates its transcription has not
              been identified.  Additionally , the 3' end of the operon has not been
              characterized.  Molecular and genetic analysis of the fla/che operon will not
              only increase our knowledge of flagellar gene expression in B. subtilis, but
              will contribute to our understanding of flagellar regulons in many different
              organisms where homologous regulons appear to exist.  Part of these research
              activities have been incorporated into a course that the a P.I. has developed. 
              As a faculty member, the goal of the P.I. is to foster the excitement of
              scientific discovery in undergraduate and graduate students at San Francisco
              State University (SFSU), and to empower them with the tools to pursue a
              successful career in science.  The specific objectives are to:   Utilize
              microbial genetic techniques for the molecular analysis of the fla/che     
              operon of Bacillus subtilis:  Characterize transcription initiation sites 
              Clone and study the 3' end of operon  Screen for and analyze regulatory mutants
              of the fla/che operon    Empower undergraduate and graduate students with the
              knowledge and    technology of molecular genetic approaches:  Introduce
              undergraduate students to the power of genetic engineering  Train graduate
              students in microbial genetics methodology    3.  Recruit and mentor minority
              undergraduate and graduate students in the                                     
              fields of microbial genetics and molecular biology:   Participate in
              institutional and community programs that reach out to        minority students
               Mentor minority students undertaking independent research    These objectives
              are firmly supported by both the Department of Biology and tip-level
              administrators at San Francisco State University.  Faculty in the Department of
              Biology believe strongly that an active research program provides students with
              the opportunity to gain first hand experience in how science operates and gives
              them skills not attainable in a traditional classroom setting.  Additionally,
              the university at large is committed to the eduation of the ethnically diverse
              Bay Area population.
