Title       : Primer Synthesis Kinetics by E. coli Primase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1998     
File        : a9600544

Award Number: 9600544
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247529             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Griep mgriep@unlserve.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600544   Griep   This is a study of the nucleotide insertion and incorporation
              kinetics of primase.  When errors are incorporated into the DNA during
              replication, a process during which primase plays a key role, the result is
              genetic mutation and possibly cancer. Recent studies indicate that primase is
              the most error-prone enzyme of DNA replication and may very well be the enzyme
              which misincorporates the most errors into the chromosome. Primase is the
              single-stranded DNA-dependent RNA polymerase that synthesizes a short (11+1
              nucleotide) RNA polymer that serves to initiate DNA synthesis. Primase is
              required because DNA polymerases are great at elongating DNA but cannot
              initiate polymers. The primase from E. coli will be studied because it has an
              especially high specificity during initiation, it prefers to initiate
              complementary to d(CTG) in the template. This specificity allows one to monitor
              the length- and sequence-dependence of the primers that are made. Other than
              this feature though, eukaryotic and bacterial primases exhibit very similar
              kinetic, structural and binding properties. Primases, like all RNA polymerases,
              carry out polymer synthesis in three distinct stages, polymer initiation,
              elongation and termination. Among the nucleic acid polymerases, primases (from
              bacterial to human) exhibit the highest nucleotide bypass efficiency and the
              greatest ability to incorporate NTP sugar analogs such as dNTP. Nucleotide
              bypass is when a polymerase inserts an incorrect nucleotide opposite the
              template strand and then incorporates that misinsertion by adding the next
              correct nucleotide.  If this were to happen in vivo with anywhere near the
              efficiency that it occurs in vivo, it might lead to mutation of the genetic
              material.  Current evidence from the proposer's lab suggests that the
              efficiency of nucleotide bypass changes during the different stages of polymer
              synthesis. Primase has very high template sequence specificity during
              initiation but not during elongation or termination.  For instance ,  primase
              is unlikely to initiate synthesis with a dNTP but will insert a dNMP just as
              efficiently as a NMP during termination.  One possible role for this ability
              during elongation may be to create a RNA polymer with a 3'-terminal dNMP which
              may be recognized more effectively by the DNA polymerase.  On the other hand,
              if dNMPs are incorporated more efficiently into the middle of the "RNA primer",
              then the primer may serve as a better (or worse) target of RNase H or the 5'-3'
              exonuclease of DNA polymerase I. This study will determine the stage at which
              primase most efficiently incorporates the correct versus the incorrect dNMPs. 
              The information gained will be used to hypothesize a role for these
              (mis)incorporated deoxyribonucleotides.   %%%   The two DNA strands are
              replicated separately and coordinately. Helicase and DNA polymerase are
              required for continuous synthesis of  the "leading strand" while the "lagging
              strand" additionally requires primase so that it may be synthesized as numerous
              short fragments. Each of these fragments begin with an 11+1 nucleotide RNA
              synthesized by  primase that is later excised by other enzymes. Using only
              primase, its nucleotide substrates, and a DNA template, we have developed a
              simple assay system to measure template sequence-specific primer synthesis.  It
              was possible to develop this assay system because initiation takes place at a
              known sequence, d(CTG), and the length of the synthesized primer is 12
              nucleotides and greater.  In the test tube,  pure primase is the most
              error-prone DNA replication enzyme. We would like to determine when during 
              primer synthesis the most errors occur so that we can hypothesize whether the
              errors stimulate the excision enzymes and what might be their biological
              relevance.  We will measure the rate of primase errors and determine the effect
              of distance from the initiation site, of one or several missing sites on the
              template, of different initiation sequences, and of DNAB helicase on all of
              these.  ***
