Title       : Genetic Analysis of TFIIA Function in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a9600955

Award Number: 9600955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen M. Arndt arndt@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600955   Arndt   Regulated transcription initiation by RNA polymerase II
              requires the involvement of several classes of transcription factors.  As the
              initial event in preinitiation complex assembly, binding of TBP to the promoter
              is a pivotal step in transcription.  Recent studies suggest that the general
              transcription factor TFIIA directly and indirectly affects the formation and
              stability of the TBP-TATA complex.  To dissect the functions of TFIIA in vivo,
              an extensive genetic analysis of the genes that encode the two subunits of
              yeast TFIIA, TOA1 and TOA2, will be performed.  To date, few mutations in these
              genes have been identified.  Mutations that cause informative mutant
              phenotypes, espe2'd Letter SM to MC.cially those that might indicate specific
              transcriptional defects will be obtained by introducing random mutations into
              TOA1 and TOA2 by PCR followed by genetic screening.  The effects of these
              mutations on TFIIA function will be determined by various biochemical methods. 
              These experiments will provide a detailed structure-function picture of TFIIA
              and will identify valuable mutants to be used in subsequent genetic and
              biochemical studies.  Studies on the properties and TFIIA suppression of TBP
              activation-defective mutants have led to the suggestion that promoters may
              differ in the degree to which they require TFIIA for normal regulation.  This
              idea will be tested by depletion of TFIIA levels in vivo by conditionally
              expressing TOA1 and TOA2.  The transcriptional effects of TFIIA depletion on
              different classes of activated genes and on constitutive genes will be measured
              and compared.  In highly purified in vitro systems, TFIIA can stabilize the
              binding of TBP to the TATA box.  Genetic studies suggest that TFIIA may perform
              a similar function in vivo.  Testing this hypotheses directly will be done by
              using genomic footprinting methods to monitor TATA box occupancy in TBP mutant
              strains that express high levels of wild-type TFIIA or mutant forms of TFIIA 
              TATA box occupancy at several  inducible promoters will be examined.    The
              teaching goals are to provide students with a solid foundation in the concepts
              and practical applications of genetic analysis.   Two new undergraduate-level
              Microbial Genetics courses, a lecture and a laboratory, have been recently
              developed. These courses will be improved by adding problem sets, instituting
              problem-solving workshops, and integrating current research topics and
              approaches into lectures and laboratory exercises.   The goal is to provide
              beginning and advanced graduate students with a current understanding of
              several fields in biology, including transcriptional regulation and yeast
              genetics.  Recent research discoveries will be introduced into lectures and
              discussions; scientists from outside the University will meet with students for
              discussions as well.  ***
