Title       : Collaborative Research: Social Context of Fertility Decisions in Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 3,  2001   
File        : a9600646

Award Number: 9600646
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marida Hollos Marida_Hollos@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              This project is a collaborative study by an anthropologist from Brown University
              and a demographer from Harvard, studying the process of fertility transition in
              Tanzania in the context of global economic changes.  The basic question is to
              explain why a transition from high fertility and no use of birth control to low
              fertility and the widespread use of birth control is happening in one ethnic
              group, in the context of changes in the regional ecology and economy.  The
              basic economy is shifting away from hoe agriculture towards wage labor, which
              is impacting social relations and shifting the traditional patriarchal lineage
              authority towards more couple-centered relations.  The major hypotheses of the
              study is that a shift towards a conjugal union where partners communicate about
              decisions and the interests of men and women converge is instrumental in
              facilitating the acceptance of fertility limitation.   Using techniques of
              ethnography to establish the local manifestation of crucial social, kinship and
              family relations as they are instituted on the household level, local surveys
              to extend the micro-level ethnographic insights to a regional level, and
              intensive interviews with a sample of couples on their joint decision-making
              and communication styles, the project will show how these global changes are
              working out in this one region of Kilimanjaro, Tanzania.  Two villages will be
              compared, a Muslim somewhat more traditional and a Lutheran somewhat less
              traditional community.   This research is part of a broad attempt to understand
              the linkages between ecology, production activities and social relations which
              affect fertility transitions from high to low reproduction.  It follows a new
              wave of research which links female autonomy and fertility to the social and
              economic context. As such the results will be significant and useful to
              population planners in other areas of the developing world which face similar
              situations.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
