Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Topics in Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1998      
File        : a9600103

Award Number: 9600103
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vladimir A. Volpert v-volpert@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600103  Volpert    Two research topics concerned with mathematical studies of
              combustion   waves are proposed. The first topic is the determination of the  
              propagation velocity of combustion waves for a number of combustion   problems.
              There are a large number of works which use various approaches  to this
              problem, including the method of matched asymptotic expansions   and those
              based on a priori physical assumptions concerning the   structure of the
              combustion wave. These works have led to numerous   approximate formulae for
              the propagation velocity. However, very few   works have been concerned with a
              careful assessment of their accuracy  or applicability. As a result, different
              formulae for the propagation   velocity of the same combustion wave derived in
              different papers do not   necessarily agree with one another. New approaches to
              the determination   of the combustion velocity, based on minimax principles
              have been   developed in our previous work. These approaches allow us not only
              to   derive an approximate formula for the propagation velocity in a number  
              of combustion problems but also to determine the accuracy of this   formula. A
              number of problems of gaseous combustion, with both simple   and complex
              chemistry, are proposed to study using these novel methods.  The second topic
              is a study of combustion synthesis waves with wide   reaction zones, which are
              often observed in experiments. All previous   theories of the process, which is
              used in materials production,   are based on the assumption of a narrow
              reaction zone. This is due   to mathematical difficulties in the study of
              synthesis waves with wide   reaction zones, and the absence of well developed
              approaches to the   analysis. Development of the theory of wide reaction zone
              combustion   waves is the primary goal of the proposed project. Preliminary
              results   show that though waves with wide reaction zones do have very complex 
               structures, new asymptotic methods allow one to successfully treat the  
              problem.  Specific topic s discussed in the proposal include   nonadiabatic
              combustion with wide reaction zones, synthesis waves with  complex chemistry
              and phase transitions as well as stability of the   propagating wave.  In each
              of these problems the structure of the   combustion wave, its propagation
              velocity, burning temperature, degree   of conversion of reactants, etc., will
              be studied in order to   understand the fundamental mechanisms of the synthesis
              process with   wide reaction zones.   %%%  Combustion synthesis of materials is
              a process that uses combustion   waves for materials production. In the
              simplest manifestation of this   process, a sample consisting of a powder
              mixture of reactants is   ignited at one end. A high-temperature thermal wave,
              having a frontal   structure, then propagates through the sample, converting
              reactants to   desired products. The process enjoys certain advantages over  
              conventional technology, in which the mixture is placed in a furnace.   These
              include (i) shorter synthesis times, (ii) less expense, since  the internal
              chemical energy of the reactants is used rather than the   external energy of
              the oven, (iii) the use of simpler equipment, and   (iv) purer products, since
              the high-temperature wave burns off volatile  impurities.  A research program
              designed to further our knowledge   of the mechanisms involved in combustion
              synthesis is proposed. The   main object of the proposed research is combustion
              synthesis waves   involving wide reaction zones, which, though they often occur
              due to   the heterogeneous nature of the chemical conversion, have not been  
              theoretically studied because of the mathematical complexity of the  problem.
              The goal of this project is to understand the fundamental  mechanisms of the
              synthesis process with wide reaction zones, and thus  to be able to make
              recommendations for effective control of the  composition and quality of the
              products.  ***
