Title       : Analysis of Formative Peruvian Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1997  
File        : a9600686

Award Number: 9600686
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22002              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Dillehay dilleha@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Tom Dillehay will analyze
              archaeological materials excavated from the site of San Luis which is located
              on the northern coast of Peru and occupied between 1,800 - 900 B.C. In past
              work at San Luis, Dr. Dillehay and his colleagues have uncovered two
              architectural complexes, both apparently associated with religious functions.
              They consist of a U-shaped structures with two wings which extend from a larger
              central mound. In the course of  the excavation of one of them, burned `C`
              shaped marks were discovered on the ground of each wing and the investigators
              believe that pots were inverted and offerings burned within them. The shallow
              but intact deposits contained large amounts of ceramic and lithic remains;
              faunal and floral samples were also collected. Dr. Dillehay believes that the
              structure reflects a form of dual social organization and shall now examine the
              collected materials to test this hypothesis. A variety of organics from each
              wing will be radiocarbon dated to determine whether the two were occupied
              simultaneously. Typologies of lithic and ceramic traits have already been
              developed during past seasons and these will be applied to the ceramic and
              lithic remains. Ceramic attributes - decorative motifs, decorative treatments
              and vessel shapes - will be carefully recorded to determine whether significant
              differences between the two wings can be discerned. To determine if trace
              element and neutron activation analyses can be used to identify non-local
              vessels, a sample of sherds will be studied. Examination of pollen and plant
              phytoliths should provide insight into diet and ritual activity. 
              Anthropologists wish to understand how, at relatively simple level of
              technology, individuals can be organized to form functioning cohesive groups.
              Ethnographic and ethnohistoric evidence from Peru indicate a widespread form of
              dual social organization. Groups are divided into two opposing halves with one
              dominant over the other. This dual form of organization provides the basis for
              social identity and control. It establishes a mental template within which
              individuals can situate themselves in relation to the rest of society.
              Ethnographically this form is widespread and is also known, in somewhat
              different variants, from other parts of the world. However anthropologists do
              not know when the pattern was established and how it developed through time.
              Based an architectural evidence, some archaeologists have postulated that
              U-shaped structures relate to dual organization but no-one has analyzed
              materials recovered through excavation to determine whether they support such
              an interpretation. Dr. Dillehay's project will fill just such a gap.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will shed light on an important
              form of social organization and provide insight into how it developed over
              time. It will also yield data of interest to many archaeologists.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
