Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Use of Pyrolysis Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry for
               Assessing the State of Preservation of Proteinaceous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1997   
File        : a9600262

Award Number: 9600262
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary A. Becker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600262  Becker    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Mary Becker at the
              Tokyo National Research Institute of  Cultural Properties, Tokyo, Japan.  Dr.
              Becker will work  with Dr. Chie Sano, senior researcher in the Conservation 
              Science Department ast the Institute, on a research project  entitled, "The Use
              of Pyrolysis Gas Chromatography Mass  Spectrometry for Assessing the State of
              the Preservation of  Proteinaceous Materials".    The proposed research will
              develop analytical techniques  sensitive to chemical alterations prior to their
               manifestation as physical changes in museum objects.  A gas  chromatograph
              (GC) interfaced with a mass spectrometry (MS)  and combined with an initial
              pyrolysis (Py) step will be  used to reveal the concentrations and number of
              pyrolysis  products of Nylon 6,6 change as a function of heat  treatment. 
              Since soluble fragments with a distribution of  molecular weights are formed as
              silk deteriorates, it is  anticipated that this technique (Py-GC-MS) will be
              useful in  monitoring the chemical alterations as a function of aging. 
              Ascertaining the complex nature of  natural degradation and  that which occurs
              during pyrolysis, the research will  examine if changes in the fragmentation
              patterns of  naturally degraded proteins in silk can indicate the state  of
              preservation.  A systematic study of aged silks could not  only supply
              information on the state of preservation of silk  but will also determine the
              usefulness of this technique as  a strategy for routine analysis of
              proteinaceous materials  found in cultural property objects.  ***
