Title       : U.S.-Portugal Cooperative Research: Computational Foundations of Non-Monotonic
               Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a9600598

Award Number: 9600598
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jeanne E. Hudson                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terrance L. Swift tswift@cs.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David S. Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              I. V. Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510204   Data Banks & Software Design            
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 5980,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This award will support collaboration in logic programming  between US groups,
              including students, at SUNY Stony Brook  and Southern Methodist University, led
              by Terrance Swift of  SUNY Stony Brook, and the Universidade Nova de Lisboa in 
              Portugal, led by Professor Luis Moniz Pereira.  They will  create a sequential
              engine capable of performing central  aspects of non-monotonic reasoning to
              develop a robust,  scalable, freely-available system that will make possible 
              the use of logic programming for such applications such as  diagnosis,
              planning, and hypothetical reasoning over  databases.  They also propose to
              develop a distributed  version of XSB combined with PVM-Prolog to form a system
               capable of performing non-monotonic reasoning in a  distributed, agent-like
              environment.  The USB-SMU group has strengths in the fundamental theory of 
              computational logic and in implementing these theories in  usable logic-based
              systems.  The UniNova group has strengths  in the theoretical development of
              expressive logic systems  with negation and in the application of these systems
              to  real-world problems.  They share an interest in  implementation and
              evaluation strategies.  Both groups have  begun to explore, in different ways,
              distributed non-  monotonic reasoning, which will address situations in which 
              the knowledge itself is distributed, and will model agent-  like argumentation
              systems that can share knowledge  non-  monotonically.  The US group will
              provide efficient  implementation of expressive systems, the Portuguese, an 
              expansion of the utility of the US systems, through  increased expressiveness
              and new applications.                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
