Title       : RPG: Structure and Function of Caveolin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1996      
File        : a9600876

Award Number: 9600876
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam S. Hasson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600876  Hasson  Caveolae, or "little caves," are flask-shaped invaginations  of
              the plasma membrane that have been observed by electron  microscopy in many
              mammalian cell types.  They have been  postulated to mediate several cellular
              processes, including  transport across cells (transcytosis), uptake of small 
              molecules (potocytosis), and most recently, transmembrane  signal transduction.
               The caveola is now viewed increasingly  as an organelle that plays a critical
              role in the  organization of communication within cells.  The long-term  goal
              of this project is the elucidation of the structure and  function of caveolae
              through crystallographic and genetic  studies of one of its protein components,
              caveolin.  During  the preliminary stage of the project, to be funded by this 
              Research Planning Grant, efforts will be concentrated on  obtaining
              diffraction-quality crystals of a soluble domain of  caveolin that mediates
              oligomerization and interaction with  G.  %%%  In order for a complex organism
              (such as a human being) to  exist, the cells that make it up must be able to
              communicate  with each other.  Each cell must be capable of receiving 
              instructions from its environment.  A cell receives many  kinds of messages and
              must choose between many possible  complex responses.  We are trying to
              understand how a normal  cell responds quickly and correctly to each message it
               receives.  It seems that many of the messages transmitted  from outside to
              inside a cell are organized by caveolae,  "little caves" on the surface of
              cells.  Caveolae seem to act  like telephone switchboards, ensuring that each
              message is  received immediately by the correct protein target inside the 
              cell.  Using the technique of X-ray crystallography, we are  attempting to
              determine the structure of the protein  caveolin, one of the main components of
              caveolae, in order to  better understand how these switchboards operate.  ***
