Title       : FASEB Summer Conference: Molecular Biophysics of Cellular Membranes being held
               in Vermont on July 20-25, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1996      
File        : a9600520

Award Number: 9600520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: John Silvius   (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Daleke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600520  Silvius  Recent research in mammalian cell biology has identified a
              number of important membrane related phenomena whose proper understanding will
              require a convergence of sophisticated approaches from the areas of both
              cell/molecular biology and structural biology/biophysics.  In the past, large
              society meetings have provided the occasion for membrane researchers working
              within these often distinct disciplines to interact regularly and at 'critical
              mass' to discuss such problems (and strategies to approach them).  However, at
              present to an increasing (and distressing) extent this is no longer the case.
              The key objective of this conference is to bring together
              structural/biophysical and cell-/molecular-biological workers to discuss
              questions of membrane organization and function that are emerging as key issues
              for the understanding of mammalian cellular function and whose resolution will
              require a combination of approaches drawn from the distinct disciplines just
              noted.  To this end two complementary themes will be explored:  the structure
              and dynamics of membrane proteins in relation to their function, and the
              supramolecular organization of membranes and its relevance to membrane function
              in mammalian cells.    The proposed conference will build on three previous
              successful FASEB summer conferences in the area of membrane structure and
              dynamics (1988, 1990 and 1994).  An important new element (and motivation) of
              the 1996 meeting, extending a welcome trend begun by the 1994 conference, will
              be a more extensive integration of topics and researches from the area of 1994
              conference, will be a more extensive integration of topics and researchers from
              the area of cell and molecular biology.  Exchange of information and ideas
              between researchers will be encouraged by combining symposium-style
              presentations from invited authorities, shorter presentations by conferees
              selected from submitted abstracts, poster presentations and two workshops
              designed to demystify emerging technologies with great  potential to contribute
              to membrane-biological research.  Special effort will be made in the program to
              provide opportunities for productive discussions and to encourage participation
              in these discussions by distributing summaries of the oral and poster
              presentations in advance to all conferees.    A list of the topics and invited
              speakers that the conference will feature is given below.  All speakers listed
              have agreed to participate.  As noted above a limited number of additional
              conference applicants will be selected, based on submitted abstracts, to give
              short oral presentations of their research in areas that complement the theme
              of each session.  %%%
