Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Lipid Second Messengers in Plant Signal
               Transduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9600183

Award Number: 9600183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip S. Low   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,5942,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9600183  Low    This award provides funds to permit Dr. Philip S. Low,
              Department of  Chemistry, Purdue University, to pursue with Dr. Youngsook Lee,
              Department of  Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology,
              Korea, for 24  months, a program of cooperative research on lipid second
              messengers in plant  signal transduction.  The collaborators propose to further
              their understanding  of the roles of lipid-derived second messengers in plant
              defense by (1)  testing whether addition of phospholipase A or C reaction
              products can  independently stimulate the oxidative burst in both cultured
              cells and in  intact plants, (2) determining whether elicitors of the oxidative
              burst also  activate phospholipases A and C in intact soybean and tomato
              plants, and (3)  evaluating whether mutant tomato plants that are defective in
              the  oligogalacturonide-induced oxidative burst are also defective in
              activating  these phospholipases.    Plant defense systems are activated upon
              exposure to pathogens or to specific  molecules derived from pathogens, termed
              elicitors.  One of the most rapid  plant defense responses identified to date
              is the oxidative burst, a process  whereby hydrogen peroxide or peroxide ions
              are released within minutes of  elicitor binding to plant cell surface
              receptors.  The experiments to be  undertaken in this project are expected to
              establish whether phospholipases A  and C participate in signaling the
              oxidative burst in both suspension cultured  cells and in intact soybean and
              tomato plants.  The collaborators are  experienced in research in the field of
              this project.  Dr. Low's experience,  however, is primarily with cultured cell
              assays, while Dr. Lee has  concentrated on intact plant systems.  Their
              complementary expertise will be a  valuable asset in this study of plant
              defense systems.  This project is  relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
              Cooperative Science Program which  seeks to increase the level of cooperation
              between U.S. and Korean scientists  and engineer s through the exchange of
              scientific information, ideas, skills,  and techniques and through
              collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.   Korean participation in the
              project is supported by the Korea Science and  Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). 
              This project adds an international  cooperative dimension to the PI's research
              under NSF Grant No. MCB-9303929.  ***
