Title       : Lomako Forest Pygmy Chimpanzee Project: Female Behavior, Ecology and Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9600547

Award Number: 9600547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25219              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances J. White fjwhite@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The pygmy chimpanzee or bonobo, Pan paniscus, is of great interest to
              anthropologists studying early human evolution. Studies of pygmy chimpanzees
              are of special interest in this regard, in light of the dramatic differences
              between the social organization of this species and its close relative, Pan
              troglodytes, and the close relationship of both chimpanzees with humans. The
              absence of friendly associations among females in most apes together with the
              strong friendships among related male chimpanzees suggest that social groups of
              human ancestors consisted of strong ties among related males and weak ties
              among unrelated females. In pygmy chimpanzees, however, the most important
              social bonds are among females so that this species introduces new
              possibilities of social bonding that need to be considered in studies of our
              hominid ancestors.  Female sociality in pygmy chimpanzees is unique among
              primates. Not only is it the only ape with female-bonding, this bonding appears
              to be among non-relatives. Female pygmy chimpanzees also gain feeding priority
              over males without being aggressive: a social strategy yet to be found in any
              other primate species.   The objectives of this pilot project are to determine
              the level of habituation of the two communities of Pan paniscus at the Lomako
              Forest site, to evaluate the proposed methods of data collection including the
              efficiency of collection of DNA samples from the study population and to
              establish an improved infrastructure for field work at the site, improve
              logistics and methods of supply to the site. It will focus on the uniqueness of
              female sociality of pygmy chimpanzees by examining three major questions of
              behavior, ecology, and genetics. Research on behavior will focus on the
              evolution of the ability of females to gain food over males without aggression,
              research on ecology will focus on the key ecological features of the pygmy
              chimpanzee habitat important to the evolution of the female-based social
              system, and research on genetics will focus on the degree of relatedness among
              bonded females in two adjacent communities.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
