Title       : Metabolism and Growth in a Teleost Fish Model of Diabetes Mellitus: Insulin
               Regulation in an Ectothermic Vertebrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9600783

Award Number: 9600783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Kelley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Long Beach Fdn
	      6300 State Univ. Dr.
	      Long Beach, CA  908150490    562/985-5537

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                9600783  Kelley      A unique model of diabetes mellitus has been developed in
              a marine fish, the goby Gillichthys mirabilis.  In contrast to the anatomical
              arrangement in other animals in which pancreatic endocrine cells (i.e., those
              producing insulin and glucagon) are located in the same tissue as exocrine
              cells (i.e., digestive enzyme-producing cells), this goby possesses a single
              pancreatic endocrine organ, called the "islet", which contains purely
              hormone-producing cells. The goby thereby allows for a simple surgical
              "isletectomy", which removes completely the endocrine cells and produces the
              outright symptomatology of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM).  In
              contrast to mammalian models, however, in which IDDM results from the singular
              loss of the insulin-producing cells ((-cells), isletectomy in the goby removes
              simultaneously (-cells as well as (-cells (the source of glucagon).  In
              mammals, "counterregulatory" glucagon, acting unchallenged by insulin, is
              believed to be a primary factor in driving the hyperglycemia during the onset
              phase of IDDM.  There have been no experimental models available, however, in
              which both (- and (-cells can be removed in order to test this hypothesis
              directly. The PI aims to characterize the diabetogenic role of glucagon during
              IDDM onset in the goby model, with special attention given to the metabolic
              mechanisms occurring in the liver and blood.  The influence of adrenal
              glucocorticoid (cortisol), a diabetogenic hormone important post-onset in
              diabetic mammals, will also be investigated.    In addition to metabolic
              perturbation, the Ix goby exhibits a strong diabetic growth inhibition,
              including reductions in insulin-like growth factor (IGF) bioactivity (an
              indicator of positive somatic) growth) and a significant increase in a low
              molecular weight IGF-binding problem that may be related to the
              metabolically-sensitive, IGF-inhibitory "IGFBP-1" of mammals.  Taking advantage
              of this apparent metabolic regulation of the IGFBP-1-like protein in the Ix g
              oby, the PI aims to characterize this protein's endocrine/metabolic regulation
              and its growth-regulatory role, and to attempt the cloning of its gene using a
              PCR-based strategy.  The PI is particularly interested in whether measurement
              of this protein may serve as a convenient indicator of health, growth status,
              and stress in natural and aquacultured fish populations.    Owing to the prior
              lack of a model of insulin deficiency in lower vertebrates, studies on the
              biological role of insulin in ectotherms ("cold-blooded" animals) have been
              limited to hormone injection studies on intact animals. The Ix goby model will
              allow the PI to gain previously-unattainable insight on metabolic regulation
              "before" the evolution of endothermy ("warm-bloodedness").  It has been
              hypothesized that the development of the physiology of endothermy, as has
              occurred in mammalian and avian evolution, necessitated the development of a
              more efficient metabolic regulatory system with an increased dependence on the
              regulatory influence of insulin.  In the Ix goby, the PI has found that
              insulin-regulatable glucose transport ion peripheral muscle tissues becomes
              insulin resistant, and that insulin treatment of Ix gobies renders the glucose
              transport system once again responsive to insulin action.  These data suggest
              that insulin may exert a dual regulation on fish glucose transporters
              comparable to that in mammals, i.e., acute effects on transporter
              dynamics/activity, long-term effects on transporter gene expression. 
              Importantly, the data also establish a regulatable experimental system amenable
              to another specific aim: to characterize the insulin regulation and cellular
              mechanisms of the glucose transport system in the goby, especially as it
              relates to that of the endothermic mammal; the PI then plans to use a PCR-based
              strategy to clone the goby counterpart of glut-4 (the primary insulin-regulated
              glucose transporter of mammals).  In the proposed studies, interrelationships
              between metabolic and growth mechanisms will be e mphasized, in order to gain
              an integrated picture of this ectotherm's physiological system.
