Title       : Paleoindian Adaption in the Great Basin as seen from the Sunshine Locality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1997     
File        : a9600999

Award Number: 9600999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15257              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charlotte Beck 3158594451  (Principal Investigator current)
              George T. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hamilton College
	      198 College Hill Rd
	      Clinton, NY  13323    315/859-4011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Charlotte Beck and George Jones
              will conduct archaeological research at the Sunshine Locality located in the
              Great Basin in eastern Nevada. Prior archaeological and geological testing by
              the investigators has revealed a stratigraphically delineated Paleoindian
              record spanning as much as 1,000 years beginning by 10,700 years ago. Buried
              several meters below the Sunshine Wash is a thick stratigraphic section that
              preserves charcoal, pollen, plant macrofossils, bone and fossil shells as well
              as several discrete levels with humanly produced artifacts. The most recent
              test excavations at the site produced a number of significant finds, including
              a fluted point, indicative of the earliest cultures in the New World and an
              association of  another point type and other lithic artifacts with the remains
              of an extinct camel. During the 1996 field season, NSF and other funds will
              permit extensive stratigraphic testing to locate areas where remains  occur in
              primary contexts. This will serve a geological goal to increase understanding
              of the development of the Sunshine stream system which contains the materials.
              The work will also provide additional exposures for sampling datable materials
              and environmental specimens. It will provide essential information on the
              depositional processes within the wash as they relate to strata containing
              artifacts and extinct fauna. The work will also expand artifact and faunal
              samples to permit detailed study of the vertical and lateral distributions of
              each.  The Great Basin of the Western United States has yielded plentiful
              archaeological information which indicates that this semi-arid region was
              inhabited by the first hunting and gathering cultures which entered North
              America during the final period of the last glacial advance. Archaeologists are
              interested in how humans at technologically simple levels adapted to different
              environments and because of the difficulties posed by the varying arid and
              semi-arid Great Basin region, they have focused on Paleoindian adaptations
              there. While surface remains in the form of stone tools are common and widely
              distributed, very few buried sites have been located and because these latter
              preserve significantly more information than their exposed counterparts they
              are especially important research targets. The Sunshine Locality is unique in
              the superimposed artifact bearing stratigraphic layers it contains. The
              materials Beck and Jones have recovered to date appear to have been slightly
              transported by stream action. This suggests that an undisturbed site lies
              buried in the immediate region and the team hopes to locate this.  This
              research is important for several reasons. It will provide information of great
              interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light on how humans adapt to a
              harsh and varying environment and will serve to improve teaching and education
              at an undergraduate institution.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                          
