Title       : Molecular Basis of the Distinct Absorbance Spectra in Salamander Rods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1999       
File        : a9600772

Award Number: 9600772
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229432             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-xing Ma majx@musc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Med Univ of South Carolina
	      171 Ashley Avenue
	      Charleston, SC  294250001    843/792-0211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600772  Ma  Rhodopsin is a light-absorbing protein residing in the outer
              segments of rods and mediates dim light vision. Amphibian photoreceptors are
              widely used models in vision research as they provide several advantages over
              mammalian cells. Salamanders have two types of rod cells in the retina: red
              rods and green rods, which have distinct absorbance spectra. The proposed
              research focuses on the molecular basis underlying the distinct absorbance
              peaks in the red and green rods, with the hypothesis that there exist two
              distinct rhodopsins (red and green) which are responsible for the distinct
              absorbance peaks. The first objective of this project is to clone and sequence
              the red and green rod rhodopsins in order to elucidate the primary structures
              and divergent residues of these two rhodopsin molecules. The second objective
              is to express the red and green rod rhodopsins in COS cells, regenerate
              pigments with a given chromophore, and measure the absorbance of the resulting
              pigments. The measurements using pure forms of the opsins and chromophores will
              provide precise determination of the absorbance spectra. The third objective is
              to identify amino acids responsible for the absorbance difference of the red
              and green rods using site-directed mutagenesis techniques. The long term goal
              of these studies is to understand the visual transduction system at a molecular
              level, which is of broad biological significance in that the visual receptor
              rhodopsin is the prototype of the large family of G protein-coupled receptors. 
              %%%  A career development program is proposed for integrating research that
              focuses on the molecular mechanisms of visual transduction with educational
              activities that bring molecular biology techniques into pre-college classroom
              settings. Dim light vision is mediated by a class of photoreceptor cells called
              rods. Salamanders provide a good source of rods for vision research because
              they have two types of rod cells, green rods and red rods, which mediate vision
              at different wavelength s. The molecular basis accounting for the difference
              has not been discovered. The goal of the research project is to clone the
              proteins responsible for the distinct color sensitivities in the two types of
              rods, and determine the structural difference of these two molecules. By
              changing the structure of the proteins at selected locations by site-directed
              mutagenesis, the part which is critical in controlling the function and color
              sensitivity of the molecules will be determined. An innovative education plan
              is also proposed using the MUSC Summer Institute for precollege teachers as a
              platform for bringing molecular biology and molecular genetics into South
              Carolina's high school classrooms.  The Principal Investigator will serve as an
              instructor in the laboratory activities of molecular biology which include DNA
              sequencing, PCR, restriction enzymatic digestion, Southern blot analysis and
              site-directed mutagenesis.  ***
