Title       : Microanalysis as a Supplement to Bulk Chemical Sourcing of Archaeological
               Pottery
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9600334

Award Number: 9600334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41612              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hector Neff neffh@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Glascock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Hector Neff and Michael Glascock
              will conduct microprobe analysis of ceramic materials collected in
              archaeological contexts and compare the results with those determined by
              instrumental neutron activation analysis. Analyses will be undertaken with
              wavelength-dispersive and energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometers attached to a
              scanning electron microscope. The instrumentation available permits quantified
              measurements down to ca. 100 ppm together with the generation of maps of
              variation in the concentrations of determined elements across the scanned
              image. Characteristics of elemental distributions such as uniformity;
              association with particular kinds of mineral grains, pores or other features;
              or correlation with other measured elements will permit some plausible sources
              of compositional patterning observed in bulk data to be understood in greater
              detail. The approach will be applied to at least seven pottery data sets
              representing several world regions, time periods and levels of sophistication
              of pottery technology.. This wide range and variety of example applications
              will afford a comprehensive test of the potential of the method for improving
              the precision of inferences derived from ceramic compositional analysis. 
              Because different clay sources often differ in mineral composition, it is
              possible to determine the trace element composition of a ceramic recovered in
              an archaeological site, compare it to chemical profiles of known sources and
              thus determine raw material source. When sources are only poorly known, it is
              often still useful to determine the degree of variation exhibited in the
              ceramics in a single site, compare such data across sites and determine degrees
              and directions of interaction. By such means archaeologists can reconstruct
              many aspects of prehistoric social organization and therefore ceramic trace
              element studies play an important research role. Most often composition is
              determined by neutron activation analysis. A small amount of material is
              removed from a sherd, ground, homogenized and measured. The difficulty with
              this technique is that it ignores chemical variation within the sherd and
              assumes that the trace element pattern observed is determined solely by source
              composition. Although they have not been examined in detain it is unclear
              whether these assumptions are correct and the value of Drs. Neff and Glascock's
              project rests on its evaluation of these. The work will allow archaeologists to
              assess the results on neutron activation analysis in a more realistic fashion
              and assist in the development of archaeological analytic techniques.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
