Title       : International Research Fellow Awards Program: An Experimental Study of the
               Stability and Wake Dynamics of a Reentry Capsule at Low Speed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9600318

Award Number: 9600318
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35405              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Y. Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              52        Engineering-Astronautical               
Program Ref : 0000,5947,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600318  Wang      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit which will support Dr. Frank Y. Wang to work with 
              Professor Jean-Marc Charbonnier at the von Karman Institute  for Fluid Dynamics
              in Belgium.        This project involves investigating experimentally the 
              dynamic stability characteristics of a reentry capsule and  their relation to
              the downstream wake flow at low speed.  Dr. Wang and Professor Charbonnier will
              measure aerodynamic  coefficients of a capsule-like body, mean and turbulent 
              quantities of the boundary layer and the downstream wake  flows, and do flow
              visualization.  An existing support  system specifically designed for the
              investigation of the  stability of capsule-like bodies will be used for both 
              mounting the model and measuring its global aerodynamic  coefficients. 
              Shadowgraph/Schlieren visualization will be  utilized as an initial step to
              globally characterize the  wake flow.  The flow diagnostic effort will then
              concentrate  on the use of particle image velocimetry (PIV) to map out  the
              boundary layer and wake characteristics.  In addition, a  parallel
              investigation of the flow fields using conventional  miniature five-hole probes
              will be carried out to address  the applicability of the PIV technique in this
              type of  problems.  The measurement of aerodynamic coefficients is  crucial in
              providing the necessary information to ensure the  safe return of astronauts. 
              The detailed documentation of  the boundary layer and wake flow fields will
              broaden the  existing database for transonic blunt bodies, aiding the 
              development and validation of computational models, as well  as offering an
              unprecedented opportunity to examine the  dynamic  interaction between the flow
              over the capsule and  its downstream wake.  ***
