Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Global Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations of the
               Magnetosphere's Response to Variations in Upstream Interplanetary Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9600340

Award Number: 9600340
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee F. Bargatze   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600340  Bargatze    The award supports for a 12-month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Lee F. Bargatze at
              the Solar-Terrestrial Environment  Laboratory (STELAB), Toyokawa, Japan.   Dr.
              Bargatze will  work with Dr. Tatsuki Ogino, Researcher at STELAB and  Associate
              Professmr at Nagoya University, on the research  project entitled:  "Global
              Magnetohydrodynamic Simulations  of the Magneto-sphere's Response to Variations
              in Upstream  Solar Wind Conditions."    The proposed research entails the use
              of computer  simulations to study the interactions between the solar wind  and
              the Earth's magnetic field on a global scale.  The  simulations will be
              compared with empirical data to study  the structure and dynamics of the
              Earth's magnetospheric  system.  In particular, the work will focus on the
              dynamical  response of the magnetosphere to sudden changes in the  upstream
              solar wind conditions such as interplanetary  magnetic field rotations.  The
              solar wind-magnetosphere  interaction, which generates the aurorae and produces
               magnetic storms and substorms, is an area of common interest  for Drs.
              Bargatze and Ogino.  In collaboration with  scientists from Japan, Dr. Bargatze
              will utilize the results  of the proposed research to further the international
               understanding of the coupling between the solar wind and the  terrestrial
              magnetosphere and to improve models describing  the global system response to
              time variations of solar wind  input parameters that define the upstream
              interplanetary  conditions.  ***
