Title       : Integrative Biology of Insect Muscle: Molecular Through Ecological
               Investigations of Locomotor Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9600840

Award Number: 9600840
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Marden jhm10@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9600840  Marden    This  research  investigates the locomotor physiology  of  a 
              model  organism  at molecular through cellular,  organismal,  and  ecological
              levels, and will demonstrate how effects  at  one  level  interact  with
              effects at other  levels.  In  so  doing,  the research would lead to a novel
              understanding  of  mechanistic   and   evolutionary   processes   that   govern
               performance physiology of muscle.    Dragonflies (Libellula pulchella) undergo
              a dramatic  change  in flight  performance  and  thermal  sensitivity  of 
              muscle  function  during adult  maturation.   Preliminary data suggest  that 
              the  mechanism  underlying  this  developmental  transition  is  a   tenfold 
              increase in calcium sensitivity of muscle activation,  which  appears  to  be
              caused by a change in isoform expression  of  the    calcium    regulatory  
              protein   troponin-t.     The  investigators  will  use recombinant troponin-t 
              to  perform  isoform   extraction/replacement   experiments   that   will 
              experimentally   demonstrate  the  role  that   age-specific  troponin-t 
              isoforms play in determining calcium sensitivity  of  muscle activation.  These
              experiments will provide  some  of the first data that address the specific
              cellular role of  troponin-t  isoform  variation.  Troponin-t  isoform  shifts 
              occur  during  muscle development in many types  of  animals  (including 
              humans),  as well as human heart  muscle  during  cardiac  arrest and recovery
              from cardiac arrest.  Mutations  in  troponin-t  cause, by mechanisms presently
               unknown,  an  inherited  heart  disease  in humans  (hypertrophic  cardiac 
              myopathy).    Thus,   the   results   will   have    general  andpotentially
              even clinical value.    Preliminary  data  also  indicate that  changes  in 
              calcium  sensitivity of muscle activation affect the timing and force 
              generation of muscle twitch contractions, which in turn  may  cause  changes 
              in the energy efficiency of locomotion.  The  researchers  will  test this
              prediction by  determ ining  how  energy  efficiency  of flight varies  with 
              age  and  muscle  maturation.   They  will perform parallel  experiments  with 
              distantly   related  dragonflies  that  show   similar   and  dissimilar 
              patterns  of  muscle  maturation  in  order   to  determine if the results
              allow accurate predictions that can  be extended to other species.
