Title       : Transport in Unconventional Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1996      
File        : a9600105

Award Number: 9600105
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Hirschfeld pjh@phys.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9600105  Hirschfeld  Theoretical research designed to aid in the identification 
              of the pairing state of the copper oxide and heavy fermion  superconductors and
              the development of a practical theory of  transport below the critical
              temperature will be conducted.  The primary focus will be on the effect of
              disorder and  magnetic field on low-temperature properties.  Previous  theory
              has provided a good description of experimental  results reflecting the
              disorder-dependent quasiparticle  density of states in terms of a dirty d-wave
              picture.  Calculations of the scattering amplitude for a d-wave order 
              parameter will be performed, including self-consistent off  diagonal
              scattering, in an attempt to address inadequacies  of the simplest models of
              this kind in the description of  transport properties.  Such corrections to the
              theory may  not be ignored and are likely to introduce qualitatively new 
              physics.  At all stages, comparisons will be made with  anisotropic s-wave
              states to search for qualitative  differences.    Several instances in the
              theory where deviations from the  usual model spherical or ellipsoidal Fermi
              surface can lead  to qualitatively new effects will be investigated.  Examples 
              include the breaking of spurious isotropy of transport  coefficients in the E2u
              pairing scenario for UPt3 by  hexagonal anisotropy, and the creation of matrix
              elements  for off-diagonal scattering due to orthorhombicity in the d  wave
              model for YBCO and BSCCO.    Finally, transport properties of unconventional 
              superconductors in a finite magnetic field will be  calculated, accounting for
              the most significant unusual  features of the unconventional vortex lattice,
              such as the  large density of unbound quasiparticle excitations over the 
              entire vortex.  This will involve a careful analysis of the  scattering
              cross-section for electrons from a single d-wave  vortex.  A semimicroscopic
              transport theory including  impurity scattering will then be formulated and
              applied to  measurements of thermal and electric al conductivities and  Hall
              coefficients in the superconducting state.  %%%  Theoretical research will be
              conducted on various aspects of  superconductivity in the high temperature
              superconductors  and the so-called heavy-fermion superconductors.  In 
              particular, studies will be made of transport properties and  on the effects of
              disorder and magnetic fields on  superconducting state properties.  ***
