Title       : CAREER: Project Lab, A Research-Intensive Laboratory Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2001   
File        : a9600864

Award Number: 9600864
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $333000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leilani M. Miller lmiller@scu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600864  Miller  Funds are requested to develop, implement, and evaluate an
              innovative laboratory course at Santa Clara University in which undergraduate
              students will participate in a supervised reserach project.  This research
              project is directly related to ongoing research in the laboratory of the
              principal investigator.  The course will be named "Project Lab" and will be
              taught for one quarter each year.  Each year, the course will focus on research
              activities appropriate for that particular stage of the research project.  The
              addition of this course will enhance the science education of undergraduate
              students at Santa Clara University by providing hands-on laboratory experience
              and exposure to real research problems.  Specifically, students will study how
              cells choose their fates in the soil nematode, Caenorhabditis elegans.    In
              any particular year, students will be exposed to several different types of
              experimental techniques and procedures.  Furthermore, equipment requested in
              this proposal will enhance SCU science facilities to allow students access to
              state-of-the-art technologies.  Students will participate in the design,
              implementation, and data analysis of each experiment included in that year's
              Project Lab course.  In addition, papers from the primary literature on topics
              directly related to the research project will be assigned and discussed.  At
              the end of the quarter, students will assimilate and present their data as a
              poster presentation to the rest of the class.  Each year, several students will
              present their posters at a local undergraduate research conference and some
              will paricipate in a poster session at a regional or international C. elegans
              conference.  Finally, during the rest of the academic year and summer, two or
              three undergraduate students who have participated in the course will continue
              their research under the supervision of the PI.  These extended research
              experiences will provide intensive research exposure to highly motivated
              students, in addition to sharpe ning their critical thinking skills.    The
              goals of his project are:    1) to provide direct research experience to a
              significant number of undergraduate students at SCU  2) to motivate, attract,
              and retain qualified students (particularly women and underrepresented
              minorities) to pursue graduate studies in the biological sciences  3) to promot
              critical thinking  4) to enhance SCU science facilities to support modern
              technologies  5) to understand how cell fates are specified in C. elegans
