Title       : Solution NMR Study of the Electronic and Molecular Structures of
               Hyperthermostable Ferredoxins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1998     
File        : a9600759

Award Number: 9600759
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $315000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerd N. La Mar lamar@chem.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600759  LaMar  The molecular and electronic structural and dynamic properties
              of ferredoxins (Fds), from a series of hyperthermophilic archaea, Pyroccus
              furiosus, Pf, Thermococcus litoralis, Tl, and the as yet unnamed ES-4 and
              JDF-3, will be elucidated by NMR.  These small electron transfer Fd possess
              paramagnetic clusters at ambient temperature in both oxidation states.  The
              appropriate tailoring of 1D and 2D NMR methods, as augmented by 3D NMR on
              select N-15 labeled Fd, to detect and assign all paramagnetically influenced
              resonances is expected to provide:  the sequence-specific identification of the
              valence states for he individual iron in the reduced cluster; elucidation of
              the influence of ligand mutation and/or exogenous ligands in modulating the
              overall cluster redox potential as well as the individual iron oxidation
              states; the spectral signatures of non cysteine ligands for identifying protein
              ligands in other iron-sulfur cluster enzymes; a protocol for utilizing various
              paramagnetic spectral data for use as structural constraints to substitute for
              lost conventional NMR constraints near the cluster; and, lastly, but most
              importantly, robust molecular models for these Fds.  The pf, ES-4 and JDF-3 Fds
              also possess a pair of remote Cys which serve as 2e- 2H+ redox sites at
              essentially the same potential as the cluster.  The complete time resolution of
              the resulting four Fd redox states at ambient temperature is expected to
              provide unique insight into the influence of each step in modulating the
              protein architecture both near and remote from the cluster, as well as the
              structural basis of the large reorganizational energy for cluster electron
              transfer in these Fd.  The resulting molecular structures are expected to shed
              light on what structural properties impart the remarkable thermostability
              (negligible denaturation at 95(C over 24h) to these proteins in spite of
              significant sequence homology to much less stable Fds from mesophiles.  The
              identification of "stabilizing structural motifs" i n the present Fds may
              permit future introduction by mutagenesis of the "motifs" to increase
              thermostability of industrial biocatalysts.  The characterization of these
              ferredoxins will also contribute to the understanding of these novel organisms
              (archaea) that are proposed to be the most ancient and slowly evolving form of
              life and possibly the closest living descendant to a universal life form.  %%% 
              The molecular structures of a series of small ((60 amino acid residues)
              electron transfer proteins called ferredoxins will be determined by solution
              proton nuclear magnetic resonance and the resulting structures used to
              interpret properties relevant to their role in electron transfer.  The
              ferredoxins are selected from a number of archaebacteria (i.e. Pyrococcus
              furiosus, Thermococcus litoralis) that live in deep ocean volcano vents at
              temperatures of boiling water.  The goal is to define the interactions among
              the various pairs of residues in these ferredoxins and to relate differences in
              these interactions in the high temperature-state archaebacteria ferredoxins
              with similar proteins of more normal eubacteria which are stable at 37(C, but
              rapidly denature at temperatures much higher than 50(C.  The understanding of
              the types of interactions that contribute to the high temperature stability may
              provide clues as how to increase by site-directed mutagenesis the high
              temperature stability of enzymes used in the biotechnology industry.  The
              proposed studies will also contribute to the understanding of these relatively
              recently discovered archaebacteria which are proposed to be the closest living
              descendants of the earliest forms of life on this planet.  ***
