Title       : International Research Fellow Awards Program: Identification of AFLP Markers
               Linked to Disease Resistance Genes in the Commercial Strawberry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9600487

Award Number: 9600487
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth M. Haymes k.m.h.haymes@cpro.dlo.nl  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5948,5956,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9600487  Haymes      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twentyfour  months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit of Dr. Kenneth M. Haymes to work with Dr. ir A. M.
              P.  den Nijs at the Centre for Plant Breeding and Reproductive  Research
              (CPRO-DLO) in Wageningen, Netherlands.        Dr. Haymes and Dr. den Nijs will
              use molecular techniques to  obtain markers for regions of the strawberry
              genome that are  linked to genes Pfr1, Pfr2 and Pfr6, which confer resistance 
              to the pathogenic fungus Phytophthora fragariae Hickman (red  stele root rot). 
              They will also look at existing strawberry  stocks for the presence of these
              markers to develop a  rational breeding program for improved resistance to 
              Phytophthora infection.  A powerful mapping technique,  amplified fragment
              length polymorphism (AFLP) will be used  following bulked segregant analysis to
              attempt to isolate  markers closely linked to the Pfr1 marker.  Bulked
              segregant  analysis and AFLP will then be applied to obtain markers  near to
              the other resistance genes.  The commercial  strawberry is octaploid and thus
              molecular markers are the  best hope for accomplishing rational linkage studies
              of  disease resistance and other traits.  Once they obtain  markers that are
              tightly linked to genes which increase  resistance to fungal infection, plant
              stocks will be  examined for the purpose of identifying appropriate breeding 
              stocks to produce strawberry plants containing multiple  resistance genes.  ***
