Title       : International Research Fellow Awards Program: The Biotic Consequences of Andean
               Uplift
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9600394

Award Number: 9600394
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41651              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Madden   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1306,5911,5956,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9600394  Madden      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards  provide opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of  unique or complementary facilities, expertise and 
              experimental conditions abroad.    This award will support a nine-month
              postdoctoral research  visit which will support Dr. Robert H. Madden of Duke 
              University to work with Professor Guiomar Vucetich at the  Universidad Nacional
              de La Plata in Brazil.  There project  is entitled, "The Biotic Consequences of
              Andean Uplift:  Inferences About the Mammalian Fossil Record Based on  Living
              Rodents and Other Mammals."        The purpose of this research is to explore
              the influence of  Andean orogeny on the Mio-Pliocene faunal record based on 
              estimates of rainfall and elevation from the composition  and structure of
              mammalian assemblages.  Inferences about  rainfall and paleoelevation will be
              based on patterns in  the organization of living mammals distributed along 
              elevation and rainfall gradients in South America framed in  terms of
              attributes that can be recognized in the fossil  record.  Of the methods
              currently available for estimating  rainfall and paleotemperature, faunal
              methods are probably  the least well-developed, and yet may provide the best 
              complement to methods based on stable isotopes and fossil  flora.  Faunal
              methods have been undertaken to distinguish  between major biomes (e.g.,
              grassland vs forest) or to  document departures from modern conditions.  These
              methods  open the possibility of reconstructing the environmental  history of
              Andean uplift in South America through the late  Neogene.  The ability to
              determine estimates of mean annual  rainfall and paleoelevation using the
              mammalian fossil  record depends on the quality of that record, especially 
              adequate sampling and modern taxonomic revision to the  species level.  The
              best available fossil records for the  studies are those o f altiplano Bolivia
              and northern  Argentina.  ***
