Title       : Topics in Classical and Quantum Relativity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9600616

Award Number: 9600616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Torre torre@cc.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A number of problems in mathematical relativity and quantum  gravity will be
              carried out by Prof. Torre.  In mathematical  relativity advantage is taken of
              recent results on the jet  space structure of the vacuum Einstein equations. 
              In  detail, the modern theory of conservation laws, which  provides a practical
              framework for computing conserved  volume, surface and line integrals
              associated to a system of  field equations, is applied to the Einstein
              equations.  The  conservation laws of the Einstein equations with and without 
              Killing vectors are computed.  A general theory of  asymptotic conservation
              laws, which describes surface  integral conservation laws of solutions with a
              given  asymptotic structure, such as the ADM energy, is developed  and used to
              give a formalism for computing such conservation  laws for a large class of
              generally covariant field  equations and asymptotic structures.  These results
              are  applied to the problem of giving a definition of `dynamical  black hole
              entropy`.  Finally, recent results on symmetry  reductions of partial
              differential equations are used to  give general theorems on symmetry
              reductions of generally  covariant field equations for a spacetime metric.  In
              quantum gravity, work involves both canonical and path  integral methods of
              quantization of the gravitational field.  The problem of functional evolution
              in canonical quantum  gravity is addressed via symmetry-reduced models of
              general  relativity obtained by assuming the existence of two  commuting
              Killing vector fields.  These models are quantized  rigorously and consistently
              with respect to general  covariance.  The possibility of accomplishing a Dirac 
              quantization of a parametrized free field theory in  Minkowski space is
              addressed using techniques from algebraic  quantization.  Path integral
              quantization is studied using  Ashtekar variables.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
