Title       : Japan STA Program: Carbon Dioxide Reforming of Methane
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1998      
File        : a9600283

Award Number: 9600283
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Schmitz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, PA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9153,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9600283  Schmitz    This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency
               of Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Andrew  Schmitz at the Hokkaido
              National Research Institute,  Sapporo, Japan.  Dr. Schmitz will work with Dr.
              Tadashi  Yoshida, Director of the Macromolecular Science Section, on  a
              research project entitled "Carbon Dioxide Reforming of  Methane".    The
              proposed research will develop techniques used in  carbon dioxide reforming of
              methane to produce synthesis gas  (carbon monoxide and hydrogen).  Synthesis
              gas is an  important feedstock for production of higher-value chemicals  such
              as methanol, acetic acid and hydrocarbons.  Consequently, carbon dioxide
              reforming of methane is an  important step in the conversion of two greenhouse
              gases  into useful chemicals.  This reforming reaction can also be  used to
              store energy from a solar, nuclear or fossil fuel  source as chemical energy. 
              The energy can then be released  on demand by reversing the chemical reaction
              or by synthesis  gas combustion.  Carbon dioxide reforming of methane  requires
              high reaction temperatures (in excess of 500 =BAC)  where catalyst deactivation
              is an important concern.  To  identify promising multimetallic catalysts for
              development,  research will focus on the comparative performance of  candidate
              multimetallic catalysts with that of known  monometallic catalysts for carbon
              dioxide reforming of  methane. Catalyst activity and deactivation rate in the 
              reforming reaction will be evaluated using a quartz-tube  flow reactor. 
              Furthermore, a study of catalyst  physicochemical properties will be used to
              identify  deactivation mechanisms and to tailor multimetallic catalyst 
              compositions to achieve high activity and high deactivation  resistance. 
              Parameters of focus are identification of which  multimetallic systems show
              enhanced performance compared to  monometallic systems, and what relative metal
              concentrations  are required to optimize multimetallic catalyst performance. 
              ***
