Title       : U.S.-Chile Cooperative Research: Inclusive Charge-Exchange Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1998     
File        : a9600417

Award Number: 9600417
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diaz                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12456              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacobo Rapaport   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,5974,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600417  Rapaport    This Americas Program award will support a collaborative 
              research project between Dr. Jacobo Rapaport, Ohio  University, and Dr.
              Francisco Brieva, Universidad de Chile.  The researchers  intend to address
              basic issues related to  the understanding of the reaction and excitation
              mechanisms  in nucleon induced inclusive reactions. The purpose of the  planned
              experiments is to provide high quality data on spin  transfer for subsequent
              theoretical interpretation and  analysis.  The objectives are to develop a
              theoretical  framework to interpret the data in terms of couplings  between
              reaction and excitation mechanisms and to study the  dependence on the
              nucleon-nucleon interaction.  The  experiment might eventually lead to a much
              more fundamental  understanding of nuclear phenomena in terms of a microscopic 
              theory.    The microscopic understanding of simple nuclear phenomena  relating
              to the structure and reaction degrees of freedom  has been greatly enhanced in
              the last few years both from  the experimental and theoretical approaches. 
              However,  there still exist important and troubling questions about  how a
              nucleus responds to certain classes of external  stimuli.  The proposed
              experiments, to take place at the  Indiana University Cyclotron Facility,
              should provide a  complete set of data to test more deeply the different 
              theoretical models.  The  group of the University of Chile  will develop new
              theoretical calculations  to explain the  data by working on the development of
              a microscopic theory  for reactions. They will then construct the codes for 
              calculating the corresponding observables.  The results of  this collaborative
              effort could be a major contribution to  the field of charge exchange in
              nuclear reactions.  ***
