Title       : Protein Folding Studied by Pressure Perturbation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 17,  1997  
File        : a9600523

Award Number: 9600523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dexter B. Northrop dbnorthrop@pharmacy.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Catherine A. Royer  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600523  Royer  The overall goal of the proposed research is to provide 
              fundamental, new knowledge about the physical mechanisms by  which small
              globular proteins of particular sequence adopt a  particular three-dimensional
              structure characterized by a  particular fold, stability and function.  The
              proposed  research will take advantage of the slow folding kinetics  and
              depressed freezing point of water which are unique to  the pressure
              perturbation approach.  High hydrostatic  pressure will be combined with a
              variety of physical  chemical measurements (fluorescence, infrared spectroscopy
               and small angle x-ray scattering) on two model proteins,  staphyloccocal
              nuclease and apomyoglobin, to address the  following issues fundamental to
              protein folding.  i.) The  nature of the transition state in protein folding
              ii.)  Molten globule intermediates of protein folding iii.)  Characteristics of
              cold denaturation.  %%%  These high pressure studies using a combination of 
              spectroscopic techniques will provide unique and fundamental  information about
              protein folding unavailable from  alternative perturbation approaches.  This is
              because the  effect of pressure is to slow down the folding and unfolding 
              process by several orders of magnitude.  Given such slow  kinetics,
              measurements of structural properties can be made  on the timescale of minutes
              rather than nano to  microseconds, providing kinetic profiles using techniques 
              which are extremely difficult to apply to the much shorter  timescales that
              characterize folding at atmospheric  pressure.  This approach will yield
              structural information  about the transition state and kinetic information
              about the  multiple states in the folding pathway of apomyoglobin.  A  second
              unique advantage of high pressure stems from the  unusual phase diagram of
              water, which remains liquid to -20  C at 2kbar of pressure, allowing for the
              direct observation  of cold denaturation at high pressure using all of the
              above  mentioned physical techniques.  The phenomenon of co ld  denaturation,
              the kinetics and characteristics of molten  globule intermediates and the
              nature of the rate limiting  step in folding remain among the least well
              characterized  aspects of protein folding and stability.  ***
