Title       : CAREER: Biochemical and Genetic Analysis of Vacuole-Mediated Mitochondrial
               Turnover
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9600975

Award Number: 9600975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284375             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Thorsness Thorsnes@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600975  Thorsness   This research project is focused on understanding the
              integration of mitochondrial and cellular metabolism, specifically the turnover
              of mitochondrial compartments.  In the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae,
              mitochondrial compartments that are damaged or in excess of what is required
              for optimum cellular metabolism are specifically taken up and degraded by the
              vacuole.  In order to further investigate this process, a novel assay that
              monitors autophagy of mitochondria by vacuoles has been developed.  A yeast
              strain has been constructed in which the only alkaline phosphatase activity in
              the cell is localized in the mitochondrial compartment.  This alkaline
              phosphatase is inactive unless it is activated by a specific proteolytic event
              that occurs only in the vacuole.  Thus, changes in growth conditions,
              mutations, or damage by chemicals that alter the rate of autophagy of
              mitochondrial compartments by vacuoles can be easily monitored by assaying
              alkaline phosphatase activity.  A specific goal of this project is to define
              physiologically relevant events that change the rate of turnover of
              mitochondrial compartments.  The autophagy assay will be used to investigate
              the catabolite inactivation of mitochondrial activities occurring in yeast upon
              changes in culture conditions.  A second goal is to investigate the stability
              of mitochondrial compartments with respect to vacuolar function upon the
              inducement of damage to mitochondria by chemicals and drugs that inhibit
              mitochondrial activities.  Finally, a plate assay for mitochondrial autophagy
              will be developed with the long range goal of using that assay for the
              identification of vacuolar and mitochondrial gene products that are required
              for the turnover of mitochondrial compartments.  %%%   In addition to being an
              important site of cellular energy production, mitochondria are also the site of
              many essential biosynthetic operations.  Thus, mitochondria are essential
              components of all eucaryotic cells.  Under some circumstances, mitoch ondrial
              compartments can be damaged by environmental toxins or be present in excess and
              consequently need to be destroyed by the vacuole, a site of degradation in the
              cell.  This research project is designed to identify what types of damage lead
              to destruction of mitochondrial compartments and what metabolic conditions
              result in excess mitochondria that are subsequently destroyed.  Additionally,
              the components of mitochondria and vacuoles that are necessary for this
              destruction will be identified.  ***
