Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Numerical Methods for Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9600088

Award Number: 9600088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Skeel skeel@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9183,9216,9251,9263,BIOT,HPCC,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9600088  Skeel    The work involves the analysis, synthesis, and testing of
              efficient numerical   time stepping schemes for the long-time simulation of
              Hamiltonian systems   of differential equations.  This is motivated by the
              desire to improve the   performance of computer programs that simulate the
              dynamics of   biomolecules, with particular attention to the MDScope simulation
              program   NAMD/SIgMA.  Much of the proposed work is general and applies
              directly   to a variety of applications modeled by Hamiltonian systems, such as
                astrophysics, some structural dynamics problems, and wave propagation.   
              Some of the work is less general but can be adapted to other applications.   
              Typically, the complicated dynamics of Hamiltonian systems is a combined  
              effect of many simple interactions, often having a range of time scales.  A  
              key emphasis of the research is the development of sound "long-timestep"  
              methods, which exploit the slowness present in many components of the   motion
              and the possible regularity present in other components.  More   specifically,
              such methods evaluate some interactions at time increments   that well exceed
              half the period of the fast modes of the system.  Another   emphasis is the
              design of time stepping schemes that can compute long   trajectories having the
              right qualities.  A specific goal is the construction of   a multiple time
              stepping scheme that can be used both with long timesteps   and for long-time
              simulations--existing schemes fail in one respect or the   other.  Another
              specific goal is to reduce the cost of certain calculations,   such as
              inverse-square-law forces, by reducing their accuracy without   sacrificing
              qualitative properties.    Mathematical formulas are being devised that can
              predict typical motions of   large molecules such as proteins and DNA.  The aim
              is find shortcuts that   enable very fast calculations on large computers. 
              These ideas are tested for   accuracy and speed, and the more useful ones are
              put into the software that   biologis ts and other scientists use to study the
              action of molecules.    Computer simulations can help the scientist to
              understand how molecules   perform biological functions, which can be very
              difficult to observe   experimentally. Such studies are also useful in the
              design of molecules for   agricultural and medical purposes.  Much of the
              proposed work is general   and extends to other applications in which
              dissipation is negligible, such as   astrophysics, some structural dynamics
              problems, and wave propagation.
