Title       : Structural Motifs in RNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  2000       
File        : a9600971

Award Number: 9600971
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Perona perona@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600971  Perona  Recent discoveries of new catalytic functions of RNA have
              greatly heightened awareness of the pivotal role of this molecule in living
              organisms. A full appreciation of the biological function of RNA must include a
              thorough description of how its three-dimensional structure is organized, but
              to date very few atomic-level descriptions of RNA molecules are available. Our
              previous work on crystallization and structure determination of the
              glutaminyl-tRNA synthetase-tRNAGIn complex provides a unique vehicle to rapidly
              determine the structures of new domains of RNA, the focus of the proposed
              project. The pre-existing crystal lattice of this large protein-RNA complex
              will be exploited by inserting new domains of RNA into specific positions of
              the tRNA, so that the new material is accomodated in the solvent interstices of
              the crystal. In-vitro selection methods are employed to obtain novel hybrid RNA
              molecules which fold correctly and retain biological activity. These new RNAs
              are chosen for their potential to teach us the underlying rules of
              three-dimensional folding and for their present-day biological significance. A
              rapid increase in new RNA structures will provide fundamental insight into
              RNA-based cellular processes and may have further implications to defining a
              new class of targets for structure-based drug design.  The establishment of a
              laboratory engaged in Macromolecular Crystallography has been a long-awaited
              development at UCSB. Consequently, a significant activity in the next five
              years will be the education of students as well as other faculty members in
              related fields. Because a joint appointment is held in Chemistry and in an
              Interdepartmental Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Program (BMB), the range
              of interactions will be especially broad. A new graduate course in
              crystallography will be developed, and an existing course in Physical
              Biochemistry has already been extensively revised. State of the art data
              collection and computer graphics facilities enhance the educat ional
              opportunities by providing hands-on experience in the most important
              techniques. The arrival of crystallography also marks the onset of a long-term
              growth phase in Biochemistry and Biophysics at UCSB. Thus, there will be
              substantial participation in several new undergraduate curricula related to
              Structural Biology: a new B.S. degree in Biochemistry to be awarded by the
              Chemistry department, and an interdisciplinary program in Pharmacological
              Sciences. The University also possesses strong commitments to supporting
              undergraduate research opportunities, as manifested by programs funded by the
              Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Materials Research Laboratory. Direct
              mentoring of undergraduates in the laboratory will be an important aspect of
              the educational program. Collaborative projects inside the University, as well
              as with senior scientists at other institutions, enhance the educational
              opportunities for students in the laboratory.  %%%  The fundamental
              building-block molecules in all living cells are DNA, RNA and protein. DNA
              encodes the genetic information within its nucleotide sequence, but for the
              cell to function this information must first be copied into a similar molecule,
              RNA, and then translated into protein. Until recently it was thought that
              proteins were the only molecules in cells capable of carrying out the necessary
              chemical and mechanical life processes. However, new discoveries have shown
              that RNA has a similar capability. We seek to understand how RNA can perform
              complex functions historically attributed only to protein. To do this requires
              visualization of RNA structure in three dimensions, a feat accomplished by
              inducing very pure samples of RNA to form well-ordered crystals which are
              analyzed by Xray diffraction. In our laboratory we are developing a new
              experimental system to grow crystals of RNA molecules bound to protein rather
              than in the usual unbound state. This system has the potential to allow us to
              rapidly determine many new RNA structures. We expect that  the structures will
              provide us with fundamental insight into the functional roles of RNA in
              essential cellular processes.  ***
