Title       : Japan STA Program: Studies on the Interdependancy of N-linked Protein
               Glycosylation and Cell Cycle START in the Yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1997   
File        : a9600341

Award Number: 9600341
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph L. Horecka   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600341  Horecka    This award supports a 12-month Japanese Science and 
              Technology Agency (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Joseph Horecka at the
              National Institute for Bioscience and  Human-Technology in Tsukuba, Japan.  Dr.
              Horecka will work  with Dr. Yoshifumi Jigami, Director of the Molecular Biology
               Department, on a research project entitled, "Studies on the  Interdependency
              of N-linked Protein Glycosylation and Cell  Cycle START in the Yeast
              Saccharomyces Cerevisiae."    The proposed research will investigate the
              inter-dependency  between asparagine-linked (N-linked) glycosylation and cell 
              cycle START in the budding yeast Saccharomyces Cerevisiae.  Asparagine-linked
              protein glycosylation occurs ubiquitously  in eukaryotes and serves to modulate
              the structure and  function of cellular and secreted proteins.  The variety of 
              roles played by N-linked glycoproteins range from yeast cell  wall components
              to mammalian growth factor receptors.  In  both yeast and mammals N-linked
              glycosyla-tion is required  for progression through cell cycle START, the point
              in late  G1 at which cells commit to a new round of DNA synthesis and  cell
              division.  Although the basis for this requirement is  unknown, its elucidation
              will reveal novel mechanisms of  eukaryotic cell cycle control.  Two specific
              analyses will  be undertaken in the research. First, a molecular genetic 
              approach will be used to identify genes that function to  connect the N-linked
              glycosylation pathway and the cell  cycle machinery.  Second,  the
              transcription regulation of  OCH1 will be further characterized.  Since the
              enzymes  involved in both N-linked glycosylation and cell cycle  control are
              similar in all eukaryotes, it is reasonable to  expect that the results from
              this project can be generalized  to mammals.  ***
