Title       : Rural Responses To Early Urbanism: Village Economy and Ecology in the Jordan
               Valley
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1996  
File        : a9600995

Award Number: 9600995
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56808              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Falconer falconer@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia L. Fall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Drs. Steven Falconer and Patricia Fall
              will conduct one season of archaeological fieldwork at the site of Tell Abu
              en-Ni'ai in Jordan. This will be followed by analysis of faunal, floral,
              ceramic and lithic materials collected and preparation for publication of the
              resultant information. A brief test excavation by the investigators in 1985
              suggests that Ni'aj was a largely sedentary agrarian village during the Early
              Bronze IV period, a time of dramatic city abandonment and increased mobile
              pastoralism throughout the region. These soundings revealed three shallow
              strata with readily accessible domestic architecture and abundant material
              remains. In their current excavations the team will explore rural agrarian
              ecology and patterns of household behavior. Substantial samples of material
              evidence will be collected from all three of Ni'aj's strata and extensive
              lateral excavation in the uppermost of these will provide detailed information
              of village and household layout.  While the Near East is seen as a cradle of
              one major civilization and the process of development is often viewed as
              unilineal from small hunting and gathering bands to a state level of
              organization, this in fact is not the case. The Early Bronze Age is of
              particular archaeological interest because its close marks a time of collapse
              when urban centers were abandoned and level of complexity appeared to decrease.
              Little is know about the factors responsible for this change. Although most
              people during the Bronze Age did not live in urban settings, very little
              attention has been focused on smaller rural sites. Ni'aj represents just such
              an occurrence and the proposed research is important both because it will
              provide a more complete picture of Bronze Age society and offer insight into
              the processes involved in the collapse.  Previous work has demonstrated that
              Ni'aj is rich in both faunal and floral remains and the investigators will
              devote considerable attention to the collection and analyses of these
              materials. Therefore they will learn a great deal about human-environmental
              interactions in a semi-arid region. The results of their research will be of
              significance to archaeologists and a wide range of environmental scientists.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
