Title       : The Mathematics Teacher Development (MTD) Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2000      
File        : a9600023

Award Number: 9600023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1040829            (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin A. Simon msimon@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ron Tzur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9600023
Abstract

OVERVIEW:  The MTD Project is studying the development of
              preservice and inservice mathematics teachers of kindergarten through grade 6
              as they develop their teaching practices in the direction of current
              mathematics education reforms.  The research studies these teachers in the
              context of an intensive instructional program and supervised field experience. 
              It seeks to identify patterns of teacher development, obstacles for preservice
              teachers, and key issues that emerge during the professional development
              process.

STRATEGIES:  The project's first instructional component is a
              series of five academic-year courses, for a combined group of prospective and
              practicing elementary and middle school teachers, taught by the project
              director.  In 1996, participants completed the first course designed to foster
              mathematical knowledge, confidence, and competence and to provide an
              experiential base for mathematics instruction that reflects the national
              standards.  The second course (1997) will focus on students' mathematical
              thinking; participants will conduct student interviews to investigate students'
              understanding of mathematics.  The third, fourth and fifth courses (1997 and
              1998) will provide an integrated look at the learning and teaching of key
              concepts in the elementary school mathematics curriculum.

	During the
              project's second component, each inservice teacher is paired with a project
              staff member, who visits one of the teacher's mathematics classes weekly to
              observe and provide feedback or teach model lessons; they then meet to outline
              future action plans, discuss useful resources, and address problems and issues
              that arise.  Each preservice teacher also works directly with an inservice
              teacher, with increasing responsibility in the classroom culminating in a
              full-time student teaching experience in 1998.

IMPACT:  Fifteen preservice
              teachers and 13 teachers from five elementary schools and two middle schools in
              the State College Area School District are participating.

	The research
              focuses on the individual and collective development of the teachers through
              whole-class teaching experiments and individual case studies.  Data collected
              through classroom videotapes of participants teaching and being taught, notes
              taken during site visits, student work, and audiotaped teacher interviews.  The
              case studies of the development of three teachers and three prospective
              teachers also include audiotaped interviews every two weeks and videotaped
              observations in their classrooms each month.  In addition. these teachers'
              meetings with project staff and preservice teachers are audiotaped.  Beginning
              in 1997, annual meetings with an advisory panel of university faculty,
              policymakers, and teachers will be held to discuss the project's progress.  A
              summative evaluation report will be available upon conclusion.  

	The
              project has proposed a paper about teachers' basic teaching models at the 1997
              National Council of Teachers of Mathematics annual meeting. Project staff and
              participants will present their findings at additional national and
              international conferences and will publish them in professional
              journals.

PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATORS:  Martin A. Simon, Ron Tzur



