Title       : Research Planning Grant: Retinoid Modulation of jun and myb in Rat Sertoli Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1996      
File        : a9600897

Award Number: 9600897
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elvira Doman                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen Creed Page kpage@coral.bucknell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bucknell University
	      Office of Finance
	      Lewisburg, PA  17837    570/577-3334

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9221,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Regulation of spermatogenesis is a remarkable process about which little is
              known.  While circulating hormones clearly play a role in initiating and
              controlling this system of rapid cell differentiation, the Sertoli cell is an
              important mediator of molecular information traveling from the blood to the
              developing sperm.  To date only five factors have been shown to play a definite
              and essential role in modulating spermatogenesis:  FSH, testosterone, stem-cell
              factor, c-fos, and Vitamin A.  Dr. Page is focusing on Vitamin A as a molecular
              switch for particular proto-oncogene transcription factors including fos and
              jun, the genes that code for components of the API complex, as well as myb, all
              of which are expressed in the Sertoli cell.  A current model for steroid action
              proposes that these compounds act as master switches for gene transcription and
              supports the notion that retinoids, as members of the steroid/thyroid-receptor
              supergenefamily, can also be considered as molecular switches for regulatory
              cascades.  Dr. Page's hypothesis is that retinoid-inducible gene transcription
              in the seminiferous tubules is modulated not by an alteration in a single
              transcription factor, such as the RAR-alpha receptor, but through regulation of
              a complex of multiple interacting factors including the proteins encoded by
              fos, jun, and myb.  Under this Research Planning Grant, Dr. Page will extend
              her recent studies, which demonstrate the up-regulation of both jun and myb
              gene expression following Vitamin-A stimulation of rat Sertoli cells, by
              evaluating the effects of Vitamin A on c-fos mRNA using Northern-blot analysis.
               The levels of the protein products translated from these proto-oncogenes will
              be determined using Western-blot techniques as well as immunostaining of
              testicular tissue.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
