Title       : dsDNA Packaging by Viruses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1998       
File        : a9600574

Award Number: 9600574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherwood R. Casjens sherwood.casjens@path.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600574  Casjens  The long term objective of this project is the furtherance of
              our knowledge of the life cycle of dsDNA viruses by gaining an understanding of
              the molecular mechanisms by which these viruses package DNA and assemble
              progeny virions within infected cells. The particular virus chosen for this
              study, bacteriophage P22, serves as a model for similar processes in less
              experimentally accessible eukaryotic viruses such as the dsDNA Herpesviruses
              and Adenoviruses. The P22 system is one of the most highly studied virus
              systems, both genetically and biochemically. This type of virus assembles
              protein shells, called procapsids, first and then inserts the dsDNA chromosomes
              into these shells. The icosahedral P22 procapsid contains three critical
              polypeptides, an external coat protein, an internal scaffolding protein and the
              portal protein. In addition, two non-structural P22 encoded proteins are
              critical in the DNA recognition/entry process. The coat protein forms the
              exterior shell of the virus particle, the scaffolding protein is required to
              build the procapsid but leaves the structure before DNA enters, and the portal
              protein forms a ring-shaped structure at one vertex of the icosahedral protein
              shell. DNA is thought to enter into this preformed capsid through the portal
              structure. The procapsid is a central feature of this viral assembly strategy
              and few details are known about its assembly and function. We propose to
              examine the mechanism of assembly of the P22 procapsid. In particular, the
              function of the scaffolding protein, which guides the coat protein assembly by
              co-assembling with it, will be studied in detail. After co-assembly with coat,
              scaffolding protein is released, and so functions catalytically in virion
              assembly. Questions will be addressed from genetic, biochemical, biophysical
              and structural directions. Knowledge gained will contribute to the
              understanding of the life cycle of the dsDNA viruses, and will also be relevant
              to all studies of the catalysis of macromolecular  assembly.  %%%  The
              objective of this project is to understand the molecular mechanisms by which
              dsDNA viruses package DNA and assemble progeny virions within infected cells.
              Knowledge gained will contribute to the understanding of the life cycle of
              dsDNA viruses and to the catalysis of macromolecular assembly. Bacteriophage
              P22 is chosen as a model for this investigation. P22 assembles protein shells
              first and then inserts the dsDNA chromosomes into these shells. The icosahedral
              P22 procapsid shell contains three critical structural polypeptides namely an
              external coat protein, an internal scaffolding protein which is required to
              build the procapsid but leaves the structure before DNA enters, and a
              ring-shaped portal protein through which DNA is thought to enter into this
              preformed capsid. Two additional non-structural proteins that are critical for
              the DNA recognition/entry process are also present in the procapsid. The
              procapsid is a central feature of this viral assembly strategy, yet few details
              are known about its assembly and function. We propose to examine the detailed
              catalytic function of the scaffolding protein which guides the coat protein
              assembly and co-assembles with it and is followed by its own release using
              genetic, biochemical, biophysical and structural approaches.  ***
