Title       : RAS Proto-Oncogene Function in Corpus Luteum Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1998     
File        : a9600915

Award Number: 9600915
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $213000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura T. Goldsmith goldsmit@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      New Jersey Medical School, MSB C
	      Newark, NJ  07103    973/972-7090

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600915  Goldsmith    The most important function of the individual in
              contributing to the maintenance of any biological species is reproduction.  In
              fact, all organ systems of any vertebrate organism function to maintain life to
              enable reproduction to occur.  In all mammalian species, reproductive success
              is critically dependent upon normal function of the ovary.  Normal production
              and secretion of specific steroid and protein hormones.  In the mammalian
              ovary, the oocyte is encased in several layers of cells which secrete the
              female sex steroid hormone estrogen.  At ovulation, the oocyte is extruded from
              the ovary and the calls which previously surrounded the oocyte are changed into
              a structure called the corpus luteum  The cells of the corpus luteum, the
              luteal cells, secrete the female sex steroid hormone, progesterone.  The
              secretion of progesterone from the corpus luteum in the proper amounts for the
              proper time period is required for successful reproduction.  If circulating
              progesterone levels are too low or if secretion of the proper amounts occurs
              for too short of a time period, implantation of the fertilized oocyte will not
              occur or if implantation does occur, the pregnancy will not be maintained.  In
              the case of a nonpregnant cycle, if progesterone levels are too high, or
              secretion occurs for too long a time period, a subsequent ovulation will not
              occur.  Thus, progesterone secretion from the corpus luteum is a critical
              determinant of reproductive success.  The cells of the corpus luteum respond,
              through biochemical mechanisms, to blood born hormonal substances which control
              the normal secretion of progesterone.  The specific biochemical mechanisms
              which allow the luteal cells to respond to those hormones which control
              progesterone secretion are at present unknown.  It is, in fact, these
              mechanisms that are responsible for normal luteal function.  The PI has
              recently discovered that, in the rat, the amounts of a particular protein, the
              K-ras p21 protein, contained in the ovary mirror  the pattern of secretion of
              progesterone from the corpus luteum.  Furthermore, when an antibody against
              this protein was incorporated into luteal cells in vitro, progesterone
              secretion from these cells was significantly decreased, thus demonstrating that
              this protein plays a role in the production/secretion of progesterone by the
              luteal cell.  It is the objective of this proposal to determine the specific
              way in which the K-ras p21 protein affects luteal progesterone secretion and to
              determine whether this p21 protein plays a role in the secretion of other
              hormones from the corpus luteum.  The K-ras p21 protein is present in all
              mammalian cells.  Thus, the results of the proposed studies will have a
              significant impact upon the understanding of ovarian hormone secretory
              mechanisms as well as understanding of the ways in which all mammalian cells
              respond to hormones and growth factors.
