Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Computational Studies of Novel Carbenes and Nitrines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9600174

Award Number: 9600174
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7436               (Estimated)
Investigator: Athanassios Nicolaides   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TX Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, TX  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9600174  Nicolaides    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Athanassios
              Nicolaides at the Chemistry Department for  Materials, Mie University, Mie,
              Japan.  Dr. Nicolaides will  work with Dr. Hideo Tomioka, Professor of
              Engineering, on a  research project entitled, "Computational Studies of  Novel 
              Carbenes and Nitrenes."    The proposed research focuses on an effort to
              design,  synthesize, and characterize novel compounds containing  carbenic
              and/or nitrenic centers linked by strong  ferromagnetic coupling units.  In
              contrast to normal organic  compounds, carbenes and nitrenes interact strongly
              with  magnetic fields, making them promising building blocks for  the synthesis
              of organic materials with magnetic properties  comparable to or even better
              than those of metals.  The  proposed research aims at understanding how the
              life-time of  such reactive species can be extended, while both preserving 
              their desirable magnetic properties and understanding how  such properties can
              be improved.  Although this is a  relatively new topic of research, the
              compounds being tested  are highly reactive and, as such, are of a high
              scientific  and technological significance.  ***
