Title       : Relativistic Gravitation and Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2000   
File        : a9600049

Award Number: 9600049
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $520829             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clifford M. Will cmw@wuphys.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program will continue to extend post-Newtonian  calculations of
              gravitational radiation to the highest  practicable order, with the goal of
              developing more accurate  and reliable theoretical templates for gravitational 
              radiation observatories, as well as of achieving deeper  understanding of
              Einstein's equations as applied to highly  dynamical, strong-gravity
              situations.  This effort will  involve (i) formal theoretical work on the
              foundations of  such approximation methods, (ii) specific calculation of 
              higher-order effects in both the gravitational radiation and  the equations of
              motion, and (iii) development of an  interface between the post-Newtonian
              methods and those of  numerical relativity, which must be used to analyze the
              late  inspiral and merger of the two bodies.    Inspiralling binary systems of
              neutron stars or black holes  are promising sources of gravitational radiation
              detectable  by kilometer-scale, laser-interferometric gravitational 
              observatories, such as the US LIGO and Italian-French VIRGO  projects,
              scheduled to be completed by the end of this  decade.  Detection and study of
              this radiation will open a  new field of gravitational-wave astronomy, and
              provide  important new tests of general relativity.  In order to make  maximum
              use of the output of these detectors, it is crucial  to have on hand extremely
              accurate gravitational-waveform  "templates":  detailed theoretical predictions
              from general  relativity of the shape and frequency evolution of the waves  for
              ranges of source parameters.  These templates will be  used as "filters" to
              extract from the noisy output of the  detectors useful information such as
              whether or not  gravitational waves are detected, and the intrinsic 
              characteristics of the source, such as its direction and  distance, and the
              masses and spins of its components.  For  all but the final, strongly general
              relativistic coalescence  of the two bodies, theoretical methods based on
              successive  "post-Newtonian" approximations to general re lativity have  proved
              to be extremely valuable in developing these  templates.
