Title       : Protein: DNA Interactions in Drosophila Mitchondrial Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1996      
File        : a9600681

Award Number: 9600681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurie S. Kaguni lskaguni@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600681  Kaguni   The long term objective of the proposed work is to understand
              the regulation of mitochondrial function, in terms of the structure of the
              mitochondrial chromosome and its expression and replication. Mitochondria are
              required in higher animal cells, and mitochondrial biogenesis requires
              expression and duplication of the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) genome. Because
              both transcription and replication are influenced by the structure of the DNA
              template, the role of nucleoprotein complexes that are involved in maintaining
              DNA conformation in vivo on these functions warrants detailed study. To begin
              to elucidate the role of proteins associated with the mitochondrial chromosome
              in maintaining its structure and to examine their influence on its function, we
              will isolate the mitochondrial nucleoid from Drosophila melanogaster, purify
              and characterize its protein components, and initiate efforts to clone them.
              Our long-term goal will be to develop in vitro transcription and replication
              systems from Drosophila mitochondria that employ mitochondrial enzyme fractions
              and mitochondrial DNA in the form of nucleoprotein complexes. The isolation and
              characterization of the mitochondrial nucleoid is an integral part in the
              development of the Drosophila model for animal mtDNA function.  %%% 
              Mitochondria are the energy-producing units in the cell and are essential to
              life. Because of the limited size of the mitochondrial chromosome, all of the
              proteins required for mitochondrial biogenesis are encoded outside the
              mitochondrion in the nucleus. These proteins are comparatively rare in the
              animal cell, and are therefore difficult to study. The fruit fly Drosophila is
              a higher animal that has proven to be an excellent model for the study of
              cellular function by biochemical, genetic and developmental approaches. The
              structure and organization of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly conserved in
              animals, and current data suggest that the mechanisms of mtDNA packaging and
              gene expression will also be. Our lo ng-term goal is to develop Drosophila as
              an animal model system to study these processes. The isolation and
              characterization of the mitochondrial chromosome and its protein components
              represents the first step in the development of the Drosophila model for animal
              mtDNA function.  ***
