Title       : Characterization of the Interactions of Eukaryotic Initiation Factors,
               Ribosomes, and MRNA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1998      
File        : a9600521

Award Number: 9600521
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dixie J. Goss dgoss@hejira.hunter.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Goss  9600521  The long term goal of this project is to understand the mechanism
              of eukaryotic protein synthesis. Eukaryotes initiate translation differently in
              normal cell and in viral infecled cell or cells under stress conditions such as
              heat shock. The overall scheme of protein synthesis has been described, but the
              details and particularily the kinetics of this process remain to be elucidated.
              A detailed study of the equilibrium and kinetics of the interaction of
              eukaryotic initiation factors with mRNA and oligonucleotides is proposed.
              Direct fluorescence measurements will be used to elucidate the interaction of
              initiation factors and mRNA or oligonucleotides. The interaction of several
              initiation factors that bind to the 5' noncoding region have been previously
              analyzed. The kinetics of these interactions will now be determined. These
              multiple interactions will be analyzed to determine if the binding interactions
              are cooperative, anti-cooperative, or independent. Kinetic results will
              determine the rate limiting steps and the probable pathway of interactions.
              These results will aid in formulating a detailed molecular mechanism for the
              assembly of the eukaryotic initiation cornplex.  %%%  This project will
              elucidate the mechanism for protein synthesis in plant systems. Regulation of
              protein synthesis is important in regulation of cell growth and development as
              well as in biotechnology applications. Plants provide possible hosts for
              production of vacines and other proteins of commercial interest without the
              contaminants that may be present from a bacterial or other host used for gene
              cloning. lt is therefore important to understand the regulation of protein
              synthesis in plants. These studies will determine the rate limiting steps for
              interactions that determine the production of proteins. Fluorescence
              spectroscopy will be used to measure these interactions and determine the
              details of this process. By elucidating the rate limiting steps one can then
              determine the possible intervention points t o increase or decrease the rate of
              the overall protein synthesis process.  ***
