Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Pressurized Gas Transport for Intravascular Oxgenation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  1997   
File        : a9600294

Award Number: 9600294
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9956               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon K. Moon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
              63        Life Science Other Medical              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600294  Moon    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the  Promotion
              of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Jon K. Moon to work at
              Kumamoto University Medical School,  Kumamoto, Japan.  Dr. Moon will
              collaborate with Dr.  Hidenori Terasaki, Chairman of the Department of 
              Anesthesiology, on a project entitled: "Pressurized Gas  Transport for
              Intravascular Oxygenation'.    The proposed research will consist of building
              an efficient  intravascular oxygenator (artificial lung) to provide life 
              support while allowing damaged lungs to heal and will focus  on developing
              materials and techniques for the pressurized  transport of oxygen into blood. 
              Drs. Terasaki and Moon  propose to exploit the high strength and nonlinear gas-
               transport behavior of recently developed microporous  materials. Although
              these materials can withstand high  internal pressures, they have been used
              only under negative  pressure in earlier oxygenator designs.  As positive 
              pressure can substantially increase oxygen delivered to the  blood,
              thermal-mass flow controllers, originally developed  for the semiconductor
              industry, will be used to measure the  pressure to flow relationship of
              microporous materials when  immersed in water, albumin plus water, and blood. 
              Data from  the experiments will be developed into a mathematical model  to
              predict the "bubble-point pressure" of an implanted  oxygenator and, following
              this analysis,  prototypes of  extracorporeal and intravascular oxygenators
              will be  constructed for tests in animals by the researchers in the 
              laboratory.  ***
