Title       : Regulation of Protoxin Synthesis in Bacillus thuringiensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  1996  
File        : a9600584

Award Number: 9600584
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur I. Aronson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600584  Aronson  Bacillus thuringiensis is unique in its ability to assemble
              insecticidal protoxins into intracellular inclusions.  Each toxin is specific
              for insects from at least three Orders, many of which cause crop and tree
              damage or are vectors for human pathogens.  This research will investigate the
              properties and synthesis of these protoxins, which have considerable potential
              as biological control agents.  Multiple plasmid protoxin genes are transcribed
              primarily in post-exponential cells during sporulation.  These genes are
              expressed to different extents from dual promoters that are recognized by two
              sporulation RNA polymerases.  While related protoxin genes have virtually
              identical overlapping promoters, their upstream regions differ substantially
              and are therefore likely to be important in the differential expression of
              these genes.  A protein that binds to one of these upstream regions has been
              purified from sporulating cells and identified as the E2 subunit of pyruvate
              dehydrogenase.  Purified E2 protein also was found to bind to a potential DNA
              bending region, and to other regions containing a consensus sequence or
              upstream from transcription start sites.  This research will determine the
              origin of soluble E2 protein in sporulating cells; that is, by dissociation
              from the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex or by transcription of the E2 gene,
              which has been cloned.  In addition, mutagenesis of the E2 gene will be used to
              determine its multiple functions in Bacillus thuringiensis and in Bacillus
              subtilis, a non-protoxin synthesizing bacteria.  Initial studies with Bacillus
              subtilis will take advantage of its better developed genetic system to identify
              and characterize phenotypic effects (including lethal mutations), before
              examining the effects of mutations on protoxin synthesis in Bacillus
              thuringiensis.  The possibility that a key subunit of an important catabolic
              enzyme has the dual functions of catalysis during growth and regulation during
              sporulation is novel, and may be an importa nt mechanism for signaling the
              transition from growth to post-exponential functions such as protoxin gene
              transcription.  %%%  Bacillus thuringiensis is unique in its ability to
              assemble insecticidal protoxins into intracellular inclusions.  Each toxin is
              specific for insects from at least three Orders, many of which cause crop and
              tree damage, or are vectors for human pathogens.  This research will
              investigate the properties and synthesis of these protoxins, which have
              considerable potential as biological control agents.  ***
