Title       : Fourth E. Coli and Small Genomes Meeting: to be held September 8-12, 1996, Lake
               Arrowhead, CA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1997  
File        : a9600796

Award Number: 9600796
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey H. Miller jhmiller@ewald.mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600796  Miller  The E. coli genome analysis efforts are likely to achieve a
              complete sequence determination of the well studied organism by the end of
              1996.  Over 2800 genes and ORFs have been sequenced; over 70% of the
              chromosomal DNA, and their gene products, where identified, are in the Swiss
              Protein database.  The extensive genetic, physiological and biochemical
              knowledge of E. coli make this the best defined of all organisms.  There is
              much excitement surrounding the opportunity now to integrate these bodies of
              information as we approach total sequence of E. coli DNA and all gene products.
               Moreover, there is the added excitement of being able to compare the E. coli
              sequence with that of as many as 10 other small genomes.      To carry out the
              integration, scientists working on E. coli in different areas will interact. 
              The sequencers, cloners, geneticists, cell physiologists, biochemists, database
              builders and computer scientists all come from different perspectives that are
              now fusing.  The meeting will facilitate the necessary interactions by bringing
              together leading researchers in the analysis of genomes at the genetic and
              sequence level, and will facilitate the coordination of the structural and
              functional analysis of this organism's genome.  Participants in the complete
              sequencing of H. influenzae, mycoplasma, and 7 different archaea will also
              present their findings, affording the unprecedented opportunity to compare
              results from so many completed genomes.      This meeting is designed to have a
              mix of invited and participant-initiated presentations, and will also have
              hands-on workshops during which investigators from different disciplines will
              be able to become familiar with available databases and new tools facilitating
              analysis and coordination of information.  Participants will not only hear the
              latest information in the talks, but also will have available hands-on
              instruction in new computer-based abilities to seek out and capture, analyze,
              correlate and integrate complex new  information.  The fields are moving very
              fast both in acquisition of new knowledge of the contents of genomes and their
              significance to cellular processes and also in management and analysis of the
              information, connecting bodies of knowledge on sequences, genetic organization
              and regulation.  No other meeting synthesizes the biology of E. coli, sequence
              information and database analysis, as well as the comparison with other
              completed genome sequences.  ***
