Title       : Internet Access to the Evolution of Terrestial Ecosystems Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9600253

Award Number: 9600253
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Gilna                              
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Damuth damuth@lifesci.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1165      BIOLOGICAL DATABASES & INFORMA
Fld Applictn: 0102000   Data Banks                              
              0108000   Software Development                    
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9139,9184,9198,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   This project will develop a World Wide Web interface for  the Evolution of
              Terrestrial Ecosystems (ETE) Database. ETE  is an international project,
              designed to allow broad-scale  comparisons of the paleobiology and paleoecology
              of  terrestrial ecosystems and their plant and animal  communities. Currently
              the Database contains information on  over 8,000 fossil localities and more
              than 5,000 plant and  animal species.  It is accessed through an X-Window 
              graphical interface, which allows one to plot fossil  localities on maps
              displayed on screen, to query the screen  display, and to construct output data
              sets for other  analysis programs.     Currently, the user interface
              application (called  "Explorer") runs only on the host that also runs the 
              project's database management software (Ingres).  This makes  the Explorer an
              effective tool in the context of a local  network, but a user at a remote site
              must operate the  interface (maps, menus, etc.) from across the Internet and 
              must transfer via FTP any analysis output files to use  locally. Users outside
              of North America find international  network access too slow to use the
              Explorer during certain  peak hours.     This project will port Explorer to the
              Java computer  language (JavaSoft, Mountain View, CA).  A Java object file  can
              be executed on any computer that has a Java interpreter  without recompiling. 
              Java interpreters are available for  all major PC and workstation platforms,
              and are built in to  WWW browsers such as Netscape 2.0 and HotJava.  From
              within  a Web browser, a special form of a Java application (called  an
              "applet") is downloaded to the user's computer (via a  standard WWW link to a
              URL), where it is executed.  The  result is a level of interactivity and
              complex behavior  previously unavailable on the WWW.  The new version of the 
              Explorer will thus take the form of a Java applet embedded  within a standard
              WWW HTML document. The result will be a  robust, Internet-based, interactive,
              interface providing the  Explorer's GI S-style approach to data exploration. 
              That  architecture will greatly increase the accessibility of the  database to
              paleobiologists world-wide and catalyze  additional research community feedback
              and professional  interaction on the project.  A WWW client for ETE will also 
              likely make the database a significant resource for formal  and informal
              education in paleobiology.
