Title       : Research in Gravitation Theory and Astrophysics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1996      
File        : a9600689

Award Number: 9600689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard A. Isaacson                     
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26584              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lee A. Lindblom   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Lindblom will continue his theoretical research on  gravitation and
              astrophysics.  He will emphasize  astrophysical situations in which strong
              gravitational  fields play a significant role.  These problems can be  divided
              into four major areas:  a) the pulsations and  stability of relativistic stars,
              b) superfluid hydrodynamics  in neutron stars, c) dissipative relativistic
              hydrodynamic  theories, and d) fundamental mathematical problems in 
              relativistic stellar structure.  Specific research problems in each of these
              areas will be  carried out, for example: a) A new approximation method to 
              evaluate the modes of rapidly rotating fully relativistic  stellar models will
              be developed.  This approximation is  based on the fact that gravitational
              radiation couples only  weakly to the modes of primary physical interest in
              neutron  stars.  b) The program to evaluate the effects of superfluid 
              hydrodynamics on the gravitational radiation instability of  rotating neutron
              stars will be continued.  The next step is  to finish debugging the computer
              codes that evaluate the  modes of rapidly rotating superfluid neutron stars. 
              c) The  relationship between the dissipative relativistic fluid  theories of
              divergence type and the Lagrangian based  dissipative relativistic fluid
              theories will be  investigated.  It is hoped that the set of theories which 
              belong to both classes can be identified and that these will  contain a strong
              candidate to be THE theory of dissipative  relativistic fluids.  d) Further
              investigations into the  possibility of determining the nuclear equation of
              state by  measuring the masses and radii of neutron stars will be  carried out.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
