Title       : U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Experimental Psychology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9600455

Award Number: 9600455
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11103              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Domjan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,5940,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Description:   This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist,
              Dr. Michael Domjan,  Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin,
              and Dr. Falih Koksal, Department of  Psychology at Bogazici University,
              Istanbul, Turkey.  The research aims at improving the understanding  of the
              animal learning process in general, and the conditioning of sexual behavior in
              particular.  The  experimental work will be on quails and will be conducted in
              Austin and in Istanbul.  In a pilot study  it was indicated that observing a
              demonstrator male quail receive a sexual Pavlovian conditioning  procedure
              facilitates the subsequent acquisition of sexual conditioned behavior in
              observer subjects.  Experiments are planned to identify what factors are
              responsible for this effect.  These will: 1.  evaluate the effect of observing
              pairings of a conditioned stimulus object with a female quail on the 
              subsequent acquisition of sexually conditioned behavior; 2. compare the effects
              of observing a  demonstrator's behavior directed towards a female quail or a
              conditioned stimulus object; and 3.  examine whether observational learning
              rather than stimulus enhancement is responsible for the faster  acquisition in
              the observer subjects.   Additional experiments will determine whether
              observational  procedures can induce conditional copulary behavior in subjects
              that do not otherwise show such  responding.  Also studies will be carried out
              to determine whether conditioned responses acquired through  observational
              learning are as resistant to extinction as those that develop through direct
              Pavlovian  conditioning.  Scope:  This project allows cooperation of two
              experienced scientists whose  capabilities complement each other to do
              important scientific work.  The Turkish scientist, who has  Scottish graduate
              training and experience in experimental clinical psychology, has a somewhat 
              different perspective from that commonly found in the U.S. experimental
              psychology programs.  He has  been instrumental in introducing new lines of
              laboratory investigation related to the sexual learning  project.   This
              project will help understand the process of learning by extending previous
              studies (  such as learning of feeding in rats, pigeons, and honey bees) to
              both a new species (Japanese quail)  and to a previously unexplored response
              system (sexual behavior).  The project is supported jointly  with the Division
              of Integrative Biology and Neuroscience.  This project meets the objectives of
              the  Division of International Programs.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
