Title       : Workshop on Site-specific Recombination and Transposition, September 22-27,
               1996, Woods Hole, MA
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1996    
File        : a9600629

Award Number: 9600629
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy E. Kleckner   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kiyoshi Mizuuchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600629  Kleckner and Mizuuchi    The purpose of this Workshop is to assemble
              for discusqions essentially the entire community of scientists who are working
              on the biochemical mechanisms of site-specific recombination and transposition
              at an "aggressively mechanistic" level.  This interrelated group of reactions
              lie at the heart of a number of very important biological processes: 
              integration of retroviruses, generation of antibody diversity, transmission of
              antibiotic resistance genes and rearrangements of chromosomes.  The analysis of
              these reactions requires understanding and applications of many scientific
              disciplines including protein biochemistry, biochemical kinetics, chemistry,
              DNA topology and genetics, and the level of scientific analysis and expertise
              within the relevant community is very high.     The scientific program includes
              studies of retroviral integration, prokaryotic transposons, site-specific
              recombinases of the integrase and resolvase families, immunoglobulin
              rearrangements and accessory host factors as they pertain to these reactions. 
              In addition, the program includes studies of chemical catalysis in other types
              of protein/DNA reactions so that observations in the field can be placed in a
              broader context.  Finally, the meeting includes several talks on "model
              systems" studies which are outside the field but are outside the field but are
              directly relevant with respect to the types of questions being asked and/or the
              types of methods being used to address questions mf interest.     The meeting
              will be limited to 135 participants.  This number is sufficient to include all
              of the principal investigators who are working productively in this area as
              well as many post-doctoral fellows and some graduate students.  Essentially
              every attendee either speaks or presents a poster.  This meeting has become the
              intellectual focal point for this field and is unique in the degree of 
              interchange amongst participants at both formal and informal levels.  ***
