Title       : RUI: Organic Archaeometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 26,  1999   
File        : a9600254

Award Number: 9600254
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61561              (Estimated)
Investigator: Curt W. Beck beck@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edith C. Stout  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1393      ARCHAEOMETRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Curt Beck and Ms Edith Stout will
              continue their ongoing program of the analysis of organic materials recovered
              from European archaeological sites. These include amber as well as tars and
              pitches which served as glues and sealants in many prehistoric contexts.
              Organic materials are found in many archaeological sites from different time
              periods from the Paleolithic through Classical civilizations. The team will
              pursue three specific goals: 1. The provenience analysis by infrared
              spectroscopy of archaeological artifacts of amber and related fossil resins
              with principal emphases on the archaeological amber finds of Switzerland,
              Portugal and Romania; 2. The determination of the chemical composition and
              botanical sources of fossil resins by using gas chromatography-mass
              spectrometry to separate and identify the molecular constituents of ambers
              native the European Alps. This will permit distinction between amber artifacts
              made from local raw materials and those imported from Northern Europe; 3. The
              analysis and identification of tars and pitches used for the hafting of tools,
              caulking of ships and lining of transport amphoras.  Archaeologists recognize
              that to understand prehistoric adaptations they must look beyond individual
              sites and must determine how these were integrated into intra and inter
              regional systems. Even before the development of agriculture, interactions
              appear to have covered hundreds of miles and by 10,000 years ago trade goods
              moved across Europe. Such systems are reconstructed by matching materials
              recovered in archaeological sites with their raw material source. Amber, which
              was highly valued as an ornament was very widely traded and thus is ideal for
              this purpose. However since this tree resin occurs in many regions it is
              necessary to pinpoint area of origin and this can be difficult to accomplish.
              Through the analytic techniques applied by Dr. Beck, in many instances such
              sourcing can now be done and with this award he and MS Stout will analyze a
              number of amber and other organic objects.  This research is also important
              because of its training component. Dr. Beck teaches at an undergraduate
              institution and for many years has actively involved students in his research.
              Many of them have been exposed to scientific research through his projects,
              have published jointly with him and gone on to pursue careers in science.      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                   
