Title       : Novel High-Field EPR Studies of Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9600940

Award Number: 9600940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Budil dbudil@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9600940  Budil  This project is directed towards characterizing the  structural
              features governing the primary light reaction in  photosynthetic organisms
              using novel high-field electron  magnetic resonance methods.  The excellent
              spectral  resolution at high field provides a new means of probing the 
              structure of the primary reactant radicals.  Orientation  selectivity at high
              frequency will be exploited to carry out  "g-magnetophotoselection" experiments
              that will relate  magnetic properties to the optical properties of the primary 
              reactants.  Where possible, single crystal studies will be  undertaken in order
              to correlate the magnetic tensors of the  reactants directly with the ground
              state structure of the  RC. Structural influences will also be investigated by
              a  novel "electrostatic mapping" approach in which nitroxide  spin labels are
              introduced at specific amino acid residues  of the protein using site-directed
              mutagenesis.  The  electric field sensitivity of high-frequency nitroxide 
              spectra will enable direct exploration of local  electrostatics at selected
              sites in the reaction center,  providing significant new information about the
              protein  microenvironment that guides the primary photochemistry. %%%  The
              broader research goal of this project is to develop new  magnetic resonance
              techniques for probing dynamic  macromolecular structures, with an immediate
              focus on the  structure and function of the photochemical reaction centers  in
              photosynthetic organisms.  High-frequency electron  magnetic resonance will be
              used to probe the microscopic  structure of the primary reactants and the
              surrounding  protein, as well as the photochemical reaction dynamics. The 
              educational goals of this program will integrate advanced  physical concepts,
              with an emphasis on magnetic resonance  methods, into training in molecular
              biology.  New  opportunities will be created for students to augment their 
              cooperative education experience at Northeastern University  by engaging
              directly in the development  of new biophysical  methodologies in collaboration
              with local entrepreneurial  companies.  ***
