Title       : Folding of a Multidomain Ribosomal Protein
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1999     
File        : a9600866

Award Number: 9600866
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $376060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Raleigh draleigh@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1045,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Raleigh  9600866  Elucidating how the amino acid sequence determines structure,
              the protein folding problem, is a central issue in modern structural biology.
              This proposal describes an integrated approach to studying the folding of the
              protein L9, a multidomain ribosomal protein. This protein forms an interesting
              bilobal structure with a compact N-terminal domain connected by a long solvent
              exposed a-helix to a compact C-terminal domain. The N-terminal domain is a
              stable folding unit and represents one of the simpler examples of an important
              class of layered sheet-helix structures. This type of structure is found in
              other ribosomal proteins and in many small RNA binding domains. Relatively
              little is known about the interactions which stabilize this important structure
              or how it folds. The L9 protein also offers a excellent model system to study
              the folding of multi-domain proteins. In recent years, considerable effort has
              been devoted to elucidating the folding pathways of single domain globular
              proteins but much less is known about the folding of multidomain proteins.  The
              folding pathway of this protein will be explored using kinetic measurements.
              The equilibrium and kinetic folding transitions of the isolated domain and of
              the full L9 protein will be studied. These experiments will indicate if
              interactions between domains affect the folding or stability of the protein.
              The unfolded state will be characterized by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and
              Circular Dichroism. Studies of peptide fragments will be used to address the
              role of local interactions in stabilizing the N-terminal domain. These studies
              will also identify any potential folding initiation sites. Fragment
              complementation experiments will be used to probe the role of tertiary
              interactions in stabilizing nascent secondary structure. Taken together, these
              experiments will provide a detailed description of the folding pathway and of
              the interactions which stabilize this interesting protein.  One of the major
              challenges of teaching at a lar ge university is balancing undergraduate
              education with research. Many of the students feel that they are "lost in the
              shuffle" or that undergraduate education is ranked a distant third behind
              research and graduate education. On the other hand, the available research
              infrastructure has the potential to allow undergraduates unique opportunities.
              The educational aspects of this Career Award include a number of initiatives
              designed to integrate undergraduate students into the research life of the
              department. A new course "Current Trends in Biological Chemistry" is being
              developed. This course is designed to introduce undergraduates to research
              areas in modern biological chemistry and is built around the departmental
              seminar series in biological chemistry. An informal seminar series designed to
              introduce students to the many career options available to chemists and
              biochemists is also being developed. One of the core undergraduate courses,
              physical chemistry laboratory is being extensively revised and redefined. New,
              more relevant experiments have been introduced and more interactive methods of
              teaching are being used. At the graduate level, a new program in biological
              chemistry is being designed. This includes a new seminar series, which also
              forms the basis of the course "Current Trends in Biological Chemistry': the
              establishment of a new degree option in the Department of Chemistry, the design
              of a new course on Protein Structure and the writing of an interdepartmental
              training grant.  %%%  Elucidating how the amino acid sequence determines
              structure, the protein folding problem, is a central issue in modern structural
              biology. This proposal describes an integrated approach to studying the folding
              of the multidomain ribosomal protein L9. Considerable effort has been devoted
              to elucidating the folding pathways of single domain globular proteins but much
              less is known about the folding of multidomain proteins. The isolated domains
              of this molecule are also of interest. The N-terminal domain is a st able
              folding unit and represents one of the simpler examples of an important type of
              structure found in ribosomal proteins and in small RNA binding domains.  One of
              the major challenges of teaching at a large university is balancing
              undergraduate education with research. Many of the students feel that they are
              "lost in the shuffle" and that undergraduate education is ranked a distant
              third behind research and graduate education. The educational aspects of this
              Career Award include a number of initiatives designed to integrate
              undergraduate students into the research life of the department. These include
              the development of new courses and a new undergraduate seminar series. At the
              graduate level, a new program in biological chemistry is being designed. This
              includes the establishment of a new degree option in the Department of
              Chemistry.  ***
