Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computational Analysis of Multiple Scales Problems in
               Wave Propagation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1996      
File        : a9600146

Award Number: 9600146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Hagstrom hagstrom@math.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9600146  Hagstrom    This project's primary focus is on the development,
              analysis and   implementation of new and more efficient numerical methods for
              simulating   wave propagation in the presence of multiple temporal and spatial
              scales.   This includes the construction of efficient  discretization methods
              and   accurate radiation conditions for solving linear hyperbolic systems, the 
               development of adaptive spectral methods for problems requiring highly  
              accurate solutions, and the analysis of splitting schemes for the efficient  
              integration of multiple time scales problems for partial differential  
              equations. Specific physical applications to be considered include acoustic  
              and electromagnetic wave propagation and the challenging problem of  
              simulating dynamic combustion phenomena making use of detailed models   of the
              physics. Basic analyses of the governing systems of nonlinear partial  
              differential equations will also be undertaken.    Multiple scales problems are
              difficult because the uniform resolution of the   smallest scales present would
              lead to a prohibitively large computational   problem, even for the fastest
              machines likely to be available in the coming   decades. They are also a common
              feature of scientifically and   technologically important phenomena in a number
              of distinct physical   settings. They arise sometimes from the need to solve
              problems on large   spatial domains or over long time periods, and other times
              from the   appearance of very localized solution features, such as sharp
              wavefronts. In   the latter case they are generally associated with singular
              perturbations of   the governing equations. Singular perturbations may be
              thought of as small   changes in the equations which can lead to large
              qualitative and quantitative   changes in the solutions. Such problems can also
              often be analyzed by non-  numerical asymptotic techniques and in this work
              asymptotic analysis is   used in a number of ways to guide and complement
              numerical    computations. The translation  of theoretical advances into useful
              tools, and   the consideration of more complicated and comprehensive
              mathematical   models is emphasized so as to maximize the impact of the
              research on other   science and engineering disciplines.
