Title       : Rough Cilician Region Archaeological Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9600617

Award Number: 9600617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103148             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Blanton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas Rauh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Drs. Richard Blanton, Nicholas Rauh and
              colleagues will conduct a two year archaeological survey in the Antioch region
              on the Turkish coast. During the period from ca. 139-67 B.C. this area, which
              was peripheral to the Roman empire was controlled by Cilician pirate societies
              which massed large numbers of sailors and ships to raid both seaborne commerce
              and port cities. These exploits of these groups are well documented but
              relatively little is known about the internal organization of these societies.
              For several years Blanton and Raugh have conducted preliminary surveys in this
              Cilician area and they shall now expand their survey to allow full coverage of
              an area of approximately 800 square kilometers. Using methods developed both in
              Middle America and in the Old World, crews will walk carefully over the entire
              region and note and map archaeological occurrences. Materials from both all
              time periods will be collected and analyzed. On this basis it will then be
              possible to reconstruct demography and settlement patterns and gain insight
              into Cilician social and economic organization.   The historical character of
              the Mediterranean reflects the importance of extensive long-distance sea travel
              that moved commodities, culture and people and that figured into military
              strategy and state-building. A growing number of archaeological researchers
              recognize the utility of social theories that address the consequences of
              interaction at the scales of world-system, area and region and are working to
              develop models of how regional interaction occurs. During Roman times the study
              area while environmentally marginal, and never the site of a major polity, was
              well situated in a way other marginal regions were not, to intermediate in
              major sea-borne commercial flows along the boundaries of important polities and
              along major Mediterranean sea routes. It thus provides an excellent setting to
              study what happens in semi-peripheral areas and to compliment an extensive
              literature which examines interactions between core and true peripheral areas. 
              Nations and individuals today participate in, and are affected by, worldwide
              systems and archaeologists wish to understand how such widespread interactions
              develop over time. This study should provide new insight. The research is also
              important because it brings together New World and Old World archaeologists and
              introduces into a `classical` Old World setting survey and analytic techniques
              which have proven highly effective in the Americas. The project will further
              intellectual interchange which will enrich research in both regions. It will
              also provide data of interest to many archaeologists.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
