Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Operator Spaces and Amenabilities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 6,  1998   
File        : a9600077

Award Number: 9600077
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhong-jin Ruan ruan@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9600077  Zhong-Jin Ruan    The investigator's research area is in operator
              spaces and their applications  to operator algebras, non-commutative harmonic
              analysis and locally compact  quantum groups.  Recently, using operator space
              theory, the investigator has  studied various amenability conditions for Kac
              algebras and locally compact  quantum groups. During next three years, he plans
              to continue his research  in this direction and plans to investigate the
              following problems:  (1)  Operator amenability, strong Voiculescu amenability
              and Voiculescu       amenability for Kac algebras;  (2)  Weak amenability, 
              approximation property and weak approximation       property for Kac algebras,
              and their connection with C*-algebra and       von Neumann algebra properties; 
              (3)  Locally compact quantum groups.      The most profound distinction between
              classical and quantum mechanics is  Heisenberg's principle: one must represent
              the basic variables of physics  by operators rather than functions.  Motivated
              by Heisenberg's principle,  mathematicians have investigated the quantization
              of certain areas of  mathematics such as topology, differential geometry,
              analysis, probability  and etc.  An operator space is defined to be a subspace
              of operators on  a Hilbert space together with a distinct matrix norm. 
              Operator spaces are  natural quantization of function spaces, or more
              precisely, natural quantization  of Banach spaces. The theory of operator
              spaces was first introduced by William  Arveson in 1969. It has been quickly
              developed into a subarea in modern  analysis due to the recent work of David
              Blecher, Edward G. Effros, Vern Paulsen,  Gilles Pisier and the investigator.
              The theory has been proved to be extremely  useful in the study of non-self
              adjoint operator algebras, C*-algebras, von  Neumann algebras, non-commutative
              harmonic analysis, locally compact quantum  group, and etc. In this project,
              the investigator plans to pursue the further  properties and applications of
              operator spaces.  The succes s of this project  will be very helpful for us to
              have a better understanding of the quantized  mathematics.
