Title       : Editing of Homocysteine by Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9600522

Award Number: 9600522
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hieronim Jakubowski jakubows@umdnj.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Med&Dent of NJ/Newark
	      100 Bergen Street
	      Newark, NJ  071032407    973/972-4400

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9600522  Jakubowski  In many cases, differences in intrinsic binding energies of
              amino acids to aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (AARSs) are inadequate to give the
              required accuracy of translation. This has necessitated the evolution of a
              second determinant of specificity, proofreading or editing mechanisms that
              involve the expenditure of energy to remove errors in amino acid selection. 
              The non-protein amino acid homocysteine (Hcy), an obligatory precursor of
              methionine in all cells, poses an accuracy problem for the protein biosynthetic
              apparatus. Hcy is misactivated by methionyl- (MetRS), isoleucyl- (IleRS), and
              leucyl-tRNA synthetases (LeuRS) at a frequency exceeding the frequency of
              translational errors. Misincorporation of Hcy into tRNA and cellular protein is
              prevented by an editing mechanism of these synthetases which yields a cyclic
              thioester, Hcy thiolactone. In spite of considerable progress on the
              elucidation of structures of AARSs, knowledge of the structural basis of
              editing is limited. This application proposes to determine the molecular basis
              of an error-correcting mechanism of an AARS. Our preliminary molecular model of
              the synthetic/editing site of an AARS, derived from studies of E. coli MetRS,
              will be refined by further tests with MetRS and generalized by tests with
              structurally related IleRS and LeuRS. Mutant selection and site-directed
              mutagenesis of cloned MetRS, IleRS, and LeuRS genes will be used to obtain
              editing-defective enzymes. Affinity labeling of the active site of MetRS will
              be used to identify active site residues that are involved in synthetic or
              editing function. These approaches, combined with sensitive biochemical assays,
              will allow the study of structure-function relationships both in vitro and in
              vivo, as well as mapping of the editing subsite and determining its interplay
              with the synthetic subsite for each AARS. We will also study enzymatic
              reactions of AA-tRNA with thiols, predicted by our model of the
              synthetic/editing site and already demonstrated in prelim inary work. The data
              will be interpreted within the framework of the crystal structure of MetRS
              using molecular modeling.  This project will elucidate a major aspect of the
              extraordinary accuracy in the flow of genetic information, i.e. the molecular
              basis of how an AARS prevents transfer of an incorrect amino acid to tRNA and
              how a correct amino acid is spared from editing. This work also has relevance
              for understanding some diseases: metabolic defects leading to elevated levels
              of Hcy, in many cases known to result in excessive editing, are implicated in
              several human genetic disorders.  %%%  Living organisms have evolved editing or
              proofreading mechanisms that assure accurate synthesis of their nucleic acids
              and proteins according to the genetic information contained in DNA. One such
              mechanism eliminates incorrect amino acids and assures that correct amino acids
              are incorporated at specific positions of protein chains which is important for
              proper functioning of these molecules. A paradigm of error correcting
              mechanisms in protein synthesis is editing of the nonprotein amino acid
              homocysteine which we are studying at molecular and cellular levels. Studies of
              molecular details of homocysteine editing, proposed in this application, are
              important for two reasons. First, this project will elucidate a major
              fundamental aspect of the extraordinary accuracy in the flow of genetic
              information, i. e., how homocysteine is prevented from being incorporated into
              protein. Second, this work is also relevant for understanding some diseases
              associated with elevated levels of homocysteine, in many cases known to result
              in excessive editing, such as vascular and heart disease, neural tube defects,
              spontaneous abortion, and possibly, cancer.  ***
