Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Internal Measurement of Magnetic Field on the FIX Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1996       
File        : a9600280

Award Number: 9600280
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam K. Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CA Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, CA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9600280  Martin    This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Adam Martin at the
              Plasma Physics Laboratory, Osaka  University, Osaka, Japan.  Dr. Martin will
              work with Dr.  Shigefume Okada, professor in the Faculty of Engineering, on  a
              research project entitled, "Measurement of the Internal  Magnetic Fields on the
              FIX Experiment."    The proposed research will examine the various problems 
              involved in the development of controlled fusion as an  energy source.  The
              central challenge is to use magnetic  fields to confine a hot plasma long
              enough to produce a  sustained thermo-nuclear reaction.  One of the most 
              promising avenues for accomplishing this is the Field  Reversed Configuration,
              or FRC, a innovative device that  makes the most efficient use of its magnetic
              field and is  the simplest cold fusion mechanism to build and maintain. To 
              better understand the FRC it is important to ascertain the  internal structure
              of the magnetic field that confines the  hot plasma.  The research will measure
              this magnetic field  in the FRC Injection Experiment (FIX) at Osaka University
              in  Japan, using an innovative technique called Localized  Faraday Rotation
              (LFR).  The results of the analysis will  provide insights into theoretical and
              applied research  questions relating to controlled fusion as a practical, 
              reliable, and clean energy source for the international  community.  ***
