Title       : Parallel Computing: From Algorithms to Global Enactment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1998      
File        : a9400232

Award Number: 9400232
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yechezkel Zalcstein                     
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283996             (Estimated)
Investigator: Franco P. Preparata franco@cs.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9400232  Preparata  Recent research on parallel computation has focused
              primarily on  algorithmic design, and, more specifically, on the elucidation of
               the inherent parallelism of a wide variety of problems.  This  approach has
              frequently de-emphasized the communication aspect of  parallel computation, and
              has placed no bound on the number of  deployed processors (granularity).  As
              parallel computing systems  appear on the market, a more global view than the
              identification  of parallelism is called for.  To contribute to this emerging 
              outlook, the following research topics are addressed in this  project:  (1)
              Since it appears that the more plausible parallel  systems of the near future
              are coarse-grained, (i.e.,  interconnections of moderate number of large,
              powerful  microprocessors), algorithms for this model must be  systematically
              developed to gain insight into general paradigms  (routing), and general
              communication primitives are to be  studied, for incorporation into the
              run-time system; (2) As  devices become smaller and faster, physical
              limitations become  increasingly relevant.  In a limiting technology, mesh-like
               architecture's are the only scalable ones.  On such networks, it  is important
              to devise practicable shared-memory emulation  schemes (the P-RAM assumes an
              increasing role as a programming  model) to evaluate the effect of memory
              granularity and  hierarchy, and to investigate the structure and functionality
              of  the most suitable most modules.  (3) Locality has been long  recognized as
              an important source of efficiency in parallel  computing.  An intriguing
              relation between locality and area-time  theories of VLSI deserves careful
              scrutiny, since exploitation of  locality and emulation (of an architecture by
              another) appear to  be the key to program portability.  ***
