Title       : An Interactive Expert Systems Key and Database for the Euphausiids of the World
               Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1994 
File        : a9400770

Award Number: 9400770
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95235              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Brinton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Ohman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9400770  Brinton   An interactive, microcomputer-based expert system will be
              developed for the euphausiid crustaceans, an ecologically important taxon
              throughout the world ocean.  The expert system will include several pathways to
              arrive at identifications and the information base for all of the known
              species.  These pathways will include:  (1) a visually oriented, interactive
              pictorial key, (2) a structured database pathway, permitting rapid searches
              based on selected character states, and (3) searches by taxon name.  There will
              be separated modules to differentiate Euphausiids from higher taxa and to
              identify species of adult Euphausiids.  The expert system will include
              worldwide biogeographic distribution maps for each species; electron and light
              micrographs, including original color micrographs wherever possible; line
              drawings; and behavioral sequences in the form of QuickTime movies.  It will
              include an illustrated glossary and a bibliography indexed by species.  It will
              be made available on CD-ROM for all major microcomputer operating systems,
              hence usable in the field or at remote field stations.  The expert system will
              be an original synthesis of information both unpublished and published. It will
              include euphausiid morphology, taxonomy, and biogeography, as well as aspects
              of euphausiid behavior including swimming, feeding, and bioluminescent
              displays.  It will be immediately useful in studies of marine biodiversity.  It
              will be important for GLOBEC ( Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics) studies, where
              multiple investigators must ensure that they are using common (and current)
              sources for identifications.  It will be useful to researchers who do not have
              comprehensive libraries.  It will incorporate unpublished information gleaned
              over 3 decades by 3 euphausiid experts.  The expert system will draw on the
              specimens and resources of Scripps Institutes Planktonic Invertebrates
              Collection.  Production of CD-ROM's will be done in cooperation with Expert
              Center for Taxonomic Identification (ETI ), University of Amsterdam.
