Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cultural Representations of Paternity Among
               Poor, Unmarried Parents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1994       
File        : a9400857

Award Number: 9400857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michele Lamont mlamont@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400857  Lamont         This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral
               Dissertation Research Program.  The research will examine  cultural
              representations of paternity among poor, unmarried  parents.  Drawing on 60
              interviews in New Jersey with never-  married mothers and fathers (black and
              white) with incomes at or  below 125% of the poverty line, the study
              investigates the  categories into which they interpret the rights and 
              responsibilities of fatherhood.  It also explores whether  different
              representations of paternity can be explained by the  socio-demographic
              characteristics and cultural or structural  environments of respondents.  This
              analysis will speak to such  sociological questions as: 1) What is the
              significance of  paternity for the poor in contemporary society?  2) Do never- 
              married parents perceive legal fatherhood to be culturally  normative, or do
              they accept the mother-child dyad or the  matrifocal, extended family as
              equally viable cultural  alternatives?  3) For unmarried parents, does the
              recent increase  in nonmarital childbearing symbolize a cultural response to 
              improving social conditions for women or the reproduction of  gender inequality
              within new family arrangement?  %%%       This research will contribute to the
              sociology of the  family, of gender roles, and of contemporary urban culture.  
              Given that about a quarter of all births in the United States now  occur
              outside of marriage, the research will also contribute to  the knowledge base
              upon which policy makers will decide the  public response to changing social
              conditions and problems.  In  addition to the scientific gains to be achieved
              by the research,  this award will materially assist a highly promising student
              in  completing research for the Ph.D. dissertation.  Thus it  contributes to
              the future scientific manpower of the nation and  the thorough training of the
              next generation of social  scientists.    ***
