Title       : Roles of Heterotrophic Bacteria and Protists in the Arctic Ocean Carbon Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9400218

Award Number: 9400218
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $252346             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry F. Sherr sherrb@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Evelyn B. Sherr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9400218  Sherr  Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
              Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
              sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs. 
              The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
              research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
              extensively studied.  The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
              collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
              on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994.  NSF-funded projects
              will focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies.  Data
              collected will be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic
              Ocean and will be highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the
              Arctic is an indicator of changing global climate conditions and how it affects
              the physical, chemical, and biological features of the more temperate oceans
              and regions.    This collaborative research effort between investigators at
              Oregon State University and the University of Delaware represents a critical
              component of the AOS biology program.  Research will measure microzooplankton
              abundances, biomass, and size distributions, together with estimates of their
              grazing on phytoplankton and other zooplankton.  Work will focus on
              heterotrophic bacteria and protists in the water column and sea ice of the
              Arctic Ocean.  Present information is sparse on the abundance and activity of
              these microbes and about their influence on primary production.  The
              investigators will quantify the distribution of numbers, biomass, and
              productivity of bacteria and compare these parameters to the in situ
              concentrations of labile organic substrates (dissolved free + combined amino
              acids and sugars); quantify the abundance, size frequency distribution, and
              biomass of phagotrophic protists in the nano- and microplankton size classes;
              and measure the grazing impact of protists on bacteria and on algal cells . 
              Incubation experiments will also be performed where substrate concentrations
              and temperatures are varied to ascertain the effect on heterotrophic bacterial
              growth.  Understanding these processes will help resolve role heterotrophic and
              autotrophic microbes' influence on the Arctic carbon cycle.  ***
