Title       : 1994 Aspen Winter Condensed Matter Conference, Aspen Center for Physics, Aspen,
               Colorado
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1994  
File        : a9400890

Award Number: 9400890
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Appelquist   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Aspen Center For Physics
	      600 West Gillespie Street
	      Aspen, CO  81611    /   -

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9400890  Appelquist  The Condensed Matter Physics Conference for 1994 at Aspen
              will  focus on the symmetry of the pairing states of high temperature 
              superconductors, the doping dependence of the anomalous normal  state transport
              and magnetic properties of the high Tc materials,  and the physics of three
              dimensional Mott-Hubbard systems.  In each  of these areas exciting and
              controversial new experimental and  theoretical results have appeared, but
              these results have not been  critically examined or systematically related to
              other work.  On  the topic of the symmetry of the pairing state, recent
              experimental  results of photoemission, penetration depth and Josephson
              tunneling  will be compared with results of other techniques such as NMR, 
              specific heat and neutron scattering.  On the normal state  properties the
              nature of the doping dependence of transport  properties and the spin gap
              behavior of the magnetic susceptibility  will be examined.  The third topic of
              interest relates to the  occurrence of metal-insulator transitions in some
              regions of the  phase diagrams of high Tc superconductors.  Certain three 
              dimensional transition metal oxides also feature metal-insulator  transitions
              but are not superconductors.   The conference will  examine this issue from a
              theoretical and experimental viewpoint.  %%%  High temperature superconductors
              exhibit remarkable physical  properties which have potentially significant
              technological  applications.  It is the very unusual properties of these
              materials  which offer a daunting challenge to experimental and theoretical 
              practitioners alike.  Many apparently contradictory experimental  results and
              theories have been published.  This conference is well  timed to critically
              examine the available data and compare it to  existing theory with the hope of
              defining future directions of  investigations.  ***
