Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Pseudodifferential Operators and Nonlinear PDE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1994      
File        : a9400905

Award Number: 9400905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Taylor met@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400905  Taylor       Work supported by this award will focus on mathematical 
              problems arising in the theory of partial differential  equationsnd their
              applications.  The plans include research on  three overlapping areas:
              applications of microlocal analysis to  nonlinear partial differential
              equations, inverse scattering  problems and diffraction of waves by a boundary.
               The first  extends early results on the action of pseudodifferential 
              operators and includes further development of Morrey space  analysis and
              applications.  Work will also continue  in establishing that smooth solutions
              to various nonlinear  evolution equations do not break down, provided one has a
              bound  on certain Zygmund space norms.  A program to stabilize in an  optimal
              fashion a class of inverse obstacle problems will be  carried out. Work will be
              done in passing from estimates for the  linearized problem to the true inverse
              problem via a combination  of techniques from microlocal analysis and a variant
              of  Moser's method for treating hard implicit function theorems.   The research
              on diffraction of solutions to linear wave equations  by a boundary represents
              a long-running collaboration with  R. Melrose.  This work also includes
              investigations into  phenomena in nonlinear geometrical optics in cases
              involving  diffraction.       Partial differential equations form a basis for 
              mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The role of  mathematical
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is to provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This may
              include answers to questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions and 
              estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.  ***
