Title       : Standing Stocks and Production Rates in the Canada, Makarov and Eurasian Basins
               of the Arctic Ocean: The Role of Lower Trophic Level Processes in the Arctic
               Carbon Cycle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1995     
File        : a9400256

Award Number: 9400256
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79938              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joyce Lewin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rita A. Horner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beatrice Booth  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9400256  Lewin  Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
              Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
              sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs. 
              The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
              research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
              extensively studied.  The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
              collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
              on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994.  NSF-funded projects
              will focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies.  Data
              collected will be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic
              Ocean and will be highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the
              Arctic is an indicator ofchanging global climate conditions and how it affects
              the physical, chemical, and biological features of the more temperate oceans
              and regions.    This collaborative research effort between investigators at the
              Univ. of Washington and Oregon State University represents a critical component
              of the AOS biology program.  The project will measure standing stocks and
              production rates of planktonic and ice-algae.  These parameters will be
              determined along the cruise track and will be the first such measurements from
              parts of the Arctic Ocean.  In addition to phytoplankton abundances, primary
              production, new and regenerated nitrogen production, mesozooplankton stocks,
              and spatial distribution of particulate organic matter and dissolved organic
              matter will be determined.  These studies will be used to evaluate the
              magnitude of Arctic basin productivity and the major pathways for the flow of
              carbon.  This work in conjunction with other collaborative efforts will lead to
              a greater understanding of the role of primary production, fate of
              photosynthetically fixed carbon, and the relative importance of autotrophic and
              heterotrophic processes in transforming and transpo rting particulate and
              dissolved forms of carbon to, within, and from the Arctic Ocean system.  ***
