Title       : Isolation and Characterization of Arabidopsis thaliana GenesEncoding Protein
               Serine/Threonine Phosphatase Regulatory Subunits.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1994     
File        : a9400477

Award Number: 9400477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1993  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabine J. Rundle rundle@email.wcu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Carolina Univ
	      
	      Cullowhee, NC  28723    704/227-7211

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9499477  Rundle    In the last decade serine/threonine protein phosphatases (PP)
              have  emerged as important regulators of eukaryotic cell metabolism and 
              development.  PP control essential cellular functions such as the  completion
              of mitosis and the regulation of enzyme activity in  pathways as diverse as
              glycogen metabolism (in animal cells) and  sucrose biosynthesis (in
              photosynthetic plant cells).  PP activity  is controlled by different
              regulatory subunits (RS).  These  subunits alter both the specificity and
              activity of the enzyme.   This research proposal outlines strategies for
              detecting RS of PP  of plants.  To date only one study on this subject has been
               reported.  The goal of this research is to use a molecular cloning  approach
              to detect the presence of plant PP RS.  Three different  strategies will be
              used to isolate cDNA sequences encoding RS from  animal systems to detect and
              isolate RS genes of plants.  Second,  the polymerase chain reaction will be
              used to amplify RS DNA  sequences from A. thaliana genomic DNA.  Third,
              interaction cloning  will be used to detect proteins that interact with the
              catalytic  subunit of PP.  Characterization of the PP RS isolated by these 
              methods will provide important first hints concerning factors that  control
              plant PP.  This work will also have a significant impact on  the emerging field
              of study concerning protein phosphorylation-  controlled events in plant cells.
               %%%  Dr. Sabine Rundle has been the holder of an NSF Post-doctoral  Research
              Fellowship in Plant Biology for the past two years.  She  has recently accepted
              her first tenure-track faculty position at  Western Carolina University where
              she will pursue research on the  role of certain enzymes, serine/threonine
              protein phosphatases in  regulating cellular functions in higher plants.  This
              award will  provide a starter grant for support of her research program.  The 
              initial goals of this research are to detect and isolate genes for  the
              components of this type of enzyme from the model  plant,  Arabidopsis thaliana.
               The results of this line of research  ultimately will contribute to our
              understanding of fundamental  regulatory events in plant cellular function. 
              ***
