Title       : Oxygen Consumption, Denitrification, and Carbon Oxidation Rates In Near-Surface
               Sediments of the Arctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1996       
File        : a9400058

Award Number: 9400058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael T. Ledbetter                    
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142999             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Christensen jchristensen@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9400058  Christensen  Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of
              the Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is
              jointly sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar
              Programs.  The research will be centered around a unique and intensive,
              multidisciplinary research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have
              never been extensively studied.  The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
              collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
              on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994.  NSF-funded projects
              will focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies.  Data
              collected will be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic
              Ocean and will be highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the
              Arctic is an indicator of changing global climate conditions and how it affects
              the physical, chemical, and biological features of the more temperate oceans
              and regions.    This work is a component of the collaborative biology program. 
              Research will be undertaken to determine the rates of oxygen consumption and
              carbon oxidation in sediments along the cruise track.  Sedimentary oxidation
              rates are said to relate to the flux of usable organic matter from overlying
              surface waters.  Hence, it is an indicator of primary production and possible
              transport of carbon and nutrients from the marginal regions.  A series of box
              and piston cores will be taken and sub-samples provided to a number of PIs. 
              Measurements will be made of key biogeochemical solutes (oxygen, nutrients,
              alkalinity, pH, soluble iron and manganese, sulfate, chloride, calcium,
              magnesium, sulfide (if present)) and solid constituents such as porosity,
              surface area, organic carbon and nitrogen, and carbonate.  Sites to be sampled
              include continental shelves, slopes, abyssal plains, and mid-basin ridges.  The
              data will be used to evaluate sediment-bottom water fluxes and to estimate
              rates of oxygen consumption, denitri fication, and carbon oxidation. 
              Information will provide a greater understanding of the carbon budget and
              nitrogen budget in the Arctic and global ocean.
