Title       : Indexing Behavioral Decrements by Computerized Assessment of Stance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1994 
File        : a9400189

Award Number: 9400189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $289845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Kennedy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Essex Corporation Florida
	      1430 SPRINGHILL ROAD
	      McLean, VA  221023000    407/894-5090

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,1180,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The sensory organs of balance permit a person to maintain upright posture and to
              position objects in the central field of vision where image clarity is best. 
              Physicians have long used stance and gait as pointers to damage and disease;
              likewise drugs and alcohol will produce balance disturbances in otherwise
              healthy individuals.  Changes in steadiness have thus served in both clinical
              and research settings as an overall index of central nervous system
              functioning.  Although some clinical batteries exist, these tend to be
              expensive and require cumbersome, fixed apparatuses. There has not been a
              portable, automatically scored, and affordable way to measure postural
              stability in experimental work.  In Phase I of this effort, we hypothesized
              that measures of head position alone could adequately represent overall
              steadiness, designed and built a prototype device using new video recording and
              image capturing technology, and developed software for automated analysis of
              head movements from video records.  Sixteen postural measures were evaluated,
              and one was selected for further use based on measurement properties.  Using
              the prototype, we analyzed head movements and obtained three key results:  a)
              Head movements for a single subject showed perfect agreement with group results
              on a less sophisticated "time to fall" measure, showing that the approach was
              useful for individual measurement;  b) more and larger head movements were
              found with increasing doses of alcohol; and c) two aviators showed significant
              decreases in postural steadiness after using a flight simulator.  POTENTIAL
              COMMERCIAL APPLICATIONS OF THE RESEARCH  A general measure of central nervous
              function which can be connected to performance in everyday life could be used,
              a) as a fitness-for-duty index in the workplace; b) to measure aftereffects
              which are increasingly being reported in connection with the newly developing
              virtual reality systems; c) to index time-course change of disease, drug
              therapy, or drug usage; and d) to assess postura l stability in the elderly,
              infirm, or other clinical populations.
