Title       : Disordered and Strongly Correlated Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1996     
File        : a9400142

Award Number: 9400142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew P.A. Fisher mpaf@itp.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9400142  Fisher  The presence of microscopic quenched disorder often changes 
              qualitatively the macroscopic behavior of condensed matter systems.   The
              effects of disorder are revealed even more dramatically at low  temperatures
              when they dominate over thermal fluctuations.  At low  temperatures, though, it
              is often necessary to disentangle the  subtle interplay between disorder and
              quantum fluctuations.   Particularly challenging are those quantum systems in
              which the  interactions are so strong that a simple description in terms of a 
              reference non-interacting model are inappropriate.  This  theoretical research
              will focus on the behavior of such strongly  correlated and disordered systems.
               In particular, the following  problems will be studied:  (1) Transport in
              interacting one-  dimensional electron gases (Luttinger liquids) and edge
              states in  the fractional quantum Hall effect; (2) The quantum phase 
              transition between plateaus in disordered fractional and integer  quantum Hall
              fluids and the closely related superconductor-  insulator transition in
              disordered superconductors; (3) The  crossovers to the two-dimensional thin
              film limit and non-  equilibrium fluctuations and noise in the mixed state of
              the  cuprate superconductors; (4) The mesoscopic superconductivity  associated
              with small superconducting systems and with normal  mesoscopic systems in
              contact with superconductors.  %%%  This theoretical research will focus on a
              number of related  problems at the forefront of modern condensed matter
              physics.  They  all have the common theme of competition between physical
              disorder  and disorder induced by the quantum nature of the systems being 
              studied.  While the primary focus is on fundamental condensed  matter physics,
              the results have potential for a broad impact on  materials.  The systems to be
              studied include the new high  temperature superconductors and the the
              two-dimensional electron  gas (as found at semiconductor interfaces in strong
              magnetic  fields).  ***
