Title       : Integration of Molecular Sequences with Specimen and Taxonomic Data in a
               Publicly-Accessible Database
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1994   
File        : a9400861

Award Number: 9400861
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol J. Bult bult@tigr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher A. Fields  (Principal Investigator former)
              Judith A. Blake  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Anthony R. Kerlavage  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Institute for Genomic Res
	      9712 Medical Center Drive
	      Rockville, MD  20850    301/315-2535

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,9184,BIOT,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9221403  Anderson  This support will enable the University of Michigan herbarium
              to purchase and install a compactor system and new cabinets to relieve severe 
              crowding and to accommodate collection growth.  This installation will occur in
              concert with the University's half million dollar renovation program for the
              herbarium, part of which involves the installation a climate control system,
              which is essential to protect the collection against infestation. The herbarium
              at Michigan houses one of the most important plant collections for systematic
              and biodiversity studies, is very active and is one of the best curated in the
              nation.  Because of its level of activity, collection crowding has become
              critical; the cost-share solution of  herbarium renovation and installation of
              a compactor storage system is creative, opportunistic and cost-effective.  This
              collection improvement will help conserve the valuable plant collection, and
              provide much greater access to the collection for researchers and students. 
              %%%  The University of Michigan Herbarium houses one of the most important
              research plant collections in the nation in terms of its international scope
              and historical depth.  It is a vital research and educational resource to
              professionals and students in many disciplines of biodiversity.  The support
              from this award will enable the herbarium to conserve its holdings, relieve
              severe collection crowding, and provide much better access to the collection
              for the user community by installing a compactor system for the herbarium
              cabinets.  This installation will occur in combination with the University's
              refurbishment of the herbarium area and installation of climate control
              facilities.  ***
