Title       : Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Research on Operators in Hilbert Space
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1994       
File        : a9400566

Award Number: 9400566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75054              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence A. Fialkow fialkowl@newpaltz.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY New Paltz
	      
	      New Paltz, NY  12561    914/257-2121

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9400566  Fialkow       The project involves work on several projects concerning 
              operators on Hilbert spaces. These problems involve the following  topics:
              joint hyponormality, especially k-hyponormality and weak  k-hyponormality for
              weighted shifts; related problems in the  theory of moments, including the
              complex truncated moment  problem; majorization, factorization and invertible
              factor  theorems in the theory of C*-algebras. One aspect of this  research
              concerns structural and computational models for  subnormal, k-hyponormal, and
              weakly k-hyponormal operators, with  emphasis on unilateral shifts. This study
              also concerns  multidimensional power moment problems, including the truncated 
              complex moment problem and the extension problem for positive  moment matrices.
              Another facet of this research concerns the  description of the spectral
              picture of an elementary operator  acting on a prime C*-algebra. This research
              also concerns  solubility of the equation a = bx in a C*-algebra, including the
               case of solubility with x invertible.       Operator theory is an infinite
              dimensional version of linear  algebra and matrix theory. One of the important
              applications of  linear algebra is in solving a system of a finite number of 
              linear equations. The problem of solving operator equations can  be considered
              as an attempt to solve a system involving a very  large or infinite number of
              equations. Part of this project  involves solving operator equations. Other
              portions of the  project involves using operator theory to solve classical
              moment  problems. The basic problem here is to determine a measure or  mass
              distribution from various moments of mass. It is important  to note that this
              research will be conducted at an undergraduate  institution and will have
              significant impact in mathematics  education.  ***
