Title       : Dissertation Research: Hohokam Ceramic Production, Distribution and Consumption
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1994   
File        : a9400239

Award Number: 9400239
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Fish pfish@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400239  Fish    Under the direction of Dr. Paul Fish, Ms. Karen Harry will 
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will employ both  neutron
              activation analysis and petrographic techniques to  analyze potsherds collected
              at two Hohokam archaeological sites  located in Arizona. She will use field
              surveys to locate clay  sources and determine the trace element compositions of
              these as  well. On this basis it will be possible to relate ceramic product 
              back to raw material source. It will also be possible to examine  the
              distribution of ceramic types within each of the two sites  and between them. 
              Ms. Harry can then use these data to  reconstruct intra and intersettlement
              production, distribution  and consumption patterns and thus gain insight into
              economic and  social organization.     The Marana and Los Robles settlement
              communities which form the  basis for this study were occupied by Hohokam
              peoples during the  early Classic period and date to between A.D. 1050-1300.
              The  Hohokam are well known archaeologically for the large irrigation  systems
              they constructed which permitted agriculture in low  rainfall areas of the
              Arizona desert. They also occupied large  sites with impressive platform
              mounds. These attest to the  aggregation of large numbers of people and some
              form of  centralized hierarchical control. Archaeologists wish to  understand
              how such centralized societies develop and postulate  that control and
              organization of trade may play a central role.  Ms. Harry will examine this
              question. Because ceramics played a  vital role in both subsistence and ritual,
              they provide an  excellent insight into the social and economic lives of these 
              communities.    This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
               information of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new  light on
              U.S. prehistory and assist in the training of a  promising young scientist. 
              ***
