Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis Special Functions and Separation of
               Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1994     
File        : a9400533

Award Number: 9400533
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1994      
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willard Miller miller@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Miller  9400533       This project continues a detailed mathematical study into 
              the relationship between symmetries of the various fundamental  partial
              differential and q-difference equations of mathematical  physics; the possible
              coordinate systems in which these equations  permit separation of variables and
              properties of the special  function solutions which so arise.  The work divides
              into several  parts.  The first concerns the problem of determining a practical
               definition of variable separation that applies to all (systems  of) partial
              differential equations and the structure theory  of possible separation types. 
              Second is the problem of  intrinsic characterization of separable coordinates,
              i.e., a  coordinate- free characterization of coordinates.  For 
              Hamilton-Jacobi and Schrodinger equations this problem is  essentially solved,
              but for systems of equations such as the  Dirac and linear elasticity
              equations, it remains open, although  progress has been made.  Third, there is
              the problem of  determining the special functions that arise when variables are
               separated in a particular equation  and establishing the  properties of these
              functions.  Finally, there are general  applications of these and related group
              theoretic methods to  problems that arise in other science and engineering
              areas, such  as quantum mechanics and radar/sonar.       Partial differential
              equations form a basis for  mathematical modeling of the physical world.  The
              role of  mathematical analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is
              to provide qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This
              may include answers to questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions and 
              estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.  One  particularly important
              form of approximation is through the use  of special functions.  The study of
              special functions related to  solutions of partial differential equations lies
              at t he heart of  this research project.  ***
