Title       : U.S.-Denmark Cooperative Research on Dosimetric Applicationsof Optically
               Stimulated Luminescence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1994    
File        : a9400070

Award Number: 9400070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1994    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7965               (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen W.S. McKeever U1759AA@VMS.UCC.OKSTATE.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510604   Analytic Tools                          
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
Program Ref : 5914,9187,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9400070  McKeever  This award supports Professor Stephen McKeever of Oklahoma 
              State University to initiate collaborative research with Dr.  Lars
              Boetter-Jensen of the Nuclear Safety Research Department  of Riso National
              Laboratory, Roskilde, Denmark.  The ultimate  objective of their research is to
              develop techniques for the  application of Optically Stimulated Luminescence
              (OSL) in  retrospective radiation dosimetry.  Their current research is 
              investigating the mechanisms of OSL sensitivity variations in  natural
              materials such as quartz and feldspar.  Recent  developments pioneered at Riso
              during studies at Chernobyl in  the Ukraine suggest that the silicate minerals
              found in common  house bricks could potentially be employed as local
              dosimeters.   Collaboration with Dr. McKeever brings expertise in computer 
              modeling of materials physics to the unique experimental  facilities of the
              Danish group.  A better understanding of the  sensitivity variations which
              occur among samples as a result of  thermal history, or other factors, will
              enable them to develop  techniques to enhance the sensitivity of these
              measurements.   Further enhancements seem likely as a result of the 
              collaboration with Dr. McKeever.    This is an unusual fundamental study in
              radiation physics which  could have very valuable practical applications in the
               measurement of radiation exposures.  The development of a  better local
              dosimeter is important to both the U.S. and the  world at large since the
              measurement of radiation exposure  history to local environments is of major
              concern.  If  successful, the simplicity of methods using natural local 
              materials would allow rapid radial mapping of the extent and  degree of
              radioactive contamination.  ***
