Title       : RUI: Percolation Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1994        
File        : a9400467

Award Number: 9400467
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yu Zhang yzhang@math.uccs.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Colo Springs
	      1420, Austin Bluffs Parkway
	      Colorado Springs, CO  80933    719/262-3153

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Zhang            The project concentrates on percolation, a mathematical  model
              has applications to a variety of areas, such as physics,  biology, computer
              science, and geology.  A percolation process  typically depends on one or more
              parameters.  There may be a  dramatic change in physical properties depending
              on whether a  parameter is above or below a critical value.  For example,  
              suppose we immerse a large porous solid in a bucket of water.  Clearly, how
              water penetrates the solid depends on the size of  the pores.  A simple
              mathematical model of such a process is   defined by considering the pores to
              be distributed in some  lattice, and to be open or closed with probabilities p
              or 1-p.  There is a critical threshold, p(c), for the probability at which  the
              behavior changes abruptly.  Below the threshold the water  penetration is only
              superficial and above it the penetration is  infinitely deep.  Of special
              interest is behavior near the  critical threshold.  One of the most challenging
              problems is to  show that the probability of infinite penetration behaves like
              a  power of |p-p(c)| if p is near p(c).  This research will focus on 
              mathematically rigorous exact solutions for the percolation  process.          
               The project concentrates on percolation, a mathematical  model has
              applications to a variety of areas, such as physics,  biology, computer
              science, and geology.  A percolation process  typically depends on one or more
              parameters.  There may be a  dramatic change in physical properties depending
              on whether a  parameter is above or below a critical value.  This research will
               focus on mathematically rigorous exact solutions for the  percolation process.
               The research makes use of probability  theory, graph theory, combinatorics and
              function analysis. ***
