Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Singular Integrals and Parabolic Partial Differential
               Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1994       
File        : a9400782

Award Number: 9400782
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven C. Hofmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wright State University
	      3640 Colonel Glenn Highway
	      Dayton, OH  454350001    937/775-2425

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400782  Hofmann       This award supports mathematical research on problems in 
              singular integral theory and partial differential equations which  arise in
              connection with boundary value problems for parabolic  equations on non-smooth
              domains, whose boundaries are allowed to  vary with time.  The problems are
              motivated in part by physical  considerations, such as the expansion and
              contraction or  otherwise changing of shape of materials over time, and in part
               by mathematical considerations.  The time-varying domains which  one would
              like to ultimately treat are in a natural sense  theparabolic analogues of the
              Lipschitz domains which have played  a prominent role in the elliptic theory in
              recent years.  The  main goal of the project is to solve initial boundary
              values  problems in this context by means of layer potentials.  Among the 
              tools which are likely to be employed or studied are the Rellich  identities,
              perturbation techniques, caloric measure  estimates, analysis of multilinear
              and nonlinear singular  integrals and the circle of ideas connected with theory
              of rough  singular integrals.       Partial differential equations form a basis
              for  mathematicalmodeling of the physical world.  The role of  mathematical
              analysis is not so much to create the equations as  it is to provide
              qualitative and quantitative information about  the solutions.  This may
              include answers to questions  about uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In
              addition, analysis  often develops methods for approximation of solutions and 
              estimates on the accuracy of these approximations.  Among the  modern
              approaches to the study of these equations is the  application of singular
              integrals and the associated powerful  techniques of harmonic analysis.  ***
