Title       : Flora of Mount Kinabalu, Sabah, Malaysia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9400888

Award Number: 9400888
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193075             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Beaman beaman@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9169,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9400888  Beaman   Taxonomic databases accessible by international networks are
              being developed for all vascular plants in the flora of Mount Kinabalu in the
              Malaysian state of Sabah in northern Borneo.  The specimen database now
              includes more than 20,000 specimens that have been examined by the PI. 
              Kinabalu has been said to have the richest flora in the world.  This contention
              is supported by a database that includes some 4,500 species.  Much of the flora
              is threatened with imminent destruction, but only about 30% of it has thus far
              been documented in enumerations by the PI and collaborators.  An enumeration
              will be produced of the remaining 70% of the flora, about 3,150 species.  The
              enumeration will cite type specimens and synonyms, characterize the habit,
              habitat and elevational distribution of each species, and list specimens
              examined.  An index will be provided to collections cited.  The databases will
              contribute to international efforts to preserve endangered species and
              exceptionally rich ad unique plant communities.  A geographical information
              system (GIS) will be used to produce a map of Mount Kinabalu that documents
              locations where all specimens have been collected and shows the names of
              streams, rivers, other landforms, and settlements.  Satellite imagery and
              global positioning system (GPS) data will make it possible to show the
              locations of major and minor roads.  The imagery will also be used to interpret
              the occurrence of ultramafic substrates, vegetation types, primary and
              secondary forests and vegetation associated with human activites.  Surface
              modeling techniques will be used to predict where taxa occur in unexplored
              areas, based on the topographic and edaphic characteristics of where they are
              known to occur.  Biogeographic relationships among ultramafic areas on Mount
              Kinabalu and other ultramafic outcrops in Boreno will be analyzed in the
              context of phylogenetic relationships among ultramafic and non-ultramafic taxa.
               The GIS will also facilitate integrating taxonomic, ethno botanical and
              phytochemical databases into Kinabalu Park activities and monitoring aspects
              such as ecotourism development and illegal harvesting activities.  Mount
              Kinabalu is one of the youngest mountains in the world, and its flora includes
              large numbers of closely related species that appear to be neo-endemics.  A
              major reason for the species-rich flora appears related to special edaphic
              conditions (ultramafic substrates), frequently occurring droughts that result
              in selection of well-adapted genotypes, and small plant populations with
              limited gene flow because of the precipitous topography.  Three genera
              (Dendrochilum, Orchidaceae; Elatostema, Urticacea; Polyosma, Grossulariaceae)
              will be analyzed by cladistic and GIS techniques in an effort to trace
              evolutionary lineages in groups of closely related species that may have
              undergone recent speciation, which may be correlated with local edaphic and
              topographic features.  The Dendrochilum data set will be obtained from sequence
              analysis of the nuclear 18-26S rDNA ITS region.  An ethnobotanical survey,
              closely linked to the floristic inventory, is being made to determine how the
              local Dusun people classify and use the flora.  Dusun collaborators are making
              extensive collections of useful plants in their communities and are entering
              ethnobotanical information in a computerized database housed at Kinabalu Park
              headquarters.  This project is helping researchers and Park personnel to
              identify culturally significant plant resources and to detect which useful
              species are most vulnerable to over-harvesting or habitat destruction.  In
              addition, the survey is strengthening the link between the Park and local
              communities, enriching interpretive programs that serve the 200,000 annual
              visitors to the Park, and facilitating assessment of the subsistence and
              commercial value of native plants.  The project will serve as a basis for Ph.D.
              dissertations by two Malaysian graduate students, one botanical and concerning
              the floristics and ecology of a presently une xplored region of Mount Kinabalu,
              the other applying GIS approaches to a study of the small mammal fauna of the
              mountain.  Two American graduate students will prepare Ph.D. dissertation
              concerning biogeography, evolution, and speciation in the flora.  Another
              American student will base his masters thesis in geography on the use of a
              Landsat image for determining occurrence of ultramafic substrates that appear
              to have great biological significance.
