Title       : Dynamic Analysis and Control of Nonlinear Processes via Nonlinear Transfer
               Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1994       
File        : a9400304

Award Number: 9400304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142703             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ahmet N. Palazoglu anpalazoglu@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Palazoglu - 9400304      The majority of chemical processes are
              inherently nonlinear and the lack of analytical tools for nonlinear systems
              hampers efforts to establish a comprehensive control paradigm, as has been done
              with the linear systems.  The lack of information regarding the behavior of
              nonlinear processes results in unnecessarily limiting the region of safe
              operation; to overdesign in an attempt to soften nonlinearities; or to design
              conservative control systems such that an acceptable operation is maintained. 
              Such engineering solutions may yield suboptimal plant operations, and more
              economically favorable regimes may be unnecessarily deemed unsafe or
              unreliable.    The PI is developing a technique for the representation of
              nonlinear dynamics, a parametrization of the solution of nonlinear dynamic
              equations, and an analytical solution for the nonlinear feedback control
              problem.  The method is based on a particular operation for nonlinearities that
              yields nonlinear transfer functions via Laplace-like transformations.  This
              permits the algebraic solution of nonlinear ODEs in the transform domain and
              subsequent realization in the time domain, quite analogous to linear systems
              analysis.  Such a procedure yields an analytical solution for the nonlinear
              ODEs.  It also provides tools for manipulating nonlinear transfer functions to
              construct and analyze nonlinear closed-loop control systems.  This analytical
              environment, supported by symbolic computations, has potential in altering
              previous perceptions about nonlinear systems analysis and paves the way for a
              new approach for nonlinear control and education.
