Title       : Differential Effect of Sensory Experience on the Organization of Primary
               Somatosensory Cortex
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9400318

Award Number: 9400318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $294525             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Waters rwaters@utmem.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UT, Memphis, HSC
	      800 Madison Avenue
	      Memphis, TN  381033400    901/528-5000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9107,9178,9251,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Part of the brain of mammals is organized into areas that are primary regions
              for processing sensory input.  The somatosensory cortex is an area where
              different parts of the body are represented in different subareas, all showing
              an orderly spatial mapping of the peripheral inputs.  The area of cortex which
              shows a response when a particular fingertip is touched, for example, is termed
              the "representation" for that fingertip, and nearby are the representations for
              the rest of that finger, and for the other fingers, the hand, and so on.  The
              discovery some years ago that these maps were not determined during development
              alone, but could change during adult life as a result of loss of a digit or
              other deprivation, was revolutionary.  This project adds two novel aspects to
              the progress in this field.  First, it raises the issue that sensory experience
              changes the organization of adult sensory cortex even when the experience
              represents only a small part of the animal's total daily experience.  Second,
              the approach adds a paradigm of enhanced sensory stimulation, rather than just
              deprivation, to drive the changes in cortical organization.  In the rodent
              somatosensory cortex are distinctive aggregations of cell clusters, called
              barrels.  This anatomical feature provides an excellent model system for
              studying details of morphological changes that accompany physiological changes,
              and correlation of these changes at the cellular level clarifies what
              mechanisms may be involved in the plasticity of the functional maps.  Tactile
              deprivation or stimulation of the forepaw in trained rats will be used to
              define the sensory experience, and see how the cortical maps change with change
              in experience.  Results will be important for understanding the effects of use
              and disuse in the nervous system, refining models of cortical plasticity, and
              for understanding the fundamental role of experience in learning.
