Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Investigations in Order Restricted Inference and Improved
               Inference Procedures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  1996     
File        : a9400476

Award Number: 9400476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Gentle                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur Cohen artcohen@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold B. Sackrowitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Strawderman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400476   Cohen        Inference in order restricted models and improved
              inferences  procedures will be pursued. A summary is as follows: We will 
              pursue the study of "one sided" confidence regions and  simultaneous confidence
              intervals for parameters that lie in a  subset of k dimensional space. This
              problem is meaningful to the  statistical practitioner. We will introduce and
              study the notion  of cone order association. Ordinary association is linked to
              the  cone which is the first quadrant of k dimensional space.  Important
              applications exist where ordinary association is not  good enough to obtain
              meaningful results but cone order  association would help. We study 2 and 3
              dimensional contingency  tables and seek optimal tests for a wide variety of
              hypothesis  testing problems. A list of problems concerning a wide variety of 
              extensions of results in order restricted testing problems is  also discussed.
              Professor Strawderman will study problems related  to hierarchical Bayes
              models, adaptive minimax estimators,  estimators which improve on truncated
              estimators such as the  positive-part James-Stein estimator or the MLE of a
              positive  normal mean, and minimax estimation for spherically symmetric 
              distributions. He is also writing a monograph on multiparameter  estimation
              with James Berger.         This proposal is concerned with improved statistical
               inference methodology. Statistical inference typically is  concerned with
              estimating unknown characteristics of populations  or testing hypotheses about
              these unknown characteristics.  Statistical methodology has progressed greatly
              over the past 60  years. Yet there is considerable room for improving
              procedures  that will be more efficient and provide substantial savings to 
              users of the improved procedures. This proposal is primarily  devoted to
              developing such new and better procedures.
