Title       : Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9400362

Award Number: 9400362
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Ulrich Strom                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11970000           (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Russel wbrussel@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1735      MATERIALS RSCH SCI & ENG CENT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9163,9181,9197,AMPP,BIOT,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9400362  Eisenberger  The   Materials  Research  Science  and  Engineering 
              Center  (MRSEC)   at   Princeton  University   supports  interactive  research
              in three major groups addressing the synthesis  and  understanding   of  
              mesoscopically    structured    complex  materials  with  the  ultimate goal of
               rational  design  of  materials for industrial applications.    The  group
              which is focused on electronic transport in  non-  Fermi  liquid  materials
              combines expertise  in  theoretical  physics  and synthesis of electronic
              materials  with  a  new  high  magnetic  field facility to explore the
              properties  of  novel   materials  with  restricted  geometries   and   low- 
              dimensionality. The study of these materials is  unified  by  common
              theoretical concepts and the prediction of properties  not observed in standard
              materials.  The group investigating  organic thin films and quantum structures
              is exploring a new  class  of engineering structures and materials based on 
              the  controlled  growth, at the monolayer level, of a wide  range  of 
              semiconducting organic thin films.  Investigators in the  group  concerned 
              with microstructured  macromolecular  soft  materials  deal  with materials
              formed from complex  fluids.  Soft  materialq with complex microstructures are 
              formed  by  the  spontaneous evolution of structure in the liquid state;  they 
              are  self-assembling.   This  group  seeks  a  unified  understanding of the
              materials science of such materials.    The  MRSEC  also  supports  the
              development,  operation  and  maintenance of shared experimental facilities for
               materials  research. It provides seed funding for exploratory research.  The  
              center  participates  in  an  undergraduate  materials  science  certification 
              program and  in  a  summer  research  program for undergraduates.  The MRSEC is
              associated with an  educational outreach program with emphasis on attracting
              and  retaining women and underrepresented minorities in materials  science  and
              co-sponsors a materials science  and engineering  training  program for K-12
              teachers.  The MRSEC  administers  an  industrial  outreach and visitors 
              program.   The  MRSEC  currently  supports  20  faculty,  6  postdoctoral 
              research  associates, 1 technical staff member, 22 graduate  students,  and  a 
              significant number of undergraduates  through  their  summer research program. 
              The Princeton MRSEC is directed by  Professor Peter M. Eisenberger.  ***
