Title       : Dissertation Research: A Survey of Maritime Cultural Landscape in South Argyll
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1995      
File        : a9400128

Award Number: 9400128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernard Wailes   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wailes    Under the direction of Dr. Bernard Wailes, Ms. Elizabeth Ragan  will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She and numerous  volunteer
              assistants will conduct an archaeological survey of the  South Argyll coastline
              of Scotland to search for prehistoric  seaports. Because the area is extremely
              large, she will limit her  work by focussing on areas with the greatest natural
              potential to  serve this function. These will then be walked over and all 
              cultural remains, both structural and artifactural, will be  recorded.
              Collections will be made of cultural material exposed  on the surface and
              limited excavation will be conducted where  concentrations of materials are
              located. These materials will  then be analyzed to determine both cultural
              affiliation and age.    Archaeologists wish to understand how state level
              societies  arise, and on the basis of work done to date, it is known that  the
              State of Scotland appeared ca. the 9th century AD. It was  then that groups
              from the South Argyll region extended their  control over the region coincident
              with Scotland today and  archaeologists wish to understand what underlying
              factors led to  this process. The hope is that the conclusions drawn here can
              be  applied to other temperate regions in Europe. It has been  hypothesized
              that trade played a major role in the consolidation  of power and, given the
              extreme difficulty in overland travel in  this region, water travel was likely
              the primary mode of  transport. Although an elegant model has been developed,
              it is  difficult to test because very little is known about coastal  settlement
              at this time. Through her survey, Ms. Ragan wishes to  collect the data
              necessary to address this issue.    This research is important for several
              reasons. It will shed new  light on the development of state level societies.
              It will  provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in the 
              training of a promising young scientist.
