Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Structural Stability for Parabolic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  1994      
File        : a9400233

Award Number: 9400233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kening Lu klu@math.byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400233  Lu       This award supports mathematical research on the development 
              of structural stability for parabolic partial differential  equations and
              related problems.  The structural stability of  dynamical systems is one of the
              fundamental problems in the  theory of dynamical systems.  One of the main
              problems currently  facing researchers in the area concerns infinite
              dimensional  dynamical systems on locally non-compact spaces.  While much 
              progress has been made, those systems generated by parabolic  equations define
              only semiflows since backwards solutions may not  exist and the phase spaces
              are not locally compact.  This work  will first focus on structural stability
              for scalar equations  with periodic boundary conditions.  In particular efforts
              will be  made to understand stability in a neighborhood of an attractor  and to
              study the quasiperiodic and almost periodic scalar  parabolic equations. 
              Involved in this work is the skew product  flow, the lap number and Floquet
              theory.  Other studies of  Floquet theory for time dependent parabolic
              equations and smooth  conjugacy for parabolic equations will also be carried
              out.       Partial differential equations form a basis for 
              mathematicalmodeling of the physical world.  The role of  mathematicalanalysis
              is not so much to create the equations as it  is to provide qualitative and
              quantitative information about the  solutions.  This may include answers to
              questions about  uniqueness, smoothness and growth.  In addition, for
              mathematical  models to adequately describe reality, the qualitative properties
               of solutions should not change significantly when the model is  subjected to
              small, allowable perturbations.  An attempt to  formalize this point of view
              leads to the concept of structural  stability.  ***
