Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Stability Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1996      
File        : a9400894

Award Number: 9400894
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Beverly Diamond                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ehud Hrushovski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400894  Hrushovski       The investigator would like to study the model theory
              of the  Frobenius automorphism.  This work has already started, on two  fronts.
               On the one hand, he formulated a conjecture analogous to  the Lang-Weil
              estimates, but more general, that would determine  the first order theory of
              the Frobenius.  On the other hand,  together with several coworkers, he is in
              the process of carrying  out the fundamental model theoretic analysis of the
              theory of  difference fields in question, along the lines of Shelah and 
              Zilber.  Put together, these should throw considerable light on  the issue;
              there will be applications to finite simple groups and  perhaps to finite
              groups in general.       The work described in the above paragraph forms part
              of a  general trend in the area of mathematical logic known as model  theory. 
              For several decades, this subject developed  autonomously.  The lack of
              external pressure allowed it to refine  distinct points of view on algebraic
              structures, and to reach a  degree of technical maturity.  However, this was
              done as it were  in laboratory conditions, under assumptions ("stability") that
               are too restrictive in practical applications.  The time seems  ripe to test
              the ideas developed in this period against more  complex structures, in
              particular, number theoretic and geometric  ones.  This requires identifying
              structures appropriate for model  theoretic analysis and performing an
              algebro-geometric analysis  needed to prepare for the model theoretic tools. 
              It also  requires generalizing the model theoretic ideas beyond the  "stable"
              context in which they were conceived.  Some success has  been had with these
              methods, including the investigation of  finite structures with a high degree
              of symmetry, and the proof  of certain conjectures in number theory.  One hopes
              that this is  only the beginning of the road.  ***
