Title       : Characterization of the Repertoire of Nuclear Protein Phosphatases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 18,  1993  
File        : a9400424

Award Number: 9400424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maryanna P. Henkart                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Wadzinski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt U Med Ctr
	      Office of Biomedical Sciences
	      Nashville, TN  372322103    /   -

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,9283,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9400424  Wadzinski    Normal signal transduction from the cell surface
              traversing the  cytoplasm and to the nucleus in response to an external
              stimulus  requires pathways which are acutely regulated by the  phosphorylation
              and dephosphorylation of specific proteins.   Activation of most cell-surface
              receptors initially results in the  generation of second messenger or
              stimulation of a protein tyrosine  kinase.  This signal, however, is rapidly
              converted via a protein  kinase network into activated protein serine/threonine
              kinases.   Many of these kinases have been studied extensively, but much less 
              attention has been given to the reverse reaction catalyzed by  specific
              serine/threonine (ser/thr) protein phosphatases (PP).   Furthermore, the
              majority of studies of these signal transduction  pathways studies have focused
              on cytoplasmic events even though the  concentration of phospho-proteins in the
              nucleus is thought to be  much higher than in the cytosol.  The importance of
              protein  phosphatases, especially nuclear protein phosphatases, in the  control
              of cell phenotype, growth and differentiation is just now  being appreciated. 
              The long term goals of this research are to  define the subcellular
              distribution of phosphatases, characterize  specific nuclear phosphatases,
              identify specific nuclear  phosphatase substrates, define the regulation of
              protein  phosphatases, and to define regulatory and effector sites of  protein
              phosphatase catalytic subunits using a mutagenesis  approach.  %%%  This is a
              starter grant to help set up the laboratory and launch  the independent career
              of a promising new investigator who, for the  past two years, has been
              supported by an NSF Post-Doctoral  Fellowship.  The overall goal of his
              research is to study the  function and regulation of certain enzymes, called
              protein  phosphatases, in signal transduction pathways of cells.  The long 
              term results of this research will contribute to our fundamental  understanding
              of the regulation of cellular function.  ***
