Title       : Role of Biomass, Bioturbation, and Remineralization in Determining the Fate of
               Carbon in the Arctic Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1994        
File        : a9400092

Award Number: 9400092
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patrick J. Webber                       
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5670               (Estimated)
Investigator: William G. Ambrose   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa M. Clough  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : East Carolina University
	      East Fifth Street
	      Greenville, NC  278584353    252/328-6452

NSF Program : 5219      ARCTIC SYSTEM SCIENCE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 5219,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9400092  Ambrose  Research supported by this grant is under the auspices of the
              Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS) Global Change Research Program and is jointly
              sponsored by the Division of Ocean Sciences and the Office of Polar Programs. 
              The research will be centered around a unique and intensive, multidisciplinary
              research expedition to parts of the Arctic Ocean that have never been
              extensively studied.  The 1994 U.S./Canada Arctic Ocean Section is a
              collaborative effort with Canada that will involve approximately 60 scientists
              on a Canadian and a U.S. icebreaker during summer 1994.  NSF-funded projects
              will focus on hydrography, biology, paleo-, and sea-ice studies.  Data
              collected will be amongst the first ever from several regions of the Arctic
              Ocean and will be highly relevant to improving our understanding of how the
              Arctic is an indicator of changing global climate conditions and how it affects
              the physical, chemical, and biological features of the more temperate oceans
              and regions.    This work is a component of the collaborative biology program. 
              Work will be undertaken to examine the fate of organic matter reaching the
              seafloor and model cycling between the various carbon pools.  The fate of
              carbon fixed in the Arctic Ocean is largely unknown, but it is surmised that a
              greater portion reaches the bottom than in other oceans.  Low abundance and
              slow feeding rates of zooplankton, and reduced importance of the microbial
              loop, may explain why the majority of primary productivity falls to the benthos
              at high latitudes.  Research will focus on some of the possible fates of carbon
              reaching the benthos by examining patterns of benthic biomass and rates of
              remineralization, irrigation, and particle mixing.  Replicate box cores will be
              collected along the Section.  Abundance and biomass of macro and meio-fauna and
              depth profiles of Eh and particulate carbon will be determined from these
              cores.  Subcores will be incubated on-board to determine rates of
              remineralization and bioirrigation.  Particle  mixing rates will be determined
              directly from down-core 210Pb distribution and will be compared with mixing
              estimates obtained from carbon depth-profiles and bioirrigation rates.  This
              study provide insights to the role of benthos in mediating geochemical
              processes and will provide a model of carbon cycling in Arctic sediments which
              can be used to make predictions of the consequences of global warming.  ***
