Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Computability Theory and Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9400825

Award Number: 9400825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190127             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert I. Soare soare@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400825  Soare       In this project Robert Soare will study recursion theory, 
              namely the theory of computability on sets of integers,  particularly relative
              computability of one set from another.  The  fundamental aim is to deepen our
              understanding of computability  and its relation to algebraic structures and to
              models of various  first order theories.  The approach is to apply algebraic
              and  model theoretic methods to assemble apparently unrelated and  often
              chaotic individual results in recursion theory into a  unified theory and to
              point the way toward future research.  A  recent example is the Slaman-Soare
              result where a simple  algebraic criterion was discovered which unified many
              results and  methods on the r.e. degrees over the last 30 years and solved the 
              long standing problem on extension of embeddings.  In another  area Harrington
              and Soare have developed a method for generating  automorphisms of the r.e.
              sets on the one hand and for producing  definable properties on the other,
              which show that other  automorphisms cannot exist.  In addition, Lachlan and
              Soare have  applied certain forcing methods to study models of arithmetic and 
              will develop these further.       The aim is to study computability of sets of
              integers.  The  first objective is to study computability in terms of the 
              recursively enumerable (r.e.) sets, namely those which can be  listed by a
              computable procedure, and to relate their algebraic  structure to the degree of
              information they encode and to the  speed with which they can be enumerated
              with respect to some  measure of the complexity of computation.  The second
              objective  is to study the relationship of computability to other  mathematical
              objects, for example to certain models, and to  certain algebraic structures. 
              For algebraic structures, the  general problem is to determine exactly what
              information can be  coded into a particular type of that structure.  This will
              give  new information about how information can be coded between sets  and how
              it can be co ded into an algebraic structure.  ***
