Title       : Nanofabricated Surfaces: Atomic Force Microscopy and Surface-Enhanced Laser
               Spectroscopy at Ultrahigh Vacuum and Electrochemical Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9400780

Award Number: 9400780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard P. Van Duyne vanduyne@chem.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research project involves a systematic study of the microscopic  
              mechanisms of surface enhanced laser spectroscopies, including surface  
              enhanced Raman, hyper-Raman, second harmonic generation, and sum   frequency
              generation spectroscopy.  Several methods of nanostructure   preparation,
              combined with scanning probe microscopic characterization of   these structured
              surfaces, will be used to probe the electromagnetic and   chemical mechanisms
              of surface enhanced laser spectroscopies.  This work,   supported by the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, will directly   test present models
              of the surface enhancement mechanism by fashioning   surfaces which match the
              structures modeled in leading theoretical   descriptions of the effect. 
              Contributions to the understanding of the   surface enhanced spectroscopy, as
              well as to the development and   characterization of nanostructured surfaces
              should result from this work.    Impact well beyond the use of this method for
              studies of roughened   surfaces is expected.    Further development of the
              analytical methods of surface enhanced laser   spectroscopy relies on the
              development of a quantitative, predictive   explanation of the enhancement
              process.  This research program will   develop the theoretical underpinning for
              this technique by a careful set   of experiments which rationally prepare
              surface structures which can be   accurately theoretically modeled.  The
              insights gained from the   comparison of measurements on modelable surfaces
              should allow development   of a quantitative theory.  It is expected that
              useful methods for the   fabrication of materials with nanostructured surfaces
              will also result.
