Title       : Photochemical and Photophysical Mechanisms of Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1996    
File        : a9400919

Award Number: 9400919
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margaret A. Cavanaugh                   
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Ford ford@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1968      PHYSICAL INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9107,9161,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400919  Ford  U. of Calif. - Santa Barbara  Dr. Peter Ford, Chemistry
              Department, University of California - Santa Barbara, is supported by the
              Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program for studies of
              the photoreaction and photophysical mechanisms of transition metal coordination
              and organometallic complexes. A series of strongly luminescing mononuclear and
              cluster compounds containing Cu(I) will be synthesized and spectroscopically
              characterized using both CW and pulse laser excitations, and the uni- and
              bimolecular ES dynamics will be determined by emission and transient absorption
              detection. The spectroscopic and bonding properties of the complexes will be
              evaluated with the aid of theoretical calculations. The photochemistry of
              several nitric oxide complexes will be examined both in order to understand the
              fundamental properties of coordinated NO and to prepare dual chromophore
              systems which might serve as sensors for solution NO.    When light is absorbed
              by a molecule, the energy which the molecule acquires is sometime re-emitted as
              light of a different wave length (this is called luminescence) and sometimes by
              initiating a chemical reaction within the molecule. This project is designed to
              probe both possibilities. By using a specially designed series of copper
              compounds the details of how luminescence occurs. This has great importance to,
              for example, the design of light emitting electronic devices. In another
              portions the reactions of metal complexes of nitric oxide (NO) will be examined
              as the complexes are exposed to intense light. This has relevance to the design
              of sensors which can detect NO, which has important biochemical roles, in
              solution.
