Title       : Development of Recombinant RNA Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  1994   
File        : a9400562

Award Number: 9400562
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Horowitz                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1994   
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin Jarrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Jarrell  9400562  Restriction enzymes typically recognize and cleave specific
              DNA  sequences that are 4 to 6 basepairs (bp) in length.  However, only  a
              small subset of the 4096 possible bp sequences present in DNA are  recognized
              by restriction enzymes.  In addition, commercially  available restriction
              enzymes are often of poor quality; the  preparations are impure and the enzyme
              concentration is low.  This proposal seeks to develop recombinant RNA
              technology making  use of ribozymes that can cut and join RNA molecules to
              serve the  functions currently served by restriction enzymes and ligase.  
              Potentially, 4096 different ribozymes, each with a particular 6  nucleotide
              (nt) sequence specifically, can be generated.  All of  the ribozymes will be
              generated and purified by the same method and  each will function in the same
              reaction buffer.  Thus, it should be  possible produce inexpensive ribozymes of
              consistently high  quality.  This technology will significantly improve our
              ability to  generate recombinant DNA molecules.  The recombinant molecules will
               be generated at the RNA level using in vitro trans splicing  catalyzed by self
              splicing group II intron sequences.  These  recombinant RNA molecules will be
              copied into DNA by reverse  transcriptase and amplified by the polymerase chain
              reaction (PCR)  to yield the recombinant DNA molecules.  This research will 
              determine the feasibility of recombinant RNA technology as a  practical tool
              for nucleic acid manipulation.  Group II introns are capable of splicing
              together exons in vitro  (Peebles et al 1986).  This reaction is autocatalytic.
               As shown in  Figure 1, the intron catalyzes its own removal from a precursor 
              RNA.  The two sequences to be joined (exons 1 and 2) are  represented by
              rectangles.  The intron consists of six conserved  structural domains that are
              numbered sequentially.  %%%  Molecular Biology relies upon recombinant DNA
              technology to  manipulate and clone DNA molecules. Restriction enzymes and
              ligase  are used to specifically  cleave and join DNA molecules.  This 
              technology is so widely used that we seldom consider its  limitations. 
              Restriction enzymes typically recognize and cleave  specific DNA sequences that
              are 4 to 6 basepairs (bp) in length.   However, only a small subset of the 4096
              possible 6 bp sequences  present in DNA are recognized by restriction enzymes. 
              In addition,  commercially available restriction enzymes are often of poor 
              quality; the preparations are impure and the enzyme concentration  is low. 
              This proposal seeks to develop recombinant RNA technology making  use of
              ribozymes (RNA catalysts) that can cut and join RNA  molecules to serve the
              functions currently served by restriction  enzymes and ligase the enzyme that
              joins nucleic acid fragments.   Potentially, 4096 different ribozymes, each
              with a particular 6  nucleotide (nt) sequence specificity, can be generated. 
              All of the  ribozymes will be generated and purified by the same method and 
              each will function in the same reaction buffer.  Thus, it should be  possible
              to produce inexpensive ribozymes of consistently high  quality.  This
              technology will significantly improve our ability to  generate recombinant DNA
              molecules.  The recombinant molecules will  be generated at the  RNA level in
              vitro and then copied into DNA by  the enzyme reverse transcriptase that can
              copy RNA molecules into  DNA and amplified by the polymerase chain reaction to
              yield the  recombinant DNA molecules.  This research will determine the 
              feasibility of recombinant RNA technology as a potential tool for  nucleic acid
              manipulation.  Group II introns are capable of splicing together exons in vitro
               (Peebles al. 1986).  This reaction is autocatalytic.  As shown in  Figure 1,
              the intron catalyzes its own removal from a precursor  RNA.  The two sequences
              to be joined (exons 1 and 2) are  represented by rectangles.  The intron
              consists of six conserved  structural domains that are numbered sequentially.
