Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topological Properties of Singularities and Solutions of
               Nonlinear Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9400930

Award Number: 9400930
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1994       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James N. Damon jndamon@math.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400930  Damon       Professor Damon has been developing analogues of 
              infinitesimal methods introduced by Mather for answering  questions about the
              structure of nonlinear mappings and the  topological structure of special but
              important classes of highly  nonisolated singularities, such as occur in
              discriminants of  mappings.  In quite different circumstances, he has also 
              discovered how to modify these infinitesimal methods for  understanding the
              generic behavior of "pixel intensity functions"  under Gaussian blurring used
              in computer vision.  He intends to  build on his earlier results and derive
              general algebraic  formulae for certain fundamental topological invariants for 
              highly singular spaces.  Second, he will further develop methods  for
              determining the generic properties of solutions to partial  differential
              equations and, in particular, apply them to recent  nonlinear versions of
              Gaussian blurring.  Third, he will apply  the results on the topology of
              singular spaces to understand how  the qualitative behavior of the solutions
              can be deduced from the  singularities which occur.       This research project
              will investigate certain qualitative  properties of the set of solutions of
              systems of nonlinear  equations.  Such properties will be applied to generally 
              appearing solutions of partial differential equations.  Professor  Damon has
              been developing methods for determining such  qualitative properties. 
              Moreover, he has begun applying them to  understand the effects of Gaussian
              blurring applied to "pixel  intensity functions" for analyzing images in
              computer vision.  He  intends to develop these methods further so that they
              apply to  general partial differential equations.  This will include the 
              investigation of relations between certain invariants of the  solutions and
              their qualitative properties.  One  particularapplication will be to the
              increasingly sophisticated  nonlinear blurring schemes which are being
              developed for  identifying essential features and properties of images suc h as
               edges, ridges, etc.  ***
