Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Heavy Tailed Modelling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1996     
File        : a9400535

Award Number: 9400535
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1994      
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney I. Resnick resnick@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gennady Samorodnitsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a three year program of research organized around the  theme of heavy
              tailed modeling. Heavy tailed modeling assumes  regular variation is present in
              either the right tail (frequently  implying infinite variances) or the left
              tail of basic component  distributions of the system and thus departs from
              Gaussian  methods. Broad  themes include parameter estimation and  prediction
              in heavy tailed models (Hill estimator, linear  programming estimator), model
              selection and confirmation and long  range dependence. Specific classes of
              models to be studied are  extreme value models, infinitely divisible processes
              and time  series with positive innovations. Application areas include  modeling
              financial and commodities markets and teletraffic  systems.  This is a three
              year program of research organized around two  topics. The first involves
              modeling random phenomena whose  behavior is controlled by exceedingly large
              values. For example,  in communications, network performance can be
              dramatically  affected by anomalous long calls such as computer logins by 
              modem. Accurate modeling of these phenomena can lead to  improvements in the
              system. The second topic deals with random  phenomena in which dependencies in
              a system last a long time.  Once again accurate modeling is important in
              improving system  performance. Other applications of this research include
              modeling  financial and commodities markets and modeling of water flows and 
              heights.
