Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Embeddings of Continua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1995   
File        : a9400945

Award Number: 9400945
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1995    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ira Wayne Lewis wlewis@math.ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9400945  Lewis       Lewis will investigate a number of problems related to 
              embeddings of continua in manifolds and other spaces with a  uniform structure.
               Techniques involving inverse limits,  accessibility, and prime end structure
              will be studied.  He is  seeking characterizations of when various inverse
              limits can be  embedded in the plane and when homeomorphisms of continua can be
               extended to homeomorphisms of the plane.  He is also  investigating continua
              with the property that all of their  nondegenerate proper subcontinua are
              equivalently embedded, or  which admit rigid embeddings in the plane, and
              various  homogeneous embeddings in real 3-space.  Determining the  existence of
              an indecomposable continuum which is almost  homogeneously embedded in the
              plane will be important in the  study of dynamics.  Questions relating
              embeddings and extensions  of maps to computation of Hausdorff dimension and to
              attractors  and cofrontiers are among dynamic topics related to this  project. 
                   Lewis hopes to narrow the currently large gap between known  theorems and
              existing examples in the theory of continua by  broadening the base of the
              theory and looking for generic classes  of examples and construction
              techniques.  Recent work in discrete  dynamics indicates that considerations of
              embeddings and  extensions of maps are crucial in identifying which sets can be
               attractors or closures of orbits, how sensitive dynamic  properties are to
              perturbation, and what type dynamics is  possible or even generic.  These
              investigations should yield more  information about the continua themselves and
              new ways of  approaching problems which until now have proven slow to yield to 
              attacks.  Possibilities for new approaches lie in the areas of  decompositions,
              homogeneity, characterizations of spaces, and  investigations of subcontinua. 
              ***
