Title       : Cross-Site: The Effects of Indigenous Small Mammals On the Species Composition
               and Structure of Chihuahuan Desert Communities: A LTER Cross-Site Research
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9527083

Award Number: 9527083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199665             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Lightfoot dlightfo@sevilleta.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Brunt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0114000   Endangered Species                      
              0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              They propose to expand an existing LTER research project to a site in Mexico. 
              They will examine the roles of indigenous small mammals as keystone species
              determining plant species diversity and vegetation structure across the
              Chihuahuan Desert grassland and shrubland ecosystem.   The Sevilleta LTER site
              is located at the northern biome transition of the Chihuahuan Desert/Great
              Plains grasslands, while the Jornada LTER site is in the north-central
              Chihuahuan Desert.  They propose to add  a new research site, the Mapimi
              Biosphere Reserve (United Nations Man and Biosphere Program), located in the
              south-central Chihuahuan Desert. This crmss-site research project will involve
              university scientists with scientists from the US Department of Interior, Fish
              and Wildlife Service (Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge), the US  Department
              of Agriculture, Agricultural Research Service (Jornada Experimental Range), and
              Mexican  scientists (Institute of Ecology, Mapimi Biosphere Reserve).  Previous
              research demonstrates that  indigenous small mammals are keystone species in
              Chihuahuan Desert ecosys tems.  Other research  demonstrates that many
              Chihuahuan Desert ecosystems have become desertified as a result of human 
              disturbance, and the persistence of desertified landscapes may result from
              plant resource use and  physical soil processes alone.  They will
              experimentally determine how small mammals affect Chihuahuan Desert ecosystems,
              and how small mammal influences are affected by short-term and long-term
              climate change both locally, and regionally across the Chihuahuan Desert.  They
              will also integrate cross-site data management network to centralize and
              coordinate data management activities for the proposed research project.  This
              data management network will include the addition of a real-time satellite
              communications link at the remote Mapimi research site in Mexico, to link that
              site to the existing LTER Network.  The respective US LTER sites, and Institute
              of Ecology in Mexico will continue the Long-Term operation of this study beyond
              the three years of this requested award.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
