Title       : Systematics and Paleobotany of the Legume Subfamily Caesalpinioideae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1996  
File        : a9527673

Award Number: 9527673
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99705              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick S. Herendeen   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Field Mus of Natural Hist
	      1400 So. Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606052496    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527673  Herendeen   The large plant family Leguminosae (Fabaceae) is
              ecologically significant (nitrogen fixing species are common) and economically
              important (it includes soybeans, clovers, and tropical tree crops). While
              general aspects of taxonomic diversity are well known, many questions remain
              unanswered about evolutionary changes within the family that have led to the
              18,000 or so species currently recognized. Even the closest relatives of the
              family remain controversial, with recent molecular (DNA) findings suggesting
              the small, herbaceous family Polygalaceae, with flowers superficially similar
              to "papilionoid" blossoms of Leguminosae. The most primitive groups of legumes
              are shrubs and trees classified in the subfamily Caesalpinioideae, with most
              genera placed in the tribes Amherstieae and Detarieae. Dr. Patrick Herendeen of
              Field Museum is working on these groups, emphasizing collection and analysis of
              fossil materials and integration of these data with information collected from
              living members of the subfamily studied by himself and by collaborators Anne
              Bruneau (DNA analyses), Ian Ferguson (pollen morphology), and Shirley Tucker
              (floral morphology). Extensive field work in Africa, a region of great species
              diversity for the two tribes, will provide new specimens and materials for all
              these researchers and others interested in legume systematics and evolution.  
              Fossil studies will concentrate on flowers, pollen, fruits, and leaves
              collected from Eocene and Miocene deposits in Asia, Europe, and North America.
              Several extinct genera are known or suspected, with plants distinguished by
              combinations of features not found in modern, living species. Character
              analysis of this fossil material will help in determining the direction of
              evolutionary change in various floral and vegetative features, and in turn this
              will aid taxonomists in delimiting subtribal and generic groupings and in
              hypothesizing phylogenetic lineages within early legumes.
