Title       : Dissertation Research: The Tiwanaku Occupation of the Island of the Sun, Bolivia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9527963

Award Number: 9527963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7430               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan L. Kolata a-kolata@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, Mr. Matthew Seddon will collect data for
              his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavations at the
              `temple to the sun` which is located on an island in highland Bolivian lake.
              Spanish explorers who observed and described the Inca empire noted that this
              was a highly sacred site. Previous archaeological work has determined the
              location and has also discovered that the area was inhabited during at least
              two previous cultural periods. Mr. Seddon will excavate to determine the extent
              and nature of these earlier occupations. Both architectural and artifactural
              data will be recovered for comparison with other sites from the same time
              periods in the Bolivian highlands. On this basis it will be possible to learn
              whether during these earlier periods the area served a religious function or
              whether is was occupied for primarily domestic use.  Archaeologists wish to
              understand the processes which led the emergence of complex societies and have
              extensively studied the Inca as an example of a New World pre Columbian
              civilization. However in the Andean region the Incas were only the latest in a
              series of such complex entities and Bolivia is known for the Tiwanaku society
              which preceded it. The extent to which the Inca created their civilization `de
              novo` is not known and Mr. Seddon's research will address this issue. Although
              the temple of the sun served a religious purpose, Mr. Seddon's work focuses not
              on religion but on social and political control. In many prehistoric societies
              these functions are embedded in a ritual framework and it is these underlying
              social processes which are the object of Mr. Seddon's research.  This work is
              important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
              archaeologists. It will shed new light on the growth of complex societies and
              assist in the training of a promising young scientist.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
