Title       : Combined Research-Curriculum Development in Process Design, Optimization, and
               Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1999       
File        : a9527441

Award Number: 9527441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Warren D. Seider seider@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Luyben  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christodoulos A. Floudas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1340      ENGINEERING EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0101000   Curriculum Development                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Abstract  EEC-9527441-University of Pennsylvania, Lehigh University, Princeton
              University, Dr. Warren D. Seider, Dr. William L. Luyben, and Dr. Christodoulous
              A. Floudas    This award provides funding to the University of Pennsylvania for
              the support of a Combined Research-Curriculum Development (CRCD) Program
              entitled, "Combined Research-Curriculum Development in Process Design,
              Optimization, and Control." The CRCD program emphasizes the need to incorporate
              exciting research advances in important technology areas into the upper level
              undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula and stimulates faculty
              researchers to place renewed, equal value on quality education and curriculum
              development. This project will be a collaborative effort between Dr. Warren
              Seider, University of Pennsylvania, Dr. Christodoulos A. Floudos, Princeton
              University, and Dr. William L. Luyben, Lehigh University to translate the
              results of their ongoing research in the design and control of chemical
              processes into a modern two-course sequence in process design.  A two-course
              sequence will be created, along with the associated courseware (text and
              multi-media modules), that provides the first comprehensive treatment of
              process design, optimization, and control for the chemical engineering
              profession.  This course will be taught cooperatively at the three institutions
              and industrial consultants will provide design problems and advise the student
              groups as their designs evolve.    ??
