Title       : Collaborative Research: Deep Ocean Ventilation through Antarctic Intermediate
               Layers (DOVETAIL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9527752

Award Number: 9527752
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234506             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Martinson dgm@ldeo.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaojun Yuan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Holland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hartmut H. Hellmer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 The proposed project is a multi-institutional integrated study of the outflow
              of newly formed bottom water from the Weddell Sea and its dispersion into the
              South Atlantic Ocean.  It builds upon earlier successful studies of the inflow
              of intermediate water masses into the Eastern Weddell Sea, their modification
              within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction with bottom water formation
              processes in the western Weddell Sea.  The study is called Deep Ocean
              Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL) and includes six
              components involving hydrographic measurements, natural tracer experiments, and
              modeling studies.  The study will be centered east of the Drake Passage where
              water masses from the Weddell Sea and the Scotia Sea come together in the
              Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and will be carried out in cooperation with the
              national antarctic programs of Germany and Spain.   The study has four related
              objectives.  The first is to assess the quantity and the physical and chemical
              characteristics of  Weddell Sea source waters for the confluence.  The second
              is to describe the dominant processes associated with spreading and sinking of
              dense antarctic waters within the Weddell-Scotia Confluence.  The third is to
              estimate the ventilation rate of the world ocean, and the fourth is to estimate
              seasonal fluctuations in the regional ocean transport and hydrographic
              structure and to assess the likely influence of seasonal to interannual
              variability on rates of ventilation by Weddell Sea waters.   Ventilation of the
              deep ocean -- the rising of sub-surface water masses to the surface to be
              recharged with atmospheric gases and to give up heat to the atmosphere -- is a
              uniquely antarctic phenomenon that has significant consequences for global
              change by affecting the global reservoir of carbon dioxide, and by modulating
              the amount and extent of seasonal sea ice in the southern hemisphere.   This
              component of DOVETAIL concerns the high resolution regional modeling of the
              study area, and the deployment of ice drifters to observe directly the ice
              motion, the surface air temperature, and the atmospheric pressure.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
