Title       : Genetic Variation and Adaptation in Heterogeneous Environments (Semibalanus
               balanoides)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9527709

Award Number: 9527709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Rand david_rand@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Bertness  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0208000   Water Resources                         
              0312000   Population                              
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9527709  Rand   This research will combine the tools of molecular population
              genetics and experimental field ecology to examine the pattern of natural
              selection at specific genes in the intertidal acorn barnacle (Semibalanus
              balanoides).  At the "Mpi" and "Gpi" genes in the acorn barnacle, two forms of
              the protein encoded by each gene are found in natural populations.  The two
              forms of each of these proteins show repeatable differences in their
              proportions between high- vs. low-tidal heights on sunny exposed rocks.  At
              shaded sites nearby, there is no clear difference between tidal heights in the
              proportions of the two types of proteins.  Similar patterns in other  organisms
              suggest that natural selection for thermal tolerance leads to the differential
              survival of the two genetic variants in different environments.     Three
              experiments will be conducted.  1) The investigators will examine the change in
              frequency of the different proteins and neutral DNA markers in different
              temporal samples (from larvae in the water column in the spring, through to
              adult stages in the fall).   2)  A reciprocal transplant experiment will be
              conducted to manipulate the placement of individuals between high vs. low tidal
              heights, and sunny vs. shaded sites.  The transplanted individuals will be
              scored for molecular genetic markers to test whether natural selection is
              acting on the protein variation.  3) Mpi and Gpi genes from the acorn barnacle
              will be cloned to determine the DNA sequence variation at these genes.  These
              experiments will allow identification of the ecological factors leading to the
              association between genes and environment,  as well as identify the DNA sites
              at which selection is acting.  No previous studies have explicitly manipulated
              DNA and protein markers in the intertidal to examine natural selection at
              specific genes.     This work will provide a synthesis of ecological and
              genetic analyses that examine adaptation to heterogeneous environments. 
              Because the relevant selective agent appears t o be thermal stress, this
              research may help elucidate the effects of climate change on genetic variation.
