Title       : Information Theoretic Approaches for Equipment Condition Assessment, Diagnostics
               and Maintenance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9527302

Award Number: 9527302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76863              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Tomsovic tomsovic@eecs.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9527302  Tomsovic  This project is aimed at developing an information theoretic 
              approach for assessing power system equipment condition with the  goal of
              improving the overall integrity of the power system.   This research is felt to
              be particularly important in light of  concerns with the quality of the
              nation's civil infrastructure  system.  In terms of overall power system
              reliability and security,  individual equipment condition plays a critical
              role.  Electric  utilities direct significant effort towards detecting
              accelerated  aging and preventing catastrophic equipment failures.  
              Traditional maintenance and condition monitoring schedules were  based
              primarily on manufacturer recommended fixed time intervals.   In recent years
              due to greater economic pressures, utilities have  begun, one, to shift towards
              longer maintenance intervals and  two, to load equipment significantly beyond
              manufacturer ratings.   Under normal conditions, there is adequate design
              margin to allow  both reduced maintenance and some overloading.  Recent sensor 
              developments offer the ability to further stretch equipment  limits by
              monitoring certain key variables.  Unfortunately, the  breakdown mechanism of
              most equipment are only partially  understood so that developed methods for
              early detection of  equipment failures are imprecise and unreliable. Broad
              experience  with a particular technique is necessary to overcome this 
              impression and perform effective diagnosis.  In addition, most  equipment has
              relatively long expected lifetimes so that there may  not be significant
              failure date to perform meaningful statistical  models of failures.  Together
              the above factors, suggest that utilities are following  practices with limited
              knowledge of the long term impacts on  system reliability.  They may not fully
              understand the limits to  which their equipment can be pushed. Further, they
              lack the  computational framework to include their data and the experience  in
              a workable model.  This work focuses on developing an  info rmation theoretic
              framework for modeling the imperfect  knowledge of equipment breakdown with the
              ability to easily  incorporate new information as experience is gained.  The
              long  term objective is to allow both statistical, process and  heuristic data
              in a model which allows for improved suggestions  on maintenance intervals,
              diagnostic conclusions and reliability  evaluation.  This project will focus on
              underlying general  principles of power system equipment in developing this
              model.   ***
