Title       : Collaborative Research: Molecular Systematics of Drosophila Repleta Group
               Species
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1995  
File        : a9527950

Award Number: 9527950
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DeSalle desalle@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527950  DeSalle   The range of host plants used by groups of insects can be
              broad or very narrow, including host plant specificity or restriction to a
              single host.  Since most insects, which constitute the vast majority of all
              animal species, use plants during some part of their life cycles for food or as
              a place to reproduce, it is important to understand the causes for insects to
              be host specialists or generalists.  Patterns of host use may be important in
              explaining the diversification of insect groups.  Particular aspects of host
              plants may either limit or increase the number of hosts an insect species can
              use.  Over long time intervals, this may give rise to related groups of insect
              species that share host affinities.   The research project supported by this
              award will use patterns of DNA sequence data similarities to study the degree
              of genetic relatedness among a group of over 40 species in the Drosophila
              mulleri species complex (Insecta: Diptera: Drosophilidae).  The pattern of
              species relationships determined will be compared to the host use of these
              species in nature.  Two clusters of species in this complex, each with three
              species, will be studied in greater detail for evidence of population level
              variation in DNA sequence data.  The fruit flies in this study group breed on
              cacti and their larvae feed on cactus host plants.  There has been an apparent
              host shift with some species feeding on the cactus genus Opuntia, whose members
              are easily recognized by paddle shaped parts, to other cacti whose growth form
              is columnar or barrel shaped.  Knowledge of relationships among the Drosophila
              species will allow determination of the number of times that this shift between
              cactus types has occurred.   %%%  This award will provide information on the
              biodiversity and host plant associations in a group of specialized cactus
              feeding flies.  This research represents an important model system for
              understanding host shifts and the origin of insect pests that may be of value
              in developing non-chemica l means of controlling pests.  ***
