Title       : SBIR Phase II: Quality Manufacturing of Oxide Dispersion Strengthened Silver
               Sheathed High-Temperature Superconductor Wire Using Internal Oxidation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9527558

Award Number: 9527558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert N. Riley briley@asc.mhs.compuserve.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Superconductor Corp
	      Two Technology Drive
	      Westborough, MA  01581    508/836-4200

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1730,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMI-9527558  Riley   This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
              will result in the development of quality manufacturing procedures for the
              cost-effective production of high-performance Oxide Dispersion Strengthened
              Silver (ODS-Ag) sheathed High-Temperature Superconductor (HTS) wire.  We have
              demonstrated in our successful Phase I Research that novel ODS-Ag materials
              fabricated using internal oxidation of a dilute Ag-alloy precursor are viable
              advanced sheathing materials for HTS wire that will enhance the mechanical and
              electrical properties of the resulting composite.  Using Total Quality
              Management (TQM) principles, we will build on our Phase I achievements and
              develop quality manufacturing procedures associated with the qualification and
              processing of dilute Ag-alloys.  In our approach, we will address the
              underlying technical and economic factors associated with raw material
              procurement, processing, and quality assurance.  Success in our Phase II
              program will result in dilute Ag-alloy qualification procedures optimized for
              the quality manufacture of high-performance ODS-Ag sheathed HTS wire,
              ultimately leading to a product with an incrementally improved price to
              performance ratio.   The successful development of cost-effective ODS-Ag
              sheathed HTS wire will significantly accelerate and broadly enable a
              multiplicity of HTS bulk applications.  The increased strength and robustness
              of the improved wire will benefit such mechanically demanding applications as
              Power Transmission Cables, Motors, and Generators.  Similarly, the improved
              alternating current performance of the improved wire will benefit such
              electrically demanding applications as Transformers, Inductors, and Fault
              Current Limiters.
