Title       : New Operating Paradigm for Electric Power Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1998       
File        : a9527626

Award Number: 9527626
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marija Ilic                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160841             (Estimated)
Investigator: Felix F. Wu ffwu@eecs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,1057,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9527626  Wu  Recent moves to open up electric power transmission networks to 
              foster generation competition and customer choice have touched  off a debate
              over how the transmission system should be  restructured in order to meet the
              goal.  the opposing sides of  this debate are now commonly known as the
              bilateral model and the  poolco model.  Both models resort to conventional
              centralized  operation in dealing with the shared resources of an integrated 
              transmission network.  The conventional operation paradigm was  developed in a
              different era for electric utilities operated as  regulated monopolies.  A new
              operation paradigm is needed for a  restructured industry that encourages
              efficient competition and  at the same time maintains necessary coordination to
              guarantee a  high standard of reliability.  Coordination does not mean 
              centralization.  There are indeed two aspects of coordination,  namely,
              information structure and decision-making authority.  We  propose to examine
              the requirements for coordination in the new  operating paradigm for reliable
              (secure) and economic operation  of power systems along these two dimensions. 
              It is believed that  the decision mechanism regarding economics and reliability
               (security) of system operation should be separated.  Economic  decision should
              be carried out by private multilateral trades  among generators and consumers. 
              The functions of reliability  should be coordinated through the power system
              operator with  proper information structure to guide generators and consumers
              to  make profitable trades that meet the secure transmission loading  limits. 
              The communications, computing and control infrastructure  necessary to support
              the proposed model will be investigated.     ***
