Title       : Systematics of Anamorphic Yeasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9527787

Award Number: 9527787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack W. Fell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527787  Fell   Yeasts and yeast-like organisms are a heterogeneous group of
              fungi of agricultural, economic, ecological, and medical importance; interest
              in them is accelerating as a result of the search for new organic compounds for
              industrial and pharmaceutical uses. About 140 genera and 800 species have thus
              far been recognized and named, but many more may exist in environments and
              habitats poorly explored thus far. One major problem associated with studies of
              yeasts, particularly the anamorphic (asexual) forms, is that they are difficult
              to identify. The phenotypic characters (morphological, physiological, or
              biochemical) used for classification and identification commonly show strain
              variability within species, either environmentally induced or genetic. This
              problem affects all laboratories throughout the world and has discouraged
              researchers and students from undertaking the collection, study, and
              classification of naturally occurring yeasts.    Tools of molecular biology
              hold promise for yielding data and characters of great utility for
              identification and classification of yeasts and their relatives. In particular,
              nucleotide sequence data from nuclear ribosomal genes are likely to provide
              powerful evidence for similarity and close relationship among strains within a
              species, and between species within genera. Dr. Jack Fell at University of
              Miami is working on the ca. 22 genera of basidiomycetous yeasts and many of
              their putative teleomorphic (sexual) relatives, to collect DNA sequence data
              useful in assessing phylogenetic relationships among these taxa. Of special
              interest are forms recovered from marine environments (open ocean, estuaries).
              Integration of the new data with information on traditional taxonomic
              characters is another goal of the work. One of the products is expected to be
              an updating of the PI's authoritative monograph (with colleague Kurtzman at
              USDA-Peoria) on the yeasts of the world.
