Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Workshops on Trenchless Excavation Technology; Dresden
               and Dusseldorf; September, 1995
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1995    
File        : a9527469

Award Number: 9527469
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christine French                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjiv B. Gokhale   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tom Iseley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1039,5936,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This award supports ten U.S. civil engineers, all of whom are junior professors
              at U.S. universities, to travel to Germany in September, 1995, for a program of
              conferences and site visits to learn more about a new trenchless excavation
              technology developed there over the past fifteen years.  They will be
              accompanied by a group of practicing engineers supported by the U.S.
              construction industry, who have begun using this technology in the U.S.  In
              addition to participating in an international conference on this subject in
              Dresden, the group will visit a microtunneling manufacturing factory near
              Hamburg and a composite polymer concrete (`polycrete`) pipe manufacturing
              facility in Luneburg and discuss the engineering research there and to explore
              possible arrangements for large scale testing of these systems and materials in
              the U.S.  Polycrete is widely used in Europe now as a sewer material due to its
              combination of strength  and extremely high resistance to corrosion and
              abrasion.  Finally, the group will spend several days at the new Institute for
              Tunneling Technology near Dusseldorf, which has received heavy investment by
              German government and industry sources and is already recognized as a
              world-class center of excellence.  Its mission is to develop, test, and
              optimize technologies for underground infrastructure systems.  There they will
              participate in a workshop with academic and industry researchers to examine the
              educational and research needs for this technology in the U.S. and elsewhere
              and the opportunities for collaboration in both research and educational
              exchanges between U.S. and German institutions in this field.  Trenchless
              technology provides the ability to install and/or rehabilitate underground
              civil infrastructure systems with minimum surface disruption and destruction by
              minimizing excavation.  Since its development outside the U.S. around fifteen
              years ago, its use by the construction industry has grown rapidly because it
              offers a safe, economical and environmentally compatible solution to the
              complex problem of underground infrastructure renewal.  It is very worthwhile
              for the U.S. to develop its own research base for this technology to reduce
              reliance on technology transfer from foreign companies.  The planned
              research-oriented travel in Germany will enhance interactions between U.S.
              academia and U.S. industry in this area of engineering and lead to more
              relevant research and training in this strategically useful technology.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
