Title       : Sensor-Integrated Control for Rapid Thermal Chemical Vapor Deposition (RTCVD)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 27,  1995 
File        : a9527576

Award Number: 9527576
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Hurt                            
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. S. Krishnaprasad krishna@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Adomaitis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evanghelos Zafiriou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wijesuriya P. Dayawansa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F              W  g                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                               O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    3   g   3
                g                                                                            
                                                                                             
                                               -   .   /   0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           F 
                Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                9527576
              Krishnaprasad  This award is the University of Maryland with a sub-contract to
              North Carolina State University at Raleigh.  The overall goal of this effort is
              to demonstrate a methodology for sensor-integrated control of rapid thermal
              chemical vapor deposition (RTCVD) of polycrystalline silicon (poly Si) from
              silane with focus on controlling deposition thickness and across-wafer
              uniformity.  The project exploits advances in real-time sensors, including
              pyrometry for temperature, thermal imaging for temperature uniformity, and
              sampling mass spectrometry for thickness metrology and process ambient
              monitoring.  Reduced-order process models constructed from high fidelity heat
              and fluid flow simulations, together with physically-based dynamic equipment,
              process, and sensor simulations, are the basis for control models.  Resulting
              run-to-run control methodologies for controlling deposition thickness and
              across-wafer uniformity are being developed and validated experimentally, and
              real-time control approaches are being explored.  These run-to-run control
              approaches will be extendible to real-time c ontrol.  An architecture to
              support a basic supervisory control component is being demonstrated, using
              physically-based dynamic simulation to determine sensor signatures of specific
              equipment failure modes, together with advanced algorithms as interference
              tools for detecting sensor signal correlations and identifying indicated
              equipment/process malfunction.  The investigators at the University of Maryland
              provide the effort on simulation and control, while the investigators at North
              Carolina State University provide the effort on sensors and on rapid thermal
              chemical vapor deposition of polycrystalline silicon.  The experimental proof
              of concept of the control system will be performed in the cluster tool
              deposition apparatus at North Carolina State University. ***    0  0           
                                                        Oh     +'  0                         
                           $       H       l                                               D 
                   h                                               ,  
              \\CLM15\SMURPHY$\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT       S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
              i o n                           (                                              
                  ,                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  9527576                             SHERONDA MURPHY        
                          SHERONDA MURPHY             @     X  g                          @  
                                              @     X  g                                     
                                                                          @                  
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              2                                                              
                                       ;         e =       e               d                 
                   d                                       l       l   l       l       l     
               l       l                                                                     
                   1                                                                         
                                   %   D                           T   G   9                 
                       l                                                                     
                                 l       l                                                   
                                 l               l                                           
                         l       l       l       l                           s               
                                                                                             
               9527576 Krishnaprasad  This award is the University of Maryland with a
              sub-contract to North Carolina State University at Raleigh.  The overall goal
              of this effort is to demonstrate a methodology for sensor-integrated control of
              rapid thermal chemical vapor deposition (RTCVD) of polycrystalline silicon
              (poly Si) from silane with focus on controlling deposition thickness and
              across-wafer uniformity.  The project exploits advances in real-time sensors,
              including pyrometry for temperature, thermal imaging for temperature
              uniformity, and sampling mass spectrometry for thickness metrology and process
              ambient monitoring.  Reduced-order process models constructed from high
              fidelity heat and fluid flow simulations, together with physically-based
              dynamic equipment, process, and sensor simulations, are the basis for control
              models.  Resulting run-to-run control methodologies for controlling deposition
              thickness and across-wafer uniformity are being developed and validated
              experimentally, and real-time control approaches are being explored.  These
              run-to-run control approaches wi
