Title       : Spermatogenesis in "Pteridophytes": Ultrastructure Differentiation and Phylogeny
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9527735

Award Number: 9527735
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen S. Renzaglia renzaglia@plant.siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Garbary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dean P. Whittier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527735  RENZAGLIA   The first successful migration of early life forms from
              water to land was one of the most significant and perplexing of all biological
              events.  Nearly 500 million years ago, swamp-dwelling algae made it ashore and
              thus set the stage for the magnificent flourish of plants and animals to come. 
              Yet, it is still uncertain as to what this ancestral alga looked like and how
              the diverse plant groups that exist today are related to this presumed
              ancestor, and to each other.  This project proposes to address these
              fundamental questions by examining sperm cell development and structure in a
              critical group of seedless vascular plants, the OpteridophytesO.   Plants
              included among the OpteridophytesO include ferns, club mosses, spike mosses,
              quillworts, and horsetails.   Sperm cells in modern OpteridophytesO hold clues
              to the functioning, structure and evolution of ancient land plants.  Swimming
              sperm are the only motile cells of contemporary plants and as such they carry
              traits of their aquatic algal ancestors.  Tracing their differentiation and
              architecture provides clues to early land plant lineages and will eventually
              identify evolutionary threads leading all the way back to the ancestral algae. 
                 Ten OpteridophytesO, species whose sperm cells are thought to resemble most
              closely those of the first terrestrial organisms, will be targeted for electron
              microscopic examination.  More than 500 detailed micrographs will be taken for
              each plant.  These photographs will be analyzed and three-dimensional images
              will be prepared to depict the stages of development.  In addition, computers
              will track and analyze information on approximately 100 cell traits, from cell
              shape to protein components.  Emphasis will be placed on examining the role of
              proteins that are involved in organizing the structural entities of these
              highly complicated motile cells.   The results will help place these ten
              informative species more correctly on the plant worldOs complex genealogical
              tree.  These analyses will  also more clearly resolve which modern algae are
              the closest relatives to terrestrial plants and the sequence of appearance of
              the primitive plant groups during the early history of plant life on land. 
              Beyond that, these studies provide more essential information about the
              organization, differentiation and evolution of cells in all forms of life.
