Title       : Entry of Sewage-Derived Organic Matter from McMurdo Station, Antarctica, Into
               the Benthic Food Web and its Biological Consequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1996     
File        : a9527789

Award Number: 9527789
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124531             (Estimated)
Investigator: John S. Oliver   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rikk G. Kvitek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 5106      ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                          Abstract    The population of the United States
              Antarctic Program at McMurdo  Station is approximately one thousand people in
              the austral  summer.  Untreated sewage is disposed through a macerator and 
              released into the marine environment as effluent directly  offshore of the
              station at the twenty meter depth contour.  Although the Principal
              Investigators have previously mapped the  boundaries of the sewage effluent
              plume in the water column, the  degree to which anthropogenic sources of
              organic enrichment is  taken up and passed through the antarctic benthic food
              web is  unknown.  Coincidentally, the foundation for understanding of the 
              structure, composition and functioning of antarctic benthic  communities comes
              primarily from field research conducted within  the boundaries of the McMurdo
              sewage outfall plume.    The purpose of this research is to determine if
              sewage-derived  organic material is assimilated by the benthic food web and its
               extent of influence and if there is a biological response to  anthropogenic
              organic enrichment and how this compares to natural  organic enrichment by
              seals.  This research will provide an  understanding of the relative
              contribution to natural organic  enrichment by seals.  A secondary purpose 
              will be to understand  the relative contribution of different organic sources
              to the  benthos and the way that this material moves through the food  web. 
              The Principal Investigators will use stable carbon, sulfur,  and nitrogen
              isotope ratios and fecal-derived bacteria as indices  and compare the influence
              of sewage and seal-derived organic  matter with natural organic sources from
              the under-ice, benthos,  and water column.  They will test the hypothesis that
              sewage  influence is greater than previously thought.  This understanding  is
              essential for effective station sewage management and policy  decisions and for
              the design and interpretation of polar benthic  research  conducted in the
              vicinity of human inhabitation or  other sources of  organic enrichment.
