Title       : Mineral Dissolution and Growth: A Laboratory Study of Kinetic Responses to
               Variable Conditions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9527031

Award Number: 9527031
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $167894             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carrick M. Eggleston   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Eggleston  9527031     Mineral dissolution and growth are basic forms of
              chemical communication between rocks and the hydro-, and bio-spheres (i.e.,
              environments at the Earth's surface).  This proposal describes a study that
              uses rate-relaxation kinetics and non steady-state experiments as a powerful
              new probe of surface chemical processes operating during dissolution and growth
              of oxide minerals.    Conditions at the Earth's surface are variable.  Chemical
              processes in this environment are subject to frequent transient and periodic
              perturbations and fluctuations of conditions; steady-state is rarely achieved. 
              Our  understanding of mineral dissolution and growth kinetics, in contrast is
              largely limited to steady-state.  We know very little about rate-relaxation
              times (i.e., the time needed for transition from one steady-state to another),
              despite strong evidence that they exist.  This imposes a fundamental limit on
              our ability to model reaction rates in nature.  This study will test and
              constrain a theory of non-steady-state (NSS) dissolution and growth kinetics
              that addresses this limitation.   The theoretical framework developed here to
              systematize NSS data combines surface complexation models (SCMs), absorption
              kinetics, and Burton-Cabrera-Frank (BCF) theory.  This approach has direct
              bearing on several other long-standing problems:  1) relationship(s) between
              overall thermodynamic driving force and rate; 2) structure-reactivity
              correlation's for mineral surfaces; and 3) the role of rate-affecting adsorbed
              species.  Importantly, it also creates a way to use new data on kinematics
              (step and kink motion and interaction) from in-situ scanning probe microscopy
              to constrain theory.  NSS kinetics thus provides a unique opportunity to
              establish connections between microscopic surface processes and macroscopic
              kinetic behavior at both laboratory and field scales.   Specific hypotheses
              tested, using simple (single component) Al, Fe, and Si oxide minerals (plus a
              few structural analogs), and later usi ng albite, are:  Rate-relaxation times
              exist; i.e., in response to an abrupt change (e.g., in pH), dissolution or
              growth rates are expected to approach a new steady-state slowly relative to the
              abruptness of the change.  This will be tested wet-chemically using specially
              designed flow-through reactors.  The system response to square-wave and
              sine-wave variations of , e.g., pH, will be recorded.  This
              "frequency-response" technique from chemical engineering provides valuable data
              on intermediate steps in reaction mechanisms.  Rate-relaxation times are
              expected to correlate with H2O-replacement rates for corresponding aqueous ions
              (as do dissolution and adsorption rates).  Rate-relaxation results from changes
              in the concentration and/or structure of adsorbed "nutrient" species (e.g., of
              Al on Al203).  Equilibrium and kinetic data on such adsorption will be gained
              using :  a) isotopic dilution, b) a novel use of FTIR spectroscopy, c) a new,
              high-resolution electrostatic atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique, and d)
              comparison of AFM-derived step kinematics data to the predictions of BCF-SCM
              theory discussed above.   Iso-structural (corundum and goethite-structure
              oxides are used so that linear-free energy relationships can be employed to
              systematize kinetic data.
