Title       : The Soil Production Function: The Key Linkage Between Erosion Rates, Climate and
               Soil Thickness on Landscapes Developed on Bedrock
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 8,  1997  
File        : a9527006

Award Number: 9527006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $277000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Dietrich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kunihiko Nishiizumi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               Dietrich  9527006   For over 100 years it has been assumed that the rate of
              disintegration of bedrock into erodable soil depends on the thickness of the
              overlying soil mantle.  This assumption underlies the belief that there are
              weathering-limited and transport-limited landscapes.  The emerging trends
              toward modeling real landscapes rather than hypothetical ones and toward
              tackling complex problems coupling climate, geology, biology and human actions,
              however, requires that this assumption be investigated.  Soil production plans
              an essential role in controlling the spatial variation in soil depth and in
              determining under what conditions landscapes become bedrock dominated.  No
              field data currently exists, however, that permits quantitative definition of
              the shape of the soil production function.  Propose to focus on the thin soils
              (<1m) developed on convex ridges where erosion is due to diffusive transport
              processes and production is strongly influenced by mechanical disruption caused
              by biologic activity.  Her we find the boundary between the soil and partially
              weathered bedrock to be abrupt, making the soil thickness easily defined.  Two
              new, independent methods will be used to determine the soil production
              function.  One method obtains an estimate of the production function from
              simple field relationships.  This method arises from a theoretical analysis
              which shows that where soil production is in balance with removal by diffusive
              (slope dependent) processes, the product of the diffusion coefficient and
              curvature equals the soil production rate.  Hence, if soil production rate
              depends on soil thickness, then soil thickness should vary with topographic
              curvature, and if the diffusion coefficient is known, the soil production law
              can be fully quantified.  The other method estimates conversion rate of bedrock
              to soil from the analysis of cosmogenic nuclide build up in the bedrock found
              at the base of the soil column.  The approach is analogous to erosion rate
              estimates previously done on expose d bedrock using cosmogenic nuclides, but
              this is a novel application to a case where the target rock is beneath the
              surface.  Although estimates of bedrock to soil conversion rates by this method
              also assume steady state soil thickness, this assumption can be evaluated for
              long term variation by comparing the ratio of 26Al to 10Be concentrations. 
              This cosmegenic nuclide method is entirely independent of the first, and can
              provide both estimates of long-term lowering rates as well as diffusivities. 
              Preliminary findings for each method show that they yield comparable results
              consistent with an expected exponential decline in production rate with soil
              depth.  A three-year project is proposed to test the assumption of depth
              dependency in soil production by applying these two new methods.  Six sites,
              two underlain by greywacke and four by granite rocks have been selected for
              study based on previous work on geomorphic processes, on climatic differences,
              and by the very large differences in long-term erosion rates.  The two
              greywacke sites have already been the subject of substantial geomorphic studies
              and the diffusivities, climatic history and role of macrofauna in transport and
              soil production are well-known.  Here we will focus on the question of does the
              methodology give sensible results and define a clear production function.  The
              four sites underlain by granitic rocks vary in long term erosion rates by as
              much as a factor of 1000, have annual precipitation that varies by a factor of
              2 and three sites show clear evidence of active macrofauna burrowing while one,
              in Australia, has no macrofauna in the soil.  Comparison of the production
              function for all six sites should shed light on the underlying controls on the
              production function and enable us to form an explanation for how landscapes
              with widely varying erosion rates could have the soil thickness.  Successful
              determination of soil production functions will be of great value to modeling
              landscape evolution as well as to providing insight and  guidelines about the
              long-term consequence of accelerated soil erosion due to land use in hilly
              lands underlain by bedrock.
