Title       : Surface Chemistry of Ice and Sulfuric Acid
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9527665

Award Number: 9527665
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W R. Gentry gentry@chem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey T. Roberts  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0202000   Atmospheric Science-ICAS                
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1318,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              In this research project supported jointly by the Analytical and Surface  
              Chemistry Program and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program, Professor   Roberts
              and his coworkers will carry out basic studies of the chemistry   of ice and
              solid acid hydrate multilayers.  The effects of ice surface   structure on the
              catalyis of reactions of importance in stratospheric   chemistry will be
              examined.  In addition, the adsorption and reaction of   small molecules on
              solid sulfuric acid and sulfuric acid water solid   solutions will be explored.
              The mechanism of the heterogeneous nucleation   and growth of ice and acid
              hydrate layers will also be investigated.    Ultra high vacuum electron
              spectroscopic probes as well as reflection   absorption infrared spectroscopy
              will be applied to these studies.  The   information obtained in this research
              will be useful for developing an   understanding of the stratospheric chemistry
              which governs catalytic   ozone destruction, and will provide a basic
              understanding of the surface   chemistry of important molecular solids.  The
              chemistry of small molecules of atmospheric importance on the surface   of ice
              and solid acid hydrates forms the focus of this research project.   Adsorption
              and reaction of molecules such as HCl, HOCl, and HNO3 on ice   and solid
              sulfuric acid surfaces will be examined using electron   spectroscopy and
              reflection absorption infrared spectroscopy.  The   information obtained from
              these studies will be important in developing   an understanding of the
              chemistry leading to ozone depletion in the   stratosphere, and in our basic
              knowledge of infrequently studied   molecular solids such as ice and sulfuric
              acid.                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
