Title       : Migration of the Pacific-Indian Isotopic Boundary and Evolution of the
               Australian-Antarctic Discordance: A Drilling Site Survey
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1995    
File        : a9527462

Award Number: 9527462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce T. Malfait                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70522              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas G. Pyle   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley R. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5720      OCEAN DRILLING PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9527462  Pyle  An improved understanding of the systematics of mantle
              circulation  is a high scientific priority in solid earth geophysics. By
              mapping  the areal distribution of crustal compositions over key areas of 
              ocean floor, quantitative information about the size, composition,  and
              distribution of mantle reservoirs, variations in mantle  temperatures, the
              efficiency of convective stirring in the mantle,  and the longevity of
              individual mantle reservoirs can be obtained.  One very important problem of
              this type, which can be addressed by  surficial sampling and crustal drilling,
              concerns the origin and  evolution of the distinctive isotopic and geochemical
              signature of  the Indian Ocean upper mantle. Lavas erupted at Indian Ocean 
              spreading centers are isotopically distinct from those of the  Pacific. A
              unique and sharp boundary between Pacific and isotopic  provinces has been
              identified within the Australian-Antarctic  Discordance along the spreading
              ridge.    The objective of the present project is to map this boundary away 
              from the ridge crest, since limited available data tends to  indicate a
              westward migration of the boundary over time. Seismic  reflection, gravity and
              magnetic data and dredge samples will be  collected in the off-axis area during
              a 40 day research cruise in  early 1996. These data will also provide
              site-survey information in  support of a proposal to the Ocean Drilling Program
              to sample old  crust in an attempt to map the history of the boundary. The
              project  involves scientists from the University of Washington, Oregon State 
              University, and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.  ***
