Title       : Consequences of Drought for Populations of Cryptantha flava
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9527833

Award Number: 9527833
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kimberlyn Williams                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349903             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brenda B. Casper bcasper@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527833  Casper      Under  models  that  predict  long-term  changes  in 
              global  climate,  semi-desert regions are expected  to  become  even  drier.  
              The purpose of this study is to predict how natural  populations  of  plants 
              in these regions  will  respond  to  drought conditions.  Most ecological
              studies of water use in  plants   have   focused  on  anatomical   or  
              physiological  adaptations  that  allow particular species  to  occupy  dry 
              habitats.   There  has been little effort to  determine  how  populations and
              communities will respond to temporal changes  in  water  availability.  To do
              this, we need to  understand  how  drought  affects individuals depending on 
              their  size,  developmental stage, or associations with other plants.  The 
              investigators  will  experimentally  reduce  the  amount  of  rainfall 
              received by natural populations of the semi-desert  herbaceous perennial
              Cryptantha flava by erecting  temporary  shelters  during spring rainstorms. 
              The study is  based  on  data collected during a natural drought year
              indicating that  larger  plants  are more severely affected by  drought  than 
              smaller  plants.   Comparisions will be  made  of  survival,  growth  and
              flowering of individuals of different sizes  and  in  different  microhabitats,
              under shrubs or in  the  open,  both  in  areas where water has been reduced 
              and  in  areas  receiving natural rainfall.  These demographic data will  be 
              supplemented  by  measurements of water use,  leaf  nitrogen  content,  and 
              photosynthesis.  These sorts of  measurements  will help to determine why
              individuals respond to changes in  water  availability as they do.  The
              experimental  reduction  in  water  will  be repeated spatially and in two 
              different  years.   Demographic and physiological measurements will  be  taken 
              on  the same individuals in the year before  drought,  the drought year, and
              the year afterwards.  This replication  of  the experiment is important because
              natural variation in  rainfall  is  likely  to  occur during the  experiment.  
              The  study  should  also  lead  to  identification  of  lingering  effects that
              extend beyond the drought year itself.
