Title       : A Broadband Seismic Experiment for Study of the Tectonics and Structure of the
               Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea Regions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9527366

Award Number: 9527366
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330685             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas A. Wiens doug@kermadec.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dapeng Zhao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wiens and Zhao  OPP 9527366    Abstract    The present day tectonics and
              seismological structure of the  Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia plate region are
              among the most  poorly understood of any location in the world.  This region 
              offers a unique and complex geodynamic setting, as illustrated by  the recent
              cessation of volcanism along the South Shetland Trench  and onset of volcanism
              and rifting in the Bransfield Strait, the  possible presence of diffuse
              deformation and/or microplates in  the Drake Passage region, and fast back-arc
              spreading behind the  South Sandwich Arc.    This award supports the US
              component of an international effort  to study the seismotectonics and seismic
              structure of the  Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea regions using a large
              scale  deployment of broad band seismographs beginning during the 1996-  1997
              field season.  The project will deploy 9 broadband PASSCAL  seismographs for 2
              years in the Antarctic Peninsula region,  Southernmost Chile, and South Georgia
              Island.    The following questions will be addressed:  1)  Is there
              seismological evidence, in the form of either  subduction zone  earthquakes or
              seismic structure, for current subduction beneath  the Antarctic Peninsula?  2)
               Is there evidence from seismic anisotropy for large scale  mantle flow around
              South America into the South Atlantic?  3)  Are regional earthquakes and focal
              mechanisms consistent with  current kinematic models for the Scotia plate,
              which imply  compressional deformation in the Drake Passage region?  4)  What
              is the deep structure of the South Sandwich subduction  zone?  5)  What is the
              seismological structure of active back-arc  spreading centers in the Bransfield
              Strait and South Sandwich  regions?    Answering these questions will help to
              constrain important  tectonic questions such as the cause of plate motion
              changes,  what processes initiate back arc spreading, and the relationship 
              between mantle flow and surface tectonics.
