Title       : MDC: Computational Optimization research Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9527124

Award Number: 9527124
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2770000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie E. Trotter trotter@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 1041,1339,9146,9216,9263,CVIS,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                      ;                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             R o o t   E n t
              r y                                                                           
              F             Tz C|                C o m p O b j                               
                                                                                       b     
               W o r d D o c u m e n t                                                       
                                                       ^       O b j e c t P o o l           
                                                                                    Tz C|  
              Tz C|        4 @                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 =   >   ?   @   A   B   C   D   E   F   G                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              F    Microsoft Word 6.0 Document     MSWordDoc     Word.Document.6     ;       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
              DMS-9527124 Trotter Advanced Scientific Computing Centers   This award covers a
              broad research program in the area of computational optimization.  The central
              thrust of the research addresses real-life, large-scale mixed-inter programming
              problems arising from important industrial application areas, such as
              manufacturing, telecommunications, and distribution.  These problems are of
              vast importance towards the nation s present and future economic and
              technological development.  The problems are also extremely intractable, both
              from the viewpoint of practical computation, as well as in terms of theoretical
              understanding, and they will only become larger and more difficult in future
              applications.  The computational and methodological technology for solving
              integer programming models has made steady advances over the last thirty years,
              often following improvements in computing machinery as much as new theoretical
              insights.  We are now at the starting point of a major quantum improvement in
              the technology.  Not only are there several new and promising methodological
              venues available, but we are witnessin g a revolution in the computing world,
              in particular involving parallel computing and operating systems, with profound
              implications for science and engineering.  It is almost certain that within a
              few years all computers will have multiple CPUs, and that all major scientific
              and engineering computing will be done on clusters of multiple-CPU machines. 
              As supercomputing becomes redefined, a push to parallelize algorithms is
              starting now, and the end result will be software of extraordinary complexity
              by today s standards.  However, it is fair to say that the field of parallel
              integer programming is, at best, in its infancy.  The research seeks to propel
              computational integer programming into the realm of parallel computing, with
              the objective of effectively handling difficult real-world problems.  The
              objective will require a multidisciplinary approach.  Our work will seek to
              extend and develop solution methodologies for integer programming, in
              particular involving cutting planes, column generation, and branch-and-cut
              techniques.  This will be integrated with computational theory techniques,
              especially the design of efficient data structures for parallel integer
              programming.  Finally, there will be a large component of software engineering,
              necessary for the implementation of efficient parallel programs.     This work
              combines the scientific and computational resources of three participating 
              organizations, Columbia University, Cornell University, and the IBM T.J. Watson
              Research Center, to create a collaborative research environment to attain the
              goals outlined above. Among the many important advantages of such a close
              relationship between university  computing research groups and that of a major
              hardware producer is the focus on practical ends provided by the industrial
              component.                                                 Oh     +'  0        
                                            $       H       l                                
                            D       h                                                   
              R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT                     S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
              i o n                           (                                              
                  <                                                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  DMS-9527124                         Jocelyn J. Whitehurst  
                          Jocelyn J. Whitehurst       @     " C|                          @  
                                              @     " C|                                     
                                                                          @    F #           
                                      Microsoft Word 6.0                                     
                              1                                                              
                                      ;         e =       e               r   ^              
                  r                                       l       l   l       l       l      
              l       l                                                                      
                  1                                                                          
                                                      r           T       I                  
                      l                                                                      
                                l       l                                                    
                                l               l                                            
                        l       l       l       l                           9                
                                                                                             
              DMS-9527124 Trotter Advanced Scientific Computing Centers   T
