Title       : Physical and Structural Properties of the Siple Dome Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2001     
File        : a9527262

Award Number: 9527262
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julie Palais                            
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $394334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Gow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Debra A. Meese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USACRREL
	      72 Lyme Road
	      Hanover, NH  037551290    /   -

NSF Program : 5116      ANTARCTIC GLACIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is for support for a program to investigate the visual  stratigraphy,
              index physical properties, relaxation  characteristics and crystalline
              structure of ice cores from Siple  Dome, West Antarctica.  This investigation
              will include  measurements of a time-priority nature that must be initiated at 
              the drill site on freshly-drilled cores.  This will be especially  true of
              cores from the brittle ice zone, which is expected to  comprise a significant
              fraction of the ice core.  The brittle  zone includes ice in which relaxation ,
              resulting from the  release of confining pressure is maximized and leads to 
              significant changes in the mechanical condition of the core that  must be
              considered in relation to the processing and analysis of  ice samples for
              entrapped gas and chemical studies.  This  relaxation will be monitored via
              precision density measurements  made initially at the drill site and repeated
              at intervals back  in the U.S.  Other studies will include measurement of the
              annual  layering in the core to as great a depth as visual stratigraphy  can be
              deciphered, crystal size measurements as a function of  depth and age, c-axis
              fabric studies, and analysis of the  physical properties of any debris-bearing
              basal ice and its  relationship to the underlying bedrock.  Only through
              careful  documentation and analysis of these key properties can we hope to 
              accurately assess the dynamic state of the ice and the age-depth  relationships
              essential to deciphering the paleoclimate record at  this location.
