Title       : Multidisciplinary Challenge (MDC): Parallel and Distributed Computing for
               Solving Large Structural Biology Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  2001     
File        : a9527131

Award Number: 9527131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2385000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan C. Marinescu   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9527131  Marinescu  Dr. Marinescu and his collaborators will develop algorithms
              and programs for real time data acquisition and analysis of crystallographic
              and cryEM data.  These are required to process data produced at high rates.  10
              Mbits per second or more, by new photon sources like the Advance Photon Source
              and by CCD detectors.  Similar data rates are produced by state of the art
              electron microscopes equipped with CCD detectors such as the new Philips CM200
              installed at Purdue.  Real time analysis of such data streams require parallel
              and distributed computing.  The research will be done by an interdisciplinary
              collaboration among members of Purdue's Center for Structural Studies and
              Department of Computer Sciences.  The biological objectives are to provide
              improved tools for the structure determination of proteins, nucleic acids, and
              complexes such as viruses, virus-receptors, and membrane bound cell surface
              molecules using X-ray crystallography, cryo-electron microscopy (cyroRM), and
              3D image reconstruction.  An essential requirement for this is the fusion of
              structural biology and high performance computing.  The computer science
              objective is to create new algorithms, parallelize old ones, and design
              methodologies for the high performance computing required in structural studies
              of biological macromolecules.  %%%  The goal is to provide an integrated
              solution for the computational side of structure determination from data
              acquisition to data analysis and data visualization and to incorporate into our
              system programs developed elsewhere, e.g., the CCP4 suite.  This group is in a
              unique position due to the extensive experience in structural biology augmented
              by expertise in computer science and mathematics.  This project builds on
              ongoing collaborative research between faculty in the Structural Biology group
              and Computer Science department.    ***
