Title       : Spectroscopic Studies of Energy Transfer in Low Temperature Matrices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1996   
File        : a9527080

Award Number: 9527080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272017             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julanna V. Gilbert jgilbert@du.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry   Division,
              Gilbert will investigate the spectroscopy and photochemistry of   various
              nitrogen- and phosphorus-containing small inorganic radicals and   molecules,
              such as energetic halogen amines and phosphenes, in   low-temperature matrices.
                Energy transfer will be studied in species   such as NX2 and PX2, where X =
              F, Cl.  The intermediates produced in the   photolysis of M(N3)3, where M is a
              Group 3 atom, will also be examined.    Ultraviolet/visible absorption and
              laser-induced fluorescence spectra   will be obtained from the matrix-isolated
              species to characterize their   electronic states as well as to aid in
              understanding the   photodissociation dynamics of the gas-phase compounds and
              their   intermediates.  Gaussian 94 calculations will be carried out on the  
              radicals formed.  The family of nitrogen-containing compounds known as halogen
              amines as   well as that of azide compounds are interesting because they are  
              notoriously unstable under standard conditions of temperature and   pressure. 
              The reasons for this behavior are not understood, but certain   trends are
              observed, such as increasing instability in going from   compounds containing
              fluorine to those containing chlorine, bromine, and   finally iodine.  An
              understanding of these issues in the halogen amines   and comparison with the
              phosphorus compounds may aid in elucidating the   chemical nature of other
              nitrogen- and phosphorus-bearing species.    Practical applications include the
              chemical etching of surfaces in   semiconductor processing, tribological
              thin-film coatings, and better   reagents for electronic-transition chemical
              laser systems.                                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
