Title       : MDC: Simulations of Integrated Communications Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1998       
File        : a9527163

Award Number: 9527163
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1557810            (Estimated)
Investigator: Fred S. Roberts froberts@dimacs.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andras P. Hajnal  (Principal Investigator former)
              Stephen R. Mahaney  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9217,9218,GRCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT      NCR-9527163  Hajnal, Andras  Rutgers University   MDC: Simulations
              of Integrated Communications Systems    The rapidly developing synthesis of
              communications and computing technologies, the ongoing construction of immense
              digital data networks, and the global deregulation of telecommunications
              industries will have a tremendous impact on the national economy and
              infrastructure.  This proposal brings together leading experts in network
              modeling, network design and analysis, and high performance discrete-event
              simulation to focus on the development and validation of high-performance
              modeling and simulation tools for broadband networks and wireless communication
              services.  The project will apply these tools to cutting edge problems in
              network design and operations that cannot be answered otherwise.    The goals
              of this project are to:  (1) develop network description methodology, similar
              in spirit to VHDL (very high speed integrated circuit hardware design
              language), suitable for the description of current and future telecommulication
              networks (2) provide validated high-performance simulation software prototypes
              based on this methodology, and (3) demonstrate the use of the tools for network
              construction and operation problems that cannot be answered otherwise.  An
              important aspect of this project involves education and training of graduate
              students and post-doctoral fellows by involvement in pressing industrial
              problems, and via sharing the high-performance modeling and simulation tools
              within the public domain.    The multidisciplinary project team attacks the
              problem by covering all of its critical elements.  The team includes
              applications scientists who will help shape the network description and
              simulation tools by their experience and knowledge of current research
              directions in networking, and who will use the tools to explore those
              directions: it includes network modeling experts who contribute mathematically
              valid network behavioral models that help to accelerate the simulations ; it
              includes experienced developers of high performance simulation tools.  Most
              critically, all members will participate vigorously in the design of the
              network specification methodology, for that methodology must address the needs
              and concerns of each.  We envision a role analogous to the academic and
              industrial research partnership which successfully fostered the rapid expansion
              of the computer-aided-design industry in microelectronics.  Indeed, we employ
              some of the proven strategies critical to that expansion - standardized
              description methodologies and highly efficient simulation tools.
