Title       : Collaborative Research: Initial Palynological Characterization of Cape Roberts
               Drillcores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9527075

Award Number: 9527075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142478             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Wrenn wrenn@geol.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,7300,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Wrenn  OPP 9527075  Askin  OPP 9527013    Abstract    The Cape Roberts Project
              (CRP) is designed to core submarine  deposits in the western Ross Sea that
              range in age from middle  Late Cretaceous-early Miocene. Four, 500m long
              drillcores will be  taken from a platform of annual sea ice floating in water
              depths  ranging from 100 to 500m.  The cores will sample a composite 
              stratigraphic section 1500m thick during two, 45-day-long  drilling seasons
              (October-November 1996 and 1997).    Shipboard geophysical surveys have
              identified a package of  dipping sedimentary strata interpreted to be
              Cretaceous-Miocene  in age.  A thin blanket of younger sediments overlies these
              beds.  Rocks of this age range are not known from the Ross Sea, the 
              Transantarctic Mountains or elsewhere in East Antarctica.  Thus,  recovered
              sediments of this age have prime importance for  interpreting Antarctic
              geologic, biologic, climatic and tectonic  history during the
              Cretaceous-Cenozoic. Objectives of CRP include  obtaining a late
              Cretaceous-Cenozoic paleoclimatic record,  studying glacial-deglacial and
              eustasy cycles, and determining  the Gondwana breakup and rifting history of
              the Ross Sea  embayment.    Core description and downhole experiments will be
              conducted at  each drill site.  An international team of biostratigraphers, 
              sedimentologists, magnetostratigraphers, petrologists, etc. will  conduct
              initial characterization of the cores and their  constituents during and
              immediately following drilling at the  fully equipped Crary Science and
              Engineering Center (CSEC),  McMurdo Station, Ross Island, Antarctica.   
              Palynomorphs have proven to be invaluable tools for  biostratigraphic and
              paleoenvironmental interpretation of younger  Ross Sea sequences drilled in the
              Ross Sea Embayment.  They  include both marine (dinocysts) and nonmarine
              (spores, pollen)  types, record extensive and diverse geologic information, and
              are  preserved in a wide variety of lithofacies formed in various 
              paleoenvironments.    This award suppor ts initial palynological
              characterization of the  CRP drillcores, in collaboration with New Zealand
              palynologists.  All samples will be processed in the CSEC using a focused 
              mircowave digestion unit for maximum safety and effieciency.  Analyses will
              focus on providing palynological input for an  integrated biostratigraphic and
              paleoenvironmental framework  based on all microfossils groups present.  This
              critical  framework is of fundamental importance to all future geologic, 
              geophysical and paleontologic studies conducted on the cores and  in the
              drilling area.  Palynology will also provide vital data  for prime CRP
              objectives: climate change, eustasy, and thermal  and tectonic history.  Future
              palynologic studies of the cores  include such topics as paleoenvironments,
              vegetational and  climatic change, taxonomy, evolution of southern marine and 
              terrestrial floras, endemism, dispersal and paleobiogeography,  and extinction
              events.
