Title       : Below-Ground Carbon Cycling Within Demographic Associations of Collembola and
               Roots
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2000  
File        : a9527663

Award Number: 9527663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Dr. Carol Johnston                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Renate M. Snider sniderr@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alvin J. Smucker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Snider  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527663  SNIDER  In situ observations of collembolan populations in the root
              zone of Michigan agroecosystems have provided reliable evidence that
              conventional sampling methods severely underestimate population densities and
              cannot adequately document vertical distribution and activity of Collembola
              throughout the root profile. Evidence from microvideo recordings indicates that
              Collembola range to depths of >100 cm in large numbers, and that collembolan
              and root demographics may be correlated over space and time. Based on data
              which suggest the existence of much larger populations than previously
              estimated (populations which persist and are active throughout the water), the
              PIs propose that the magnitude of collembolan influence on carbon cycling may
              also have been underestimated. This project will quantify the demographics of
              Collembola / root associations in the field, and document potential mechanisms
              underlying these associations. In addition, the work will assess potential
              effects of collembolan activity in the root zone on carbon flow through
              below-ground trophic networks. The work is directly linked to ongoing NSF/LTER
              research at Kellogg Biological Station, which focuses on ecological properties
              of natural and managed ecosystems, and on the mechanisms which regulate
              interactions in these systems. The research will also add significantly to
              current understanding of below-ground interactions, by documenting distribution
              and activity of a major soil faunal component, the nature of its association
              with roots and rhizospheres, and the magnitude of its effect on carbon cycling
              within below-ground trophic networks.
