Title       : Discrete-Time Population Models: The Combined Effects of Dispersal and Stage
               Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9527400

Award Number: 9527400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hal Caswell hcaswell@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael G. Neubert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9527400  Caswell    Dispersal is a fundamental process in population ecology. 
              Mathematical models of population growth that include dispersal have helped
              scientists to address such important ecological, economic, and public health
              issues as habitat fragmentation, invasions of exotic species, and the spread of
              epidemics.  The life history of individuals also has important demographic
              consequences.  Vital rates (i.e., birth, growth, development, and mortality
              rates) change throughout an individual's life.  Mathematical models that
              incorporate age- or size-dependent vital rates are among the most important
              tools for studying the evolution of life histories and for protecting
              endangered species.     This project will develop and analyze models that
              incorporate both dispersal and population structure in a simple modeling
              framework based upon integrodifference equations (IDE's).  IDE's have a number
              of advantages:  (1) rather than using a standard diffusion approximation, IDE's
              can model a variety of dispersal mechanisms; (2) as discrete-time equations,
              IDE's link naturally to matrix population models and (3) IDE's connect easily
              with data because their central component, the dispersal distribution, lends
              itself to empirical measurement.  The investigators' analyses of these models
              will focus on the interaction of stage-specific dispersal and stage-specific
              vital rates.  They will combine mathematical analysis and numerical simulation.
              The results will be useful in population ecology, evolutionary biology,
              conservation biology, and biological control.
