Title       : Experimental Studies of Surface Transport Aspects of Electrodeposition and
               Corrosion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1998   
File        : a9527497

Award Number: 9527497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $197339             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Suni isuni@clarkson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9527497    The goal of this effort is to develop and apply a
              methodology to measure surface diffusion on electrodes at the solid-liquid
              interface.  The approach uses voltammetry, differential capacitance, and
              surface second harmonic generation (SHG).  Systems studied include lead on gold
              (111) and chlorine, lead, or copper on silver (111).  Experiments on vicinal
              gold (111) use a purely voltammetric measurement to obtain the relative
              coverage on terraces and steps;  the dependence of  this partitioning on the
              deposition rate from dilute solutions gives an indirect measure of  surface
              diffusion.   Direct measurements of surface diffusion.  Direct measurements of
              surface diffusion on silver (111) use surface SHG, a nonlinear optical probe of
              adsorption capable of submonolayer selection; these experiments are two types: 
              measurement of the decay of a surface diffraction grating, and measurement of 
              the decay of a one-dimensional concentration step.  The first technique employs
              laser-induced thermal desorption (LITD) to create a diffraction grating and
              uses SHG to monitor its rate of decay, which is caused by surface diffusion. 
              The second techniques involves creation of a step concentration profile, either
              by LITD or by masked vacuum evaporation, the decay of which is monitored by
              SHG.  A Boltzmann-Montano analysis of the decay gives the coverage-dependent
              diffusivity that is needed to describe macroscopic electrodeposition processes.
               The SHG signal is related empirically to surface coverage by two
              electrochemical methods:  stripping voltammetry and differential capacitance.  
               Surface diffusion is one of the fundamental steps in electrodeposition and
              electrodissolution, and is rate-limiting in some industrial situations. 
              Nevertheless, the phenomenon is little studied because it is experimentally
              inaccessible.  This study aims to rectify this with the eventual goal of
              incorporating microscopic information on surface diffusion and nucleation into
              feature-scale  (morphological) simula tion of sub-half-micron electrodeposition
              of noble-metal interconnects and electrical contacts.  ***
