Title       : Theoretical Studies of Kinetics, Dynamics and Mechanisms of Polyatomic
               Bimolecular Gas Phase Chemical Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9527333

Award Number: 9527333
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200625             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thanh N. Truong Truong@chemistry.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting  
              professor  Truong at the University of Utah.  The research to be conducted over
              the   next  three years involves the development and applications of new direct
                ab-initio  dynamics methods for investigating potential energy surfaces,
              kinetics,   and  dynamics of gas-phase bimolecular reactions.  The dynamical
              method is   based on  Variational Transition State Theory augmented with
              several   multidimensional  semiclassical tunneling corrections.  Reaction path
              information will be  evaluated directly from a sufficiently accurate ab-initio
              or non-local   density  functional method, thus obviating the need for the
              construction of   analytical  potential functions which currently do not exist
              for most of the   reactions  under consideration.  A methodology for
              calculating vibrational-state   selected  rates will also be developed.   These
              new methods will be used to study the detailed dynamics of a   number of 
              radical reactions.  Most of the reactions under consideration involve  
              hydrogen  abstraction by species such as hydroxyl radical reacting with H2, or 
               methane.  Particular attention will be devoted in these investigations to the 
               effect of  reagent vibrational energy on the computed bimolecular reaction
              rates.    These  investigations will also attempt to correlate the topology of
              the   potential  An understanding of the dynamics and mechanisms of these
              reactions has  implications at both the fundamental as well as technological
              levels.  In   terms  of technology, these hydrogen abstraction reactions are of
              significance   in  combustion, environmental and atmospheric chemistry.  In
              terms of a   fundamental  chemical understanding, these reactions contain
              similar reaction   kinematics  with simple light-light-heavy (L-L-H) and
              heavy-light-heavy (H-L-H)   atom-diatom  reactions whose dynamics have been
              well studied.  Experiments on these  reactions are underway in different
              laboratories.  Hence, potential   energy  surface information resulting from
              this work will be valuable in aiding   the  interpretations of new experimental
              observations.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
