Title       : Time/Frequency Approach to Phasor Dynamics in Power Systems Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1996       
File        : a9527570

Award Number: 9527570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117780             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. DeMarco demarco@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9527570  DeMarco                  Dynamic studies in power systems have long
              exploited analytic simplifications gained by approximating all voltages and
              currents in the network as sinusoids of  "slowly varying" magnitude and phase. 
              With this assumption, network behavior in dynamic analyses is characterized by
              power flow equations that represent time-domain bus voltages via complex
              phasors.  This is typically referred to as the "sinusoidal quasi-steady-state"
              approximation (abbreviated here by the acronym "SQSS"), and is widely utilized
              in modern computer packages used to study electromechanical behavior and
              control system dynamics.  For faster time-scale phenomena, the most widely used
              techniques are time-domain simulations in which all relevant network voltages
              and currents are represented as three-phase, time-domain signals, without any
              requirement of nearly sinusoidal behavior.  This latter approach involves
              tremendous computational burden and analytic complexity, because one uses
              instantaneous quantities rather than phasors, and dynamic circuit models rather
              than algebraic impedance relations.   The goal of the research outlined in this
              proposal is to provide a middle ground between the approximations inherent in
              an impedance-based SQSS representation, and the analytic complexity and
              computational burden associated with representing network voltages and currents
              as time-domain quantities in a three-phase circuit.  In particular, this work
              will adopt a viewpoint on phasors that is closer to time/frequency
              representations utilized in signal processing, but extending these
              representations to a dynamic formulation.  The result will be termed "Phasor
              Dynamics" (PD) models, and will involve a carefully constructed hybrid of the
              impedance and circuit representations.  This approach will allow an important
              extension that is not possible in standard phasor representations:  a dynamic
              analysis that includes higher order harmonics.  The work  proposed will treat
              these cases by representing relevant st ates as weighted sums of narrow-band
              signals, each located about a harmonic center frequency of interest.  The time
              evolution of  the weights are governed by dynamic equations derived directly
              from the original instantaneous model.  ***
