Title       : Regional Structure of the Antarctic Peninsula Derived from ERS-1 SAR Mosaic: A
               Study of Upper/Lower Plate Interactions During Subduction of the Antarctic/Aluk
               Ridge Crest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1996 
File        : a9527550

Award Number: 9527550
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24956              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry J. Wilson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    This award supports a project to use synthetic aperture radar  (SAR)
              data from the European  ERS-1 satellite for a structural analysis of the
              Antarctic  Peninsula.  This project constitutes a demonstration of the use  of
              SAR data for geological and geophysical investigations in  largely ice covered
              regions.    The Cenozoic tectonic evolution of the Antarctic Peninsula 
              involves a history of geometrically simple orthogonal plate  subduction, with
              successive collision of fracture zone-bounded  segments of the Antarctic-Aluk
              ridge crest from south to north  along the convergent margin.  It has been
              proposed that the  subducted fracture zones are reflected in geological and 
              structural segmentation of the Antarctic Peninsula and,  therefore, a direct
              mechanical interaction between the upper and  lower plates along the subducting
              margin is suggested.  Structural mapping from a synoptic ERS-1 SAR mosaic of
              the entire  Antarctic Peninsula should document the regional continuity of  any
              fracture zones into the continental crust and any systematic  changes in
              structure within the peninsula that may be linked  these fracture zones.  The
              goal is to systematically evaluate the  impact of subducting fracture zones on
              the upper plate along the  convergent margin.  The Antarctic Peninsula provides
              an unrivaled  opportunity for such a study because the ocean floor record is 
              well documented, Oground truthO exists from high-quality geologic  mapping and
              field structural data, and the convergent margin  represents the least complex
              scenario of fracture zone/trench  interaction.  The results of this study can
              provide a model for  other convergent margins worldwide where the tectonics are
              more  complicated.  Furthermore, this approach, using an ERS-1 SAR  mosaic,
              will serve as a prototype for SAR-based structural  mapping in ice-covered
              terrain that should prove useful when  RADARSAT data becomes available.
