Title       : Solid State Chalcogenides From Intermediate Temperatures. Exploratory Synthesis
               in Molten Salts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9527347

Award Number: 9527347
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1995   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $331758             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mercouri G. Kanatzidis kanatzid@cem.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    9527347          Kanatzidis    This research is concerned with the
              use of molten  polychalcogenide salts as reactive media to explore the
              synthesis  of new chalcogenide materials at low and intermediate  temperatures
              (200-500  C). Various A2QX salts (A=alkali cation,  Q=S, Se, Te) will be used
              in reactions with late transition  metals and main-group elements. Emphasis
              will be given in the  stabilization of quaternary phases. Three kinds of
              quaternary  compounds will be explored in this stage. One kind involves the 
              mixed-metal system A/M/M'/Q (M=late transition metal,  M'=lanthanide,
              actinide). The second involves the mixed-chalcogen  system A/M/S/Te. The
              synthetic approach will use binary alloy  compounds as starting materials and
              mixed fluxes such as mixed  A2TexSy. The third kind involves the use of the
              thio- and  seleno-phosphate fluxes in materials synthesis. These fluxes are 
              new and are designed to yield novel thiophosphate and  selenophosphate solids
              containing the  PxQy n- polyanions (where  Q=S, Se). The physical properties of
              the new compounds, such as  spectroscopic, thermal and magnetic will be studied
              as a function  of temperature. In order to probe for unusual electronic 
              phenomena, the charge transport properties of the new compounds  will be
              studied in detail via variable temperature four-probe  resistivity and
              thermoelectric power (Seebeck) measurements on  single crystals.   %%%  This
              research is concerned with new methodologies to discover new  solid state
              materials having various technologically important  properties. Promising
              materials will be studied further and their  potential for applications will be
              evaluated. The subject of this  proposal is performing reactions using molten
              salts as solvents.  Molten salts have been employed for well over 100 years for
              high-  temperature single crystal growth.  Although many salts are high 
              melting species, eutectic combinations of binary salts and salts  of polyatomic
              species often have melting points well below the  te mperatures of classical
              solid-state synthesis, making possible  their use in the exploration of new
              chemistry at intermediate  temperatures. In some cases, such salts act not only
              as solvents,  but also as reactants, providing species which can be 
              incorporated into the final product. Such studies are important  because
              polysulfide ligands have been implicated in the  hydrodesulfurization of crude
              oil, where they are thought to be  present at the surface of metal sulfide
              catalysts.  Polychalcogenide glasses also are important as materials for 
              non-linear optics, IR wave guides, optical switching, and optical  information
              storage, but the structure/property relationships  have not been well
              determined due to the amorphous nature of the  compounds.
