Title       : Dissertation Research: Native Perceptions of Plant Efficacy Among Indigenous
               Cultures of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9527875

Award Number: 9527875
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1996        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7828               (Estimated)
Investigator: Brent Berlin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9179,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                This award to the University of California-Berkeley funds the dissertation
              research of a cultural anthropologist in the Peruvian Amazon rain forest.  The
              problem is to understand how native Americans identify medicinal plants in the
              forest.  The student will assess native perceptions of specific cues of taste,
              smell, or feel (bitterness, sweetness, astringency, aromatic smell, prickly
              texture, etc. ) which are thought to indicate therapeutic efficacy.  A `taste
              and smell` experiment will be conducted whereby Indian informants are asked to
              describe items unfamiliar to the native palate, to provide an objective,
              comparative basis for defining the indigenous vocabulary of taste and smell. 
              The student will also study how native perceptions of medicinal efficacy relate
              to native theories of disease causation, and how these correspond to Western
              pharmacological and medical knowledge.  The methods include an ethnomedical
              health census, structured and semi-structured interviews, and the collection
              and analysis of botanical specimens.  The native models of two Amerindian
              groups will be compared, to assess the degree of variability  across unrelated
              cultural groups sharing a similar environment.  This research is important
              because it will add to our expertise about this important region of the world
              and will advance our knowledge of how native peoples select and use medicinal
              plants.  The study of medicinal plants used by indigenous peoples is especially
              important because it may reveal new cures for diseases, while at the same time
              promoting cultural and ecological conservation in indigenous areas.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
