Title       : Mesozoic Break-up of Gondwanaland: Geochronology of Antarctic Tholeiites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9527816

Award Number: 9527816
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David H. Elliot   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth A. Foland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Elliot and Foland  OPP 9527816    Abstract  This award supports a project to
              investigate igneous rocks  associated with the break-up of the Gondwanaland
              supercontinent.  The initial break-up of Gondwanaland during the Mesozoic was 
              associated with a major magmatic event during which voluminous  extrusive lava
              flows and intrusive sills and dikes were formed.  Study of these igneous
              products which are related to large-scale  processes of continental disruption
              is important in constraining  the temporal and spatial nature of break-up. 
              This magmatism is  expressed by the Karoo tholeiites of southern Africa and
              related  rocks in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica, and by Ferrar tholeiites  of
              the Transantarctic Mountains.  The geochronology of mafic  igneous intrusive
              and extrusive events will be examined in  Antarctica in two distinct areas: in
              Dronning Maud Land and in  the Ross Sea sector of the Transantarctic Mountains.
               The former  is directly associated with the initial rifting which separated 
              Africa from Antarctica while the latter, the Ferrar, has a less  direct
              relationship but nevertheless is part of the initial phase  of igneous
              activity.    The objectives of the research are to: (1) establish the time of 
              emplacement and duration of the Mesozoic magmatism in Dronning  Maud Land; (2)
              refine the geochronology of the Ferrar Group with  the application of U/Pb
              zircon dating as well as 40Ar/39Ar  dating; (3) establish the timing of
              alteration of the Vestfjella  lavas and other post-crystallization events
              recorded by secondary  minerals in Dronning Maud Land; and (4) evaluate
              possible  relationships of Dronning Maud Land magmatism and alteration to  the
              Lebombo Monocline in southern Africa and to the Ferrar Group  and other
              magmatism associated with Gondwanaland break-up.    Mineral samples will be
              used to date the events using the  40Ar/39Ar, U-Pb, and Rb-Sr methods.  The
              minerals include:  primary igneous phases (feldspar, biotite, zircon) that will
              be  the focus for establishing timing of ma gmatic events; and,  secondary
              phases (apophyllite, phyllosilicate) to address timing  of alteration events.  
               Based upon recent experience and success in related studies, the  results are
              expected to have broad implications not only for  specific questions dealing
              with the region but also for tectonic  models and geochronologic methods.  The
              results will address:  Gondwanaland break-up; spatial and temporal relations of
               magmatism in Antarctica; tectonic models for the generation of  flood basalt
              provinces; and, application of geochronologic  methods, especially to altered
              basic igneous rocks.
