Title       : Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Dynamics of Streamflow: Classification,
               Predictability and Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1997      
File        : a9527804

Award Number: 9527804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher G. Maples                   
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry D. I. Abarbanel hdia@jacobi.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 1325,1673,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527804  Abarbanel    An understanding of the dynamics (or time evolution) of
              streamflow, its predictability, causality and variability at different time and
              space scales is a central issue in hydrologic research.  The proposed research
              seeks to develop quantitative notions of predictability and dynamical
              similarity of streamflow at U.S. sites, using long USGS records (60 to 114
              years) of daily streamflow that are presumed to have little human impact. 
              Methods (based on nonlinear dynamics) for forecasting streamflow directly from
              the time series will be a byproduct of the research.  In the context of climate
              change research, projections of streamflow using exogenous model climate data
              may be needed for many years in the future.  Given uncertain inputs, it is
              important to assess how quickly, and under which conditions such predictions
              deteriorate into random traces, irrespective of model formalism.  It may also
              be of interest to know, at least qualitatively, the sensitivity of streamflow
              to different causative factors.   What are the implications for modeling
              streamflow at different space and time scales?  When is it useful to pursue
              deterministic, distributed or lumped models, and when must one resort to a
              purely statistical approach?  Loosely speaking, streamflow results from the
              interaction of large scale atmospheric circulation with slowly varying or fixed
              surface conditions.  The latter may lend organization to streamflow as the
              spatial scale of interest (e.g., drainage area) increases, thus limiting the
              effective number of "dynamical" factors that have major influence.  An idea
              which we will investigate is that a larger basin spatially averages over the
              many dynamical processes in the climatic forcing--rainfall at specific
              locations, geographical features in the basin, evaporation and soil properties
              which are certainly heterogeneous across any watershed.  This averaging may
              reduce the dimension of the response which we sample by streamflow.  Similarly,
              climatic fluctuations that have "stru cture" at long time scales, (e.g., El
              Nino Southern Oscillation).  may increase stearmflow predictability. An
              interesting methodology for insights into such processes is provided by recent
              advances in nonlinear dynamics, and in particular for time series analysis from
              nonlinear processes.  The idea is that time series for a single state variable
              (e.g., streamflow) for the dynamical system can be used to geometrically
              reconstruct a "state space" that contains the essential information on
              predictability and complexity of the underlying system.  Predictability is
              measured in information theoretic terms through Lyapunov exponents that measure
              the rate of divergence of nearby trajectories in state space.  Complexity is
              measured through generalized dimensions by an examination of how densely the
              state space is filled and variations in such a density over the state space. 
              Strategies for forecasting the state variable in the reconstructed state space
              are devised.  Our analyses of the Great Salt Lake  volume using these methods
              have been very fruitful, and have given us the firm conviction that significant
              insights into the nature of the streamflow  process and development of
              theoretical models for streamflow at different scales will be possible.  The
              approach proposed here is to systematically analyze variety of long US
              streamflow data sets, to (1) see if a reconstruction of the underlying dynamics
              is possible from the time series, (2) estimate Lyapunov exponents as a measure
              of predictability, (3) estimate generalized dimensions to describe the
              complexity of the underlying dynamics, (4) to develop effective forecasting
              strategies for daily streamflow, and (5) identify how predictability and
              complexity and forecasting ability vary the climatic attributes and basin
              attributes such as drainage area.  Of particular interest are physical
              thresholds at which the response of the system undergoes a change to
              qualitatively different dynamics.  The existence of such thresholds is probed
              after the recovery of sy stem invariants from the time series using
              nonparametric regression methods with respect to the parameters of interest.
