Title       : Signal-Responsive Transcription of Plant Nuclear Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9527364

Award Number: 9527364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan A. Arias   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Biotech Inst
	      701 East Pratt St., Suite 200
	      Baltimore, MD  212023101    410/385-6330

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1227,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9527364  Arias  The goal of these studies is to better understand how the
              expression of protein-encoding genes of plants are regulated by environmental
              stimuli.  A central hypothesis to be tested here is that defense gene
              expression in plants is modulated by a phosphorylation-dependent change in the
              transcriptional activity of G-box binding factors.  Aside from understanding a
              process of general importance to all higher eukaryotes the proposed studies may
              ultimately lead to the development of novel and sustainable forms of crop
              protection.  Changes in the transcription activity of plant GBF's in response
              to defense cues (eg., nonhost bacterial species or biotic elicitors) cDNA's of
              these factors will be fused to a novel DNA-binding domain and expressed in
              plant cells containing a reporter gene.  Changes in the phosphorylation of
              these chimeric GBF's will be assessed by phosphopeptide mapping.  Protein
              kinases that phosphorylate GBF's in response to defense stimuli will be
              biochemically purified to obtain N-terminal sequences for cloning GBF-protein
              kinase cDNA's.  Cloned putative kinases will be tested in vivo for their
              ability to phosphorylate GBF and act in defense-signaling.  To identify
              potential mediators of plant GBF-dependent transcription a far-western
              screening of plant cDNA expression libraries with labeled GBF as probe will be
              performed.  Cloned proteins will by functionally characterized by standard
              protein binding and transfection techniques.  %%%  Higher plants resist
              microbial infection in part by synthesizing phytoalexins.  The rapid and
              transient activation of "defense" genes that encode for enzymes in phytoalexin
              biosynthesis largely determines the timing and magnitude of this response. 
              Recent evidence suggests that protein kinases couple defense signal perception
              to enhanced gene expression.  For example, inhibitors of protein kinases block
              the expression of plant defense genes, whereas agents that stimulate protein
              kinase activities in other metazoan systems both enhance pla nt defense gene
              expression and result in the transient phosphorylation of a few cellular
              proteins.  How plant gene building factors function in signal-dependent
              transcription is currently unknown but, like in animals, may involve changes in
              the phosphorylation state of the factor.  ***
