Title       : Leak Prevention, Detection and Location in Storage Tank/ Pipeline Facilities
               Using Passive Acoustic Emission Technol-ology: Research and Development
               Implementation and Tech. Tra
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9527633

Award Number: 9527633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162410             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald O. Thompson dthompso@cnde.iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0110000   Technology Transfer                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              19        Physical Sciences NEC                   
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 5761,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  EEC-9527633  Thompson    Underground pipelines and storage tank
              systems can develop leaks over time and cause significant environmental damage.
               A number of Government agencies have jointly recognized this concern and are
              joining together to facilitate a research and development program to be
              undertaken jointly by the New Jersey Institute of Technology's
              Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Emission Reduction (ERRC)
              and Iowa State University's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
              Nondestructive Evaluation (CNDE).     This collaborative effort will address
              the envisaged broad scope of a multi-university, multi-agency project.    The
              Emission Reduction Research Center (ERRC) at New Jersey Institute of Technology
              will be responsible for the interface with the sponsoring agencies, EPA, DOE,
              DoD, and NSF.  ERRC is studying how to modify the pipeline systems at the EPA
              UST/Pipeline Test Apparatus in Edison, NJ utilizing the research results of a
              prior award, EEC-9420695.  Researchers in collaboration with instrument
              manufacturers will characterize the nature of acoustic emission leak signals in
              the large scale pipeline systems.  Working collaboratively with researchers
              from the Center for Nondestructive Evaluation at Iowa State University and
              utilizing the characterization data base, sensor placement and signal
              processing and analysis will be optimized for the range of leak size and
              location precision necessary to obtain a 95% reliability for leak location. 
              These results will provide another data base for the two Centers to test how
              effective the acoustic emission system will be in a number of "real world"
              operational sites.    The Center for Nondestructive Evaluation is studying the
              pipeline acoustics transmission characteristics to clarify interpretation of
              measured signals in this laboratory.  Tests will then be made on an outdoor
              buried, water filled pipeline using an artificial acoustic source and
              manufactured fluid leaks.  These results will be compared a nd analyzed to
              develop transit time-based leak location algorithms.  The algorithms will be
              tested against the experimental and theoretical data to establish units,
              performance and accuracy as a function of location, leak rate, etc.  The CNDE
              researchers will then assist in implementing the acoustic emission system for
              "real world" field tests, at various sites coordinated by NJIT and the
              participating agencies.    The researchers are fully qualified to perform these
              studies.    Funding for year one of this collaborative award is being provided
              by EPA, DOE, DoD, and NSF.  Dr. Ken P. Chong, Program Director, Structural
              Systems and Construction Processes Program, is providing the NSF funds.
