Title       : Mathematically General Predictions and Plant Population Dynamics: Experimental
               Tests with Cardamine Pensylvanica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a9527986

Award Number: 9527986
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1996      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane Molofsky jmolofsk@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527986  Molofsky   Ecologists are increasingly called upon to develop
              predictive models about how the effects of human-induced changes in the
              environment will affect the future performance of populations and communities. 
              Although simple mathematical models are often used as a basis for such
              predictions, we know very little about the relationship between the qualitative
              predictions of these models and the behavior of real populations.  However,
              given the limited resources available to ecologists, it will be impossible to
              construct realistically detailed models for all situations.  Thus, one of the
              most critical tasks facing ecologists today is to determine when (if ever) the
              predictions of simple models adequately reflect the effects of changes in
              environmental conditions.  Research funded by this award addresses that goal by
              testing whether simple population models adequately predict changes in
              abundance for populations of an annual plant (Cardamine pensylvanica) grown
              over multiple generations under controlled environment conditions.  By
              experimentally manipulating environmental conditions and monitoring long-term
              population dynamics, we will be able to test whether the mathematically general
              predictions of simple models capture ecologically general features of
              population dynamics.     Experiments will allow us to propose conditions for
              which simple models should or should not be able to capture important aspects
              of plant population dynamics in a variety of natural and experimental settings.
               Findings will have implications for environmental planners, conservation
              biologists, and natural resource ecologists involved in modelling effects of
              anthropogenic perturbations and natural disasters on plant populations.
