Title       : Variable Control of Island Communities: Productivity, Nutrients, Consumption and
               El Nino/Drought Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a9527888

Award Number: 9527888
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1996     
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297319             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary R. Huxel   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary A. Polis  (Principal Investigator former)
              Francisco Sanchez-Pinero  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1325,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527888  Polis  This work examines what factors determine the distribution,
              abundance, and diversity of key groups along the Gulf of California.  Many
              species of insects, spiders, scorpions, lizards and mammals are extraordinarily
              dense on small islands and coastal areas compared to larger islands or the
              mainland.  Several factors are important:  productivity flowing from the marine
              to terrestrial ecosystems via shore drift and bird colonies; size of the island
              (its shoreline to area ratio); variable terrestrial productivity; and the
              presence/absence of predators.  The marine and terrestrial food webs will be
              connected by examining how marine input penetrates inland and how it affects
              key species.  How primary productivity by land plants changes with variable
              precipitation (drought to heavy rainfall associated with El Nino events) will
              be determined, as will differences in soil nutrients caused by seabird
              fertilization and how the terrestrial system responds to such changes.  This
              research investigates several issues with applied importance.  First, it
              analyzes the potentially great influence that marine input exerts on the
              dynamics of key populations, food webs, and ecosystems of island and
              terrestrial coastal communities.  This is novel and important, since coastal
              communities cover about 8% of the earth and contain more than 65% of humans and
              a disproportionate amount of biodiversity and productivity.  Second, this
              research addresses how El Nino, a major planetary weather maker, influences the
              productivity and structure of land communities.  Third, it illustrates a
              ubiquitous process:  the flow of nutrients, detritus, prey, and consumers
              across habitat boundaries.  Finally, this system is a general model for the
              ecology of islands and fragmented habitats (e.g., nature reserves), each of
              different size, and each exhibiting different combinations of species and
              interconnections to other habitats.  It also provides a general understanding
              of factors affecting abundance and biodiversity.
