Title       : U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research on Variational Methods inthe Control of
               Nonlinear Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1996   
File        : a9527672

Award Number: 9527672
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17204              (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinz M. Schaettler hms@cec.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,5953,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9527672  Schaettler    This U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research award is on
              "Variational  Methods in the Control of Nonlinear Systems."  The principal 
              researchers are Dr. Heinz Schaettler of Washington University,  and Drs. Andrej
              Nowakowski and Stanislaw Walczak of the Institute  of Mathematics of Lodz
              University.  The researchers will combine  their expertise in optimal control
              theory in the area of field  theory, the Dubovitskii-Milyutin method, and
              nonregular/abnormal  optimization problems to develop a broad and comprehensive
              theory  of sufficient conditions for optimality and optimal control  problems. 
              The notion of a field of extremals and/or dynamic  programming provide the
              theoretical basis both from a classical  viewpoint using generalizations of
              Hilbert's invariant integral  as well as from a modern perspective in the
              context of solutions  to the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation.  They will
              investigate  links between geometric properties of extremals and singularities 
              of the value function.  In particular, they will analyze the role  optimal
              abnormal extremals play in the construction of a regular  synthesis, viz., an
              optimal field of extremals.  They will give  special attention to control
              systems of Dirichlet type for which  currently only limited necessary
              conditions for optimality are  available.    This research in applied
              mathematics fulfills the program  objectives of bringing together leading
              experts in the U.S. and  Poland to combine complementary efforts and
              capabilities in areas  of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis of
               equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.  ***
