Title       : SBIR Phase II: High Density Plasma Vapor Desposition of Metal Oxide Thin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9527003

Award Number: 9527003
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Darryl G. Gorman                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269719             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mathias Koch koch@astex.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy Gat  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : ASTeX
	      35 Cabot Road
	      Woburn, MA  018011053    617/933-5560

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***   9527003  Bourget              This SBIR Phase II project will develop the
              High Density Physical Vapor Deposition (HDPVD) sputter source for the growth of
              useful oxide compounds such as superconducting Y1Ba2Cu307-x-
              (Yttrium-Barium-Copper-Oxide). Using an electron cyclotron resonance source to
              sustain an oxygen plasma, large current densities can be produced in the HDPVD
              source which will uniformly sputter a large diameter YBCO target when
              independently biased at low voltage. The large current density delivered to the
              sputtering target will yield high deposition rates without concomitant high
              energy negative ion bombardment of the deposited film, a problem typically
              associated with magnetron sputtering. This project will fully characterize the
              parameter space for the HDPVD source and develop a robust reproducible
              deposition process for the growth of high quality YBCO films over both the
              front and back-sides of 4-inch diameter LaA10 (Lanthanum Aluminum
              Oxide)substrates. The HDPVD source has already demonstrated high growth rates
              with uniform film thickness for metals deposited over 5-inch diameter
              substrates, and this process can produce high quality YBCO films with growth
              rates which are at least an order of magnitude larger than that obtainable with
              off-axis magnetron sputtering.      Once a HTS process is developed, this
              project will aim to fully commercialize the HDPVD source and sell these sources
              to several potential customers in the HTS (high temperature superconductor)
              community. The HDPVD source could be used for the deposition of numerous oxide
              materials for a wide variety of commercial applications. For instance, one
              potential high volume application for YBCO films is switchable filter banks for
              installation in all U.S. cellular phone repeater stations. Furthermore, the
              HDPVD source could be utilized for other oxide materials such as ferroelectrics
              for high dielectric or RAM (random access memory) applications, thin film
              phosphors for use in emerging flat panel display technology,  and a variety of
              non-linear optical materials for other emerging applications.  ***
