Title       : Polyphenols as a Plant Adaptation to Acidic, Infertile Soils--A Positive
               Feedback?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a9527722

Award Number: 9527722
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Carol Johnston                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354950             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randy A. Dahlgren radahlgren@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Zasoski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Caroline S. Bledsoe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527722  Dahlgren   Pygmy Forest species on the northern California coast
              contain some of the highest levels of foliar polyphenols ever reported.  Data
              show that foliar polyphenol contractions in coniferous species increase as soil
              acidity increases and fertility decreases.  It is believed that plants produce
              polyhenols in a response to increased acidity as a positive feedback mechanism.
               This feedback may control the dominant form in which litter N is mobilized
              (dissolved organic N vs mineral N), facilitating recovery of DON by adapted
              mycorrhizal associations, minimizing N availability to  competing organisms,
              and attenuating N losses from leaching an denitrification.   Specific
              objectives of this research are to I) determine soil acidity and nutrient
              limitation effects on foliar polyphenol production, ii) examine the influence
              of polyphenol-rich litter on regulating release of mineral and organic N forms,
              iii) to determine whether polyphenol production is a phenotypic response to
              soil conditions, iv) to examine mycorrhizal changes and rhizosphere conditions
              along the acidity/nutrient gradient, and v) determine DON utilization by
              vegetation and their associated mycorrhizae.  This research will use landscape
              units which have undergone leaching for 100,00 to  500,000 years and which
              impose increasingly acidic conditions and nutritional stress on plant
              communities.  Controlled growth chamber studies using quartz sand will examine
              acidity and nutritional effects on foliar polyphenol levels in Pinus muricata
              (Bishop pine) and Cupressus pygmaea (Mendocino cypress).  In the field, foliar
              nutrient applications to single branches of Bishop pine and Mendocino cypress
              and fertilizer and lime applications to individual trees will evaluate the
              response of foliar polphenol levels to changing nutrient and acidity
              conditions.  The forms of N released (NH4, NO3, DON) from Bishop pine,
              Mendocino cypress and ericaceous litter differing in phenol and tannin levels
              both in field and laboratory incubation studies w ill be examined.  The forms
              of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and DON in soil solutions and leachates from
              the incubation studies will be fractionated into hydrophobic/hydrophilic,
              acid/base/neutral fractions.  Release rates of mineral N and DON will be
              evaluated in relation litter polyphenol, nutrient, lignin contents. 
              Mycorrhizal species composition and infection levels will be determined across
              vegetation types and soil conditions, and rhizosphere versus bulk soil will be
              evaluated acrtoss the edaphic gradient.  Utilization of DON by acid-adapted
              plant species and their mycorrhizae will be evaluated in solution cultures
              using natural and synthetic soures of DON.
