Title       : Cross-Site: Spatio-temporal Dynamics of Canopy and Soil Moisture: Linking
               Synthetic Aperture Radar Image Phenomenology with Ecosystem Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9527108

Award Number: 9527108
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151335             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan K. Knapp aknapp@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Geoffrey M. Henebry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1199,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Soil moisture is a key controlling factor for numerous ecological and
              biophysical processes.  While diverse techniques are available to make point
              estimates of soil moisture, spatially extensive surveys can be logistically
              difficult and fraught with problems of interpolation.  Remote sensing of soil
              moisture offers the possibility of  exhaustive spatial  sampling.  The efficacy
              of microwave sensors (both active and  passive) in measuring soil moisture is
              well-studied.  However, little research has focused on patterns  of radar
              imagery of natural landscapes.  Yet, there is a distinct need to assess the
              potential of  Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) for routine environmental
              monitoring of land surface processes.  Environmental monitoring of vegetated
              landscapes will increase during the next decade as data from  spaceborne SAR
              platforms become more readily available.  The project involves the use of SAR
              data  from the European, Canadian, and Japanese orbital platforms to address
              the variation in canopy and  soil moisture and its ecological consequences. 
              These data augment current investigatio ns at two NSF  Long Term Ecological
              Research (LTER) sites, Konza prairie Research Natural Area in the northeast 
              Kansas and Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in central New Mexico.  Both LTER
              sites are located  within ecological transitional zones (ecotones) in which
              soil moisture is a major determinant of plant  productivity and species
              composition.  The primary products are site-specific time series of soil 
              moisture and canopy change maps.  These data will then be used to link remote
              sensing and groundtruth  data with ecological processes.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
