Title       : Development and Evolution of Caecilians (Amphibia: Gymnophiona)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9527681

Award Number: 9527681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marvalee H. Wake mhwake@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527681  Wake                                    A   general  hypothesis  in 
              evolutionary  biology  is  that  modification  of a developmental pattern may 
              be  correlated  with a change in reproductive mode.  Analysis of development 
              of  the  skeleton,  and some elements of  the  muscular  and  nervous  systems,
              in a monophyletic lineage,  the  amphibian  Order  Gymnophiona,  will  test the
               general  hypothesis  of  correlation  of  reproductive  and  developmental 
              patterns.  Development  in  three  focal  species  representing   three 
              families will be analyzed.  One species represents  a  basal  family  with an
              oviparous, free-living larval life  history,  the  other  two  are viviparous
              (live-bearing with  maternal  nutrition).   One  viviparous species  is 
              terrestrial,  the  other  fossorial,  and  their  developmental  patterns  and,
               consequently,   adult  morphologies  differ   significantly.  Consequently, 
              interactions  of phylogenetic  history,  life  history, habitat, development
              and function can be approached  and analyzed.  Comparative development of the
              skull will  be  examined  to  ascertain the basis of homology of  structural 
              elements,   and   the  degree  to  which   modification   of  development is
              correlated with the factors mentioned  above.  The microstructure of tooth
              development will be examined  to  understand the development and evolution of
              the unique fetal  dentition  of  viviparous forms.   The  development  of  the 
              vertebrae  will  be  studied to  test  the  hypothesis  that  resegmentation is
              a fundamental property of development, and  to   determine  the  process  by 
              which  it   occurs.    The  development   of  specific  neural  and  muscular  
              elements  associated  with  the skeletal ontogeny,  such  as  the  jaw 
              musculature  and the hypoglossal nerve, will be  studied.  A  diversity     of 
                 techniques    will     be     employed:  immunohistochemistry,  scanning 
              and  transmission  electron  microscopy, clearing and staining, and others.  A
              program t o  breed  caecilians in captivity will be established in  order  to: 
              (1)  provide  means  of  examining  the  diversity   of  reproductive  modes in
              the lineage; (2) provide  embryos  at  crucial  developmental stages for study;
              and (3) assure  the  maintenance of species threatened in their natural
              habitats.  This is an integrative study that should lead to significant 
              advancement  in  the search to understand  the  relationship  between
              reproduction, development and evolution
