Title       : Global Positioning System Measurements of Crustal Motion in Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1999      
File        : a9527606

Award Number: 9527606
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335844             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barclay Kamb barclay@gps.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kamb  Raymond  9527606    Abstract    This award supports a project to establish
              a Global Positioning  System geodetic network in the Transantarctic Mountains
              of  Antarctica to measure vertical and horizontal crustal velocities.  The
              vertical crustal velocities measured by GPS reflect the  viscoelastic response
              of the solid Earth to Antarctic  deglaciation.  Data from this GPS network will
              be used to test  models of late Pleistocene-early Holocene versus late Holocene
               deglaciation of Antarctica.  These data will also constrain the  length of
              time over which the Antarctic ice sheet disintegrated,  and the distribution of
              the peak glacial load.  A mid-Holocene  deglaciation model produces a predicted
              uplift pattern in the  vicinity of the Transantarctic Mountains that can be
              measured by  high-precision GPS geodetic measurements within a time span of 
              four years.  Horizontal deformation induced by rebound will also  be measured.
              These data will also help constrain present-day  changes in Antarctic ice mass
              by monitoring the elastic  deformation of the lithosphere resulting from
              ongoing glacial  loading and unloading.  The lithospheric response to ongoing
              ice  mass changes is predicted to be an order of magnitude less than  the
              viscoelastic response to late-Pleistocene-Holocene  deglaciation.  Tectonic
              uplift rates are also predicted to be  very small compared to the predicted
              rebound signal for this  region.  Baselines across faults in the
              Transantarctics may  capture co-seismic motion if an earthquake were to occur,
              or  aseismic slip.   The first year of the project will be spent in  technology
              development for, and a proof-of-concept demonstration  of, a prototype
              autonomous GPS station (AGS) under joint funding  with JPL.  This prototype
              station will be powered by solar panels  and will collect data continuously
              during the deployment period.  Data transmission via long-range Radio Frequency
              (RF)  transceivers acting as modems will also be tested.  The prototype 
              station will be modified as neede d to implement a reliable,  operational
              network of four autonomous GPS stations in the  following year of the project,
              contingetn upon joint funding by  NASA.  The AGS network will send daily data
              reports McMurdo.  The  network will be a permanent installation that will
              continue to  monitor motion in the region beyond the term of this project. 
              Advanced processing techniques will be employed to increase the  accuracy of
              the crustal velocity measurements, especially for the  vertical component. 
              These include orbit modeling, troposphere  correction, ionosphere correction,
              and extraction of annual and  seasonal solid Earth and ocean tidal signals.
