Title       : Solar Radiation Processes in the East Antarctic Sea Ice Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1998      
File        : a9527245

Award Number: 9527245
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen G. Warren sgw@atmos.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This project is a three-year study of what happens to solar energy at the
              interface between the antarctic sea ice and the atmosphere, specifically how
              the energy is apportioned among the ocean, the ice, and the lowest air layers. 
              It will be carried out in cooperation with the Australian Antarctic Program,
              with field work on board the Australian ship Aurora Australis.   The very high
              reflectivity of the seasonal antarctic sea ice cover reduces the input of solar
              energy at the surface, and the low thermal conductivity of the ice reduces the
              loss of heat from the ocean to the atmosphere, significantly affecting the
              climate of the Southern Ocean.  Information about how these processes work is
              needed in order to develop appropriate and realistic sea ice models, and to
              integrate these into general circulation and climate change models.   Three
              topics will be investigated:  the distribution and types of snow and ice cover
              and their reflectance in the solar spectrum, the effect of clouds in
              transmitting incident solar radiation, and the distribution and absorption
              properties of organic material within the snow and ice.   Calibrated downward
              and reflected upward irradiance observations will be used to infer the
              radiation balance at the surface and will be used to model the surface energy
              forcing for the antarctic sea ice region.  The concentration and distribution
              of major organic absorbers will be determined from core samples within the ice,
              and their effect on the transmittance of energy within the visible and
              ultraviolet bands will be studied.  Algal layers are frequently found within
              the antarctic sea ice, and have been proposed as a likely mechanism for
              initiating  seasonal plankton blooms in the Southern Ocean.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
