Title       : Opportunities in Support of Multidisciplinary Research: A Center for High
               Performance Computing and Communication for Structural Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9527181

Award Number: 9527181
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerhard Wagner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1144      BIOMOLEC STRUCT & FUNCT
Fld Applictn: 61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9527181  Wagner  The establishment of a Center for High Performance Computing in
              Structural Biology will tackle computationally intensive problems that have
              been difficult or impossible using conventional laboratory computational
              resources, but that will be solvable in the HPCC environment.  The emphasis is
              on the reduction, analysis, and interpretation of experimental data in
              structural biology.  The primary goal will be the implementation, validation,
              application and dissemination of parallel protocols for the computational
              tasks, focusing on problems in macromoleculap NMR spectroscopy and X-ray
              crystallography, including advanced signal processing, molecular modeling, and
              ligand design.  The Center will have a high impact on basic science in
              structural biology, and on the development and application of new hardware and
              software technologies to problems that are manifestly important.  The broad
              aims of the Center are to extend the reach of structural biology to greater
              sensitivity and  higher resolution, to larger and more complex structures and
              phenomena, and to reduce the time required for structure investigations.  %%% 
              The Center's structural biology focus provides a set of problems that embody a
              rich diversity of mathematical and algorithmic expression, creating a fertile
              testbed for the development of HPC algorithms and software.  The emphasis on
              experimental aspects of structural biology, in particular, will bring HPC to
              bear on new problems that are not being pursued by groups developing
              applications of HPC to theory and simulation in structural biology.  The
              architecture of the planned computational facility will provide a versatile and
              cost-effective computational environment for this effort.  ***
