Title       : LTREB: EROC: Climate and Predation Effects on Reproductive Patch Choice and
               Species Coexistence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1997       
File        : a9527318

Award Number: 9527318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527318  Martin  Habitat selection and species coexistence are generally thought
              to reflect choice of environmental conditions that minimize ecological costs
              and maximize fitness. Biotic interactions are often particularly emphasized in
              theories. Yet, ecological influences may be constrained by physiological
              tolerances as a function of evolutionary history of a species and different
              evolutionary histories or physiological tolerances may provide an alternative
              explanation of differences in resource use among coexisting species. Such
              alternative actions of biotic versus abiotic influences are particularly
              highlighted along microclimate gradients because species commonly segregate
              along microclimate gradients. This research will document a microclimate
              gradient and show that seven bird species are segregated along this gradient.
              Such segregation raises an interesting question: Does segregation reflect
              physiological constraints or responses to ecological costs? Recent studies
              indicate that the ecological cost of nest predation may favor choice of nest
              sites that minimize risk of predation and favor coexistence of species that
              differ in nest site selection. Changes in microclimate from weather changes
              among years should cause dynamic shifts in habitat selection if physiological
              costs of microclimate are important. Yet, nest site shifts could increase
              ecological costs if shifts exceed ecological optima. Data collected over the
              previous six years show that nest sites do shift in response to weather
              changes. Continued long-term study of this system and nest site shifts is
              important because such shifts provide an unprecedented opportunity to examine
              the potential role of biotic versus abiotic influences on habitat selection and
              species coexistence based on dynamic changes in potential environmental
              influences.
