Title       : Reconfigurable Network Routing with Spatial Soliton Crossbar Switches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1995     
File        : a9527241

Award Number: 9527241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah L. Crawford                     
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1995     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George I. Stegeman george@mail.creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Torruellas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9527241  Stegeman  We will explore radical new opportunities for the application
              of spatial solitons to information manipulation in networks.  Our ultimate goal
              will be to implement a hybrid, all-optical/electronic, reconfigurable NxN
              routing switch.  Using a totally new concept will optically write bright
              spatial solitons which act as " guiding: channels between any two points on
              opposite sides of a self-focusing nonlinear material.  Either TDM or WDM
              signals can be routed by these non-diffracting channels to interconnect abitary
              input and output signal paths.  Furthermore, by controlling electro-optically
              the input soliton wavefront tilt, angular scanning of soliton channels ( and
              signal paths) in space will be demonstrated for connecting different inputs to
              different outputs on demand, i.e. a reconfigurable NxN interconnect.    We will
              investigate the spurious deflection of spatial solitons by collisions in planar
              waveguides of A1GaAs and bis-paratoluene sulfonate (PTS).  In fact, we have
              already characterized the nonlinear properties of A1GaAs waveguides,
              demonstrated all-optical switching devices and excited spatial solitons. 
              Therefore these waveguides provide an excellent testbed for the new concepts
              involved.  In parallel (with a student salary from a recent AASERT award from
              BMDO) we will investigate the feasibility of exciting spatial solitons in PTS
              which we have also recently characterized.  PTS is important because it has the
              largest know nonresonant nonlinearity and its implementation into waveguides
              will lead to low-power spatial soliton generation, and ultimately
              interconnects.  This work will be done in collaboration with Wagner at the
              University of Colorado Boulder.  ***
