Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Production of Endohedral Metallofullerenes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1999     
File        : a9527836

Award Number: 9527836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph E. Hennessey                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Wright   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TDA Research, Inc
	      12345 West 52nd Avenue
	      Wheat Ridge, CO  800331917    303/940-2301

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 1407,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ***  Wright  9527836     This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
              project will develop a continuous method for the production of endohedral
              metallofullerenes (fullerenes containing encapsulated metal atom(s)) and an
              economical method of separating them from the empty fullerenes. The
              metallofullerenes form a unique new class of molecules whose graphite like
              fullerene shell simultaneously protects the trapped, reactive metal atom from
              the outside environment while also provide a fullerene functional group that
              can be readily used for derivation or attachment of the metallofullerene to
              carrier molecules and substrates. Additionally, because of electronic
              interactions that occur between the trapped metal atom and the fullerene shell,
              the metallofullerenes are expected to possess a broad range of unusual
              electronic and magnetic properties. The metallofullerenes have potential
              applications in such diverse areas as superconductivity, nonlinear optics, and
              pharmaceuticals for medical imaging. Unfortunately, progress on the research
              and development of metallofullerene properties and applications has been slow
              due to the very high production costs. Metallofullerenes are currently produced
              by a batch process using carbon arc vaporization of doped graphite. The
              production costs using this method are so high that metallofullerenes are
              currently not commercially available. During Phase I of this project, a new,
              dramatically different synthesis method that is continuous, simple to operated,
              and scaleable to large industrially relevant capacities was developed. Phase II
              will improve the efficiency of this new process and investigate methods for
              scaling-up both production and purification of the metallofullerenes.   The
              production and separation processes developed in this Phase II project are
              capable of meeting the research demands for metallofullerenes. In the long
              term, this new production method is projected to lower the cost of
              metallofullerenes to less than $10/gram and allow their use in medical i
              maging, nonlinear optics, novel superconductors, and a host of other
              applications.  ***
