Title       : Theoretical Studies of State to State Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1997  
File        : a9527677

Award Number: 9527677
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1996  
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $372348             (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Schatz SCHATZ@chem.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting   Schatz's
              research program which is concerned with using computational   methods to
              determine the rates of chemical reactions that are important   in combustion
              and atmospheric chemistry.  For certain kinds of reactions,   the current
              generation of computers has opened up new opportunities for   the use of theory
              to determine rate information at a level that is better   than or competitive
              with experiment.  A goal of the research program is   therefore to develop
              theoretical methods (quantum and classical dynamics   methods) that take
              advantage of the new computer power to characterize   important reactions. 
              Another component of this work is the   representation of potential energy
              surfaces that determine the forces   between the atoms while reaction takes
              place.  Such surfaces have proven   difficult to describe when simultaneous
              bond-breaking and bond-forming   occurs, or when there are multiple reaction
              pathways.  However the Schatz   group has developed several techniques for
              representing these surfaces   and the resulting surfaces have been widely used.
                     The theoretical dynamics methods and reactive potential energy  
              surfaces will together be used to study several specific chemical   reactions
              of interest to the combustion and atmospheric kinetics   community for the
              purpose of interpreting and predicting experiments.   Planned studies are aimed
              at understanding the role of reagent   vibrational excitation on chemical
              reactivity, including the importance   of mode-specific chemistry; at
              characterizing reactions in which there is   a change in electronic state while
              the reaction occurs (with emphasis on   the influence of spin-orbit excitation
              on chemical reactivity); and in   understanding reactions in which there is no
              reaction path that connects   reagents and products.  Other topics include the
              use of theory to   understand the spectroscopy of transition states of chemical
              reactions,   and the characterization of collisional relaxation rates that
              leads to   the stabilization of reaction intermediates.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
