Title       : Structure of Plant-Arthropod Associations: Impact of Herbivores on Community
               Composition and Host Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  1999  
File        : a9527536

Award Number: 9527536
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Mopper                            
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard B. Root rbr1@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527536  Root    The conditions created by a long-term experiment involving the
              removal of insects from abandoned agricultural fields provide an exceptional
              opportunity to examine key assumptions in models of plant succession.  In a
              previous experiment, the suppression of plant-feeding insects released the
              controls on goldenrod populations.  Under these circumstances, goldenrods
              became strong competitive dominants that suppressed many plant species that are
              prominent in normal plant succession. This study will measure the changes that
              follow the withdrawal of insecticide treatments to reveal how herbivores can
              account for vegetational change in communities that are dominated by plants
              with strong inhibitory influences.  The results of this experiment will also
              demonstrate whether the removal of insects, a major component in most
              terrestrial ecosystems, merely sets back the normal sequence of successional
              changes or if it causes the community to develop along an entirely new
              trajectory that produces a persistent and previously unknown plant association.
               In another set of experiments, the attributes that are responsible for the
              dominance of goldenrods will be examined.   Previous work has shown that
              goldenrods respond to herbivore damage by reducing their fecundity, but not the
              quality of their seeds.  As is the case with our understanding of the
              population biology of most plants, little is known about the fate of the seeds
              after they leave the parent.  The availability of germination sites, loss of
              viability in aging seeds, size of the seed bank, and dispersal of seeds will be
              addressed in field experiments in isolated gardens where the density and age of
              seeds are controlled.    This investigation will further our understanding of
              management strategies for fields in long-term fallow.  The studies on seed
              dispersal and the dynamics of seed banks will provide better insight into the
              processes involved in the establishment of weed populations.
