Title       : The Role of Amino Acid Uptake by Mycorrhizal Ericaceous Shrubs in the Nitrogen
               Economy of Nutrient-Deficient Peat Bogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1999       
File        : a9527907

Award Number: 9527907
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256653             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loretta C. Johnson johnson@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Antoni W. Damman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Johnson  9527907  Peatlands, dominated by ericaceous shrubs and Sphagnum moss,
              cover 400 million ha in the circumboreal region.  These ecosystems are
              characterized by slow decomposition and nutrient cycling, and accumulation of
              peat (primarily Sphagnum moss litter).  Ombrotrophic (rain-fed) peat bogs
              represent one of the most nutrient-deficient of all ecosystems because peat
              accumulates above the surrounding landscapes and, therefore, these systems
              receive nutrient inputs form only atmospheric sources.  Consequently,
              ombrotrophic peat bogs are thought to be strongly limited by nitrogen (N).  Our
              field and laboratory net N mineralization rates from ombrotrophic peat bogs are
              much lower than minertrophic peatlands and even lower than arctic tundra. 
              Furthermore, it appears that only about 1/4 of the annual N requirement of
              ericaceous shrubs and Sphagnum moss can be met by inorganic sources from
              atmospheric inputs (mostly deposition, N fixation is negligible) and N
              mineralization.  Although inorganic N is in short supply in peat bogs, organic
              N is present in large quantities as partially decomposed peat and, in lesser
              amounts, as dissolved organic nitrogen (DON).  In organic soils, some DON
              occurs as 'free' amino acids, previously considered as unavailable for plant
              uptake.  Recent laboratory investigations and the few field studies that have
              be conducted indicate that ericaceous mycorrhizal plants (and even several
              arctic non-mycorrhizal sedges) can take up amino acids.  The goal of this
              project is to determine if uptake of amino acids (and perhaps more complex
              organic N forms) by mycorrhizal ericaceous bog shrubs can account for the
              apparent N deficit in the plants' annual uptake requirements.  If the uptake of
              organic N is a primary form of N nutrition for ericaceuous plants in
              organic-rich peat bogs, it would fundamentally alter ideas about N limitation
              and N cyclinging, these systems and perhaps in other Ericace-dominated
              ecosystems,  e.g. heathlands and nutrient-poor oak forests.   This proje ct is
              focused on the possible short-circuiting of the decomposition-mineralization
              cycle by uptake of amino acid N and nitrogenous sugars by ericaceous plants via
              ericoid mycorrhizas in an organic-rich bog ecosystem.  The objectives of this
              project are to 1) determine if ericaceous bog plants take up amino acids and
              amino sugars under field conditions, either directly or via mycorrhizas, 2)
              characterize the levels of 'free' amino acids and amino sugars in the soil, and
              determine the release of dissolved organic N, especially from relatively liable
              roots and leaves, and 3) determine if ericacous bog plants require mycorrhizas
              for their amino acids uptake.  The project plan includes:  a field test of
              uptake of isotopically-labelled glycine (amino acid) and glucose amine
              (nitrogenous sugar) by mycorrhizal ericaceous plants, field and laboratory
              incubations of litter to measure release of DON, field and laboratory studies
              of mycorrhizal dependency, and N turn-over studies using 15N-labelled
              decomposing roots and leaves.
