Title       : New Numerical Tools for Diffusion-Reaction Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 22,  1996   
File        : a9527671

Award Number: 9527671
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122350             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. A. Ramachandran rama@wuche3.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Ramachandran - 9527671    Trickle bed and packed bed catalytic
              reactors are widely used in petroleum processing and in bulk chemical
              manufacturing processes.  Commercial applications include hydrocracking,
              hydrodesulfurization and fine chemicals manufacturing.  In such systems the
              interactions of hydrodynamics, mass transfer and kinetics are complex and the
              design of the reactor is initiated through numerical simulation.  Such
              simulations are useful in optimization studies and may provide guidance in
              reactor selection which is then followed by experimental testing of the most
              promising cases only.  The objective of this work is to develop new numerical
              techniques based on the boundary integral and the dual reciprocity methods to
              solve such physical/chemical problems on the particle scale and to incorporate
              these into an overall reactor simulation model.    The techniques that will be
              further developed include the Boundary Element Method (BEM) and the Dual
              Reciprocity Boundary Element Method (DRM).  The BEM can be used to solve
              partial differential equations and its advantage is the necessity to only
              discretize the surface of the object.  It has been used for the study of linear
              diffusion reaction problems for single reactions and networks of linear
              reactions.  This technique permits easy modeling when non-regular shaped
              catalyst particles such as trilobes, quadrulobes, wagon wheels, etc. are used. 
              DRM has been used in solving 2-dimensional non-linear diffusion reaction
              problems with partial wetting effects.  The emphasis in this work is on: (I)
              developing reliable a posteriori error indicators, (ii) standardizing the basis
              functions for the approximation of non-linear rate terms, (iii) developing
              3-dimensional algorithms to simulate realistic catalyst shapes, and (iv)
              developing efficient methods for large scale computing of complex reaction
              networks.
