Title       : Material Handling Research Colloquium IV, The Netherlands, June 16-19, 1996
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1995 
File        : a9527476

Award Number: 9527476
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Georgia-Ann Klutke                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon F. McGinnis lmcginnis@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1465      PRODUCTION SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9527476  McGinnis   The aim of this project is to hold a colloquium on material
              handling research in the Netherlands. The will be attended by a team of
              researchers drawn mostly from the US and the EC countries. At the meeting
              several topics in material handling  research will be covered. This colloquium
              is the fourth of what is hoped will constitute a series of biannual colloquia
              on material handling research. All the three previous colloquia had been held
              in the US. This colloquium is the first to be held outside the territorial USA.
              Attendance is by invitation only and this has been the format used in all the
              three previous colloquia. The colloquium builds upon the first three colloquia
              in bringing together leading researchers to present their current research in
              the field, brain storm, debate, and assess the future needs and directions of
              material handling research. Specifically, researchers will assess and
              characterize the current state of research, identify critical research issues,
              and identify the future needs and directions of material handling research. It
              is hoped that the international dimension of the meeting will facilitate cross
              fertilization of ideas between researchers in the US and the EC countries and
              possibly foster new international collaborations.     Material handling is a
              major activity in many manufacturing operations. Depending on the industry, it
              is often quoted that material handling accounts for about 25-75% of all
              manufacturing costs. With this proportion, it is obvious that improvement in
              the control of material handling functions in manufacturing will result in some
              large cost savings annually in manufacturing. Improvement in material handling
              control can be gained through research.  Therefore, a meeting of researchers
              focused on issues of material handling can lead to better system understanding
              and control, improved research, and the strengthening of relationships between
              researchers at various institutions
