Title       : Nonadditivity in Molecular Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9527099

Award Number: 9527099
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria M. Szczesniak-Bryant maria@ouchem.chem.oakland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Grzegorz Chalasinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oakland University
	      
	      Rochester, MI  483094401    313/377-2100

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry   program 
              will study non-additivity of intermolecular interactions in a variety of  
              chemical  systems using first principles ab-initio quantum mechanical methods. 
               Weak intermolecular forces and interactions are of key importance in   studies
               of the properties of matter in condensed phases. In such an environment,   the
              interaction   in a pair of molecules affects the ways each of them interacts
              with a   third.  The assumption of pairwise additivity of intermolecular
              interactions  is thus a very poor approximation.  Most current means of
              simulating  condensed phase reactions either disregard non-additivity of
              interactions  entirely, or attempt to include it in a very crude manner, mixed
              together  with a number of errors in the interaction potentials.  One common 
              misconception about non-additivity is that it originates from a single  source.
               However, in reality it arises from a number of fundamentally  different
              physical phenomena.    This theoretical research is aimed at elucidating all of
              the effects   responsible  for non-additivity and to break these down into
              components which are   labeled   dispersion,  induction and exchange.  Such an
              analysis will lead to an   improved  understanding of these effects on a
              fundamental level. This work will   result  in the development of a number of
              analytical potentials which explicitly   include  many-body effects and are
              thus suitable for simulations of condensed   phases. as   well as properties of
              clusters.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                        
