Title       : MDC: Collaborative Computing Frameworks for Natural SciencesResearch
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1997     
File        : a9527186

Award Number: 9527186
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Charles H. Koelbel                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1995 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1328102            (Estimated)
Investigator: Vaidy S. Sunderam vss@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl S. Hagen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shun Y. Cheung  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Luigi G. Marzilli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael D. Hirsch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,GRCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9527186  Sunderam  The proposed research address enabling technologies to
              support collaborative, distributes computer-based problem solving in the
              natural sciences. The research emphasis of this effort will be on problem
              solving environments in scientific disciplines, and on computer science issues
              in multimodal distributed systems. the project will be driven by the
              requirements of collaborative research and problem-solving in natural sciences,
              i.e. chemistry, physics, biochemistry, and allied fields.  In these, and other
              laboratory/instrument based sciences, an increasingly common research
              methodology involves the use and dependence upon computation, interaction,
              graphical display of data, and data storage.  The overall goal of this project
              is to evolve a virtual distributed computing framework that integrally supports
              human AV communication, high performance heterogeneous computing, and
              distributed data management facilities.  this research will involve analysis of
              computational transformations and graphical viewing of results produced by
              scientific instruments, and the development of methodologies and tools to
              enhance the experiment-results-analysis phases of scientific endeavor, in a
              collaborative distributed setting.  It is expected that this project will
              culminate in a tangible suite of software tools that facilitate  such
              collaborative frameworks.
