Title       : Effects of "Bottom-Up", "Lateral", and "Top-Down" Forces on the Structure of a
               Phytophagous Insect Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9527846

Award Number: 9527846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Denno rd12@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527846  Denno    The relative importance of plant characteristics ("bottom-up")
              and natural enemies ("top-down factors") in the population and community
              ecology of phytophagous (plant-feeding) insects has been disputed for decades. 
              Add to this the effects of competition ("lateral factors") on herbivorous
              insect communities and the issue becomes more complicated.  To date, very few
              studies have determined whether: (1) "bottom-up", "lateral", and "top-down"
              forces act in concert, (2) important interactions exist among these forces, and
              (3) each herbivore species is influenced by different factors such that no
              single force dictates community organization.  The present research employs an
              experimental approach in which host plant quality, competition, and predation
              are manipulated to understand the factors which influence the plant-feeding
              insect community in intertidal marshes of eastern North America.  The major
              organisms are salt marsh cord grass, its dominant sap-feeding insects, and
              their major predators, hunting spiders.  Existing evidence suggests that
              "bottom-up", "lateral", and "top-down" forces are all potentially important in
              this system, and that each herbivore species responds to these forces
              differently.  Thus, this system provides the exciting opportunity to assess how
              these forces integrate to determine the abundance of each herbivore species. 
              The proposed research will make a significant contribution toward unraveling
              the interactions most influential in dictating the distribution and abundance
              of plant-feeding insects.    The sensitive wetland ecosystem that will be
              studied is strikingly similar to many agricultural cropping systems such as
              rice, corn, and sugar cane.  Similarities include the uniformity of the
              habitat, as well as the types of herbivorous insects and their natural enemies.
               The results of this study will provide critically-needed information on the
              importance of host-plant factors (fertilizer regimes and varietal resistance)
              and biological control agents and how  they interact to suppress agricultural
              pest populations.
