Title       : Molecular Studies of Cospeciation in a Host-Parasite Assemblage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1996    
File        : a9527583

Award Number: 9527583
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark S. Hafner namark@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xuhua Xia  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527583  HAFNER  Despite considerable study, biologists still know very little
              about relative rates of DNA change in distantly related groups of organisms,
              such as mammals versus insects.  In this research, Mark Hafner and Xuhua Xia
              will investigate a host-parasite system, from which they will generate
              comparative data about rates of DNA change.  The hosts in this study are pocket
              gophers, which are small, herbivorous rodents found throughout much of North
              and Central America.  The parasites are chewing lice, which are small,
              ectoparasitic insects that live in the fur of their hosts.  The association
              between chewing lice and their hosts is considered obligate, because the lice
              cannot survive off their natural hosts.  This intimate and long-term
              association between pocket gophers and chewing lice presents an unusual
              opportunity to examine both the pattern and rate of molecular change in the DNA
              of these organisms.  Previous work has shown that each speciation event in the
              pocket gophers is accompanied by a speciation event in their lice.  This means
              that one can measure the amount of molecular change between the species of lice
              that live on these gophers.  Since time is a constant, such a comparison yields
              a direct measure of relative rates of DNA change in the gophers versus their
              lice.    Sequences of two mitochondrial genes (cytochrome oxidase I and
              cytochrome b) will be used to construct independent phylogenies of gophers and
              lice.  These trees will be compared statistically to evaluate overall branching
              similarity, hence degree of cospeciation in the gopher-louse assemblage. 
              Finally, lengths of homologous branches in the gopher and louse trees will be
              compared to determine relative rates of DNA change in gophers versus lice.
