Title       : Magnetism and Phase Transitions of Unusual Pure, Dilute and Mixed Magnets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1997  
File        : a9527357

Award Number: 9527357
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147938             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary C. DeFotis gxdefo@wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1762,9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9527357  DeFotis    This proposal is concerned with the detailed study of 
              magnetic behavior, especially that associated with magnetic  phase transitions,
              of a number of unusual pure, dilute and  mixed magnetic systems with short-
              range exchange  interactions. The pure materials are interesting because  four
              of them are members of a new family of 3d transition  metal dichloride
              monohydrates in two of which spin glass-  like behavior has already been
              observed; another is  ferromagnetic and a potential member of the rare 
              universality class; and two others exhibit remarkably large  zero-field
              splittings. The study of spin glass behavior in  insulating materials is of
              particular interest and  importance, and several of the mixed magnetic systems
              to be  studied could exhibit spin glass phases. One of these is a  potential
              three-dimensional XY insulating spin glass. The  behavior of a 3D-XY
              ferromagnet with dilution is itself an  important problem. Two of the mixed
              systems are ternary in  character, i.e, they contain either three different
              magnetic  components or two magnetic and one diamagnetic. Such systems  are
              virtually unstudied among insulating materials. The  mixed magnets will contain
              either competing exchange  interactions, competing anisotropies, different spin
              values,  or some combination of these. Determination of magnetic  phase
              diagrams, showing the dependence of ordering  temperature on composition and
              regions of phase stability,  is a major objective of this work. Certain
              theoretically  predicted phase diagram types are yet to be observed.  %%%  This
              research include a detailed study of magnetic behavior  of a number of unusual
              pure, dilute and mixed magnetic  systems with short- range exchange
              interactions. The pure  materials are interesting because certain members
              exhibit  spin glass-like behavior, are ferromagnetic, or they exhibit 
              remarkably large zero-field splittings. A variety of systems  are proposed for
              study because several different phenomena  are of interest. Experimenta l
              methodology consists primarily  of variable temperature, variable field
              magnetization  measurements, on polycrystalline and single crystal samples. 
              Collaborative work also is planned for neutron diffraction  and scattering,
              high field magnetization, and very long time  thermoremanent magnetization
              measurements. The proposed work  will have a major impact on the departmental
              research  environment, especially in opportunities afforded  undergraduates for
              research during the summer and during the  academic year. Such experience is a
              critical part of their  scientific education, and valuable preparation for
              later  scientific work.
