Title       : A New Approach for Evaluating Controls on Depositional Sequence Architecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9527004

Award Number: 9527004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  1996     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Evan K. Franseen evanf@kgs.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Goldstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Farr  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Franseen  9527004     For the past decade, concepts of sequence stratigraphy
              have been applied to studies of carbonate facies.  However, in large part, our
              understanding of the variable that control the location and geometry carbonate
              depositional sequences are inadequate because of the few studies that are able
              to isolate these variables.   The objectives of this study are to evaluate the
              effect of variables such as eustatic sea level fluctuation, regional sea level
              fluctuation, tectonism, substrate paleoslope, leeward versus windward location,
              siliciclastic input and autogenic controls, by using a unique combination of
              quantified relative sea level histories, high resolution chronostratigraphic
              correlations, and selection of localities which allow isolation of different
              variables.  We have selected the Upper Miocene because of exceptional exposures
              of Upper Miocene carbonate sequences from Mediterranean region.  The comparison
              of shapes and magnitudes of relative sea level fluctuations shown on
              quantitative relative sea level curves from different areas, combined with
              field data and high resolution age control from radiometric dating,
              biostratigraphy and magnetostratigraphy, can provide the detailed data
              necessary to determine the effects of local, regional and global controls on
              depositional sequence development.   To arrive at the overall goal the proposed
              project is divided into four phases.  Phase I is complete.  It was designed to
              develop a quantitative record of the relative sea level history,
              chronostratigraphy, and to develop a detailed understanding of the sequence
              stratigraphy for one locality.  It has developed a new method for
              quantification of relative sea level history (pinning points) based on
              identification of facies deposited at or just below sea level and on tracing
              evidence of subaerial exposure on marine rocks down paleoslope.  It has also
              produced a high resolution chronostratigraphy calibrated with radiometric
              dates.  The successful completion of Phase I of this project h as already
              illustrated significant deviations from commonly accepted sequence 
              stratigraphic models by showing the importance of substrate paleoslope and
              illustrating that the architecture predicted by the systems tract approach is
              not applicable.   Funding is requested for Phase II and Phase III in this
              proposal.  Phase II will develop the same information as in Phase I in separate
              localities on the same tectonic block.  This information includes geologic
              mapping, petrography, construction of pinning point curve, magnetostratigraphy,
              biostratigraphy, and radiometric dating.  Time correlation of depositional
              sequences between the areas will allow the analysis of local variables such as
              substrate paleoslope, leeward versus windward location, siliciclastic input and
              autogenic controls while the variable of relative sea level should be held
              relatively constant because of the location on the same tectonic block.  Phase
              III involves working with other researchers who are studying areas on separate
              tectonic blocks of the Mediterranean to develop similar quantitative relative
              sea level histories, chronostratigraphy and sequence stratigraphy in those
              locations.  This comparison will allow analyses of the tectonic effects on
              relative sea level history and sequence stratigraphy in unites that have
              experienced the same overall Mediterranean sea level history.   Phase IV is the
              final phase of the study.  It will develop similar quantitative relative sea
              level histories, chronostatigraphy and sequence stratigraphy for sites outside
              of the Mediterranean to separate local Mediterranean sea level effects from
              eustatic effects.   The purpose of this research is to develop an understanding
              of the variables that control the location and architecture of carbonate
              depositional sequences.  Thus, the product will be a quantitative understanding
              of how depositional sequence geometry, location, and facies distribution is
              controlled by:  (1) local variables of paleoslope, autogenic controls,
              siliciclastic input, and seaw ard versus windward location; (2) regional
              variables of tectonic controls on accommodation space and Mediterranean sea
              level, and (3) global sea level.  Once the sedimentologic effect of these
              variables are understood , a better general understanding of the geologic
              record may be gained, and predictive models may be refined to the point of
              aiding oil and gas production.
