Title       : MDC: A High-Performance Problem-Solving Environment for Optimization and Control
               of Chemical and Biological Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1997       
File        : a9527151

Award Number: 9527151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1649999            (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda R. Petzold   (Principal Investigator current)
              J. Ben Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert T. Tranquillo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,9263,GRCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               The primary goal of this research is the development of   high-performance
              problem solving environment (PSE) for the    optimization and  control of
              chemical and biological processes,  with initial   emphasis on  bioengineering
              applications.  The  optimization and control   of such processes  requires the 
              repetitive solution of time-dependent partial   equations (PDEs) in two or
              three spatial dimensions.  The    requirements of this problem, which must be
              solved    interactively, can only be  met by the use of massively parallel 
              computers.  Such a   comprehensive and  powerful PSE does not  currently exist,
              and its development   presents significant  computational and computer science
              challenges.    The initial   application is  the design and optimization of a 
              small diameter   bioartificial artery.  Over  600,000 surgical  procedures for
              blood vessel replacement are   conducted in the  U.S.  annually, many involving
              synthetic polymer substitutes   for small  diameter  blood vessels that fail
              due to lack of biocompatability,    which is not an issue  for bioartificial
              arteries.  A PDE model  based on continuum   mechanical theory  that describes
              the  distribution of cells, fibers, and   stresses in a tissue will  be  used
              to simulate the evolving compaction of a   bioartificial  artery.  Optimization
              of the ultimate properties of the  bioartificial   artery is sought,  in
              particular the ability to  withstand pulsatile arterial   pressure.  PDE 
              systems of a  similar mathematical structure commonly arise   as models for 
              chemical processes with a need for their control and    optimization.  The
              project  includes collaboration with and input  from scientists and   engineers
              at several  industrial and  government laboratories with applications in  
              processing.    To optimize or control a process described by   PDEs, the
              original  time interval is divided into subintervals in a multiple-  shooting 
              type  approach.  The PDEs on each subinterval are discretized in    space via
              parallel  adaptive finite el ement methods to give a  large system of  
              algebraic equations (DAEs).  Parameters or control variables   are then
              optimized,  subject to  state and control variable and continuity   constraints
              (equality  and  inequality) using large-scale nonlinear programming   
              techniques.  Extensive  knowledge and research experience in  adaptive methods
              for   PDEs, DAEs,  large-scale optimization,  parallel computing, computing  
              environments, and  chemical  and biological processes, are required to  
              successfully develop  such a  PSE.  The reaerch team members cover this broad 
              range of   expertise, and have a successful record of  collaboration   with
              each other.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
