Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Stability and Approximation for Distributed Parameter
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 7,  1995       
File        : a9527381

Award Number: 9527381
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Lagnese                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1995  
Expires     : August 31,  1997     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33389              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard H. Fabiano   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of St Thomas
	      3812 Montrose
	      Houston, TX  770064626    713/522-7911

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9527381  Fabiano        This RUI award supports a project dealing with stability
              and  approximation of dynamic partial differential equations and
              integro-differential  equations.  The basic issue involved is that of
              preservation of stability under  finite dimensional approximation of the
              system.  This is a very important  question since every computational scheme
              for a system of partial differential  equations or other infinite dimensional
              system involves a finite dimensional  approximation of one sort or another, and
              it is well-known that certain  approximation schemes will destroy stability or
              change the so-called stability  margin.  A recently developed method of
              approximation, called the  method of   equivalent inner products,  that is
              known to preserve the  stability margin of  the original infinite dimensional
              system, will be studied.  The method is known  to be useful for approximation
              of bounded operators (systems of ordinary  differential equations, for
              example).  In additions to establishing convergence  properties of the method
              in the context of the equations under consideration,  reliable computer
              algorithms based on the method will be developed.        The mathematical
              equations governing the motion of vibrating flexible   elastic structures are
              used to model such diverse physical systems as robot   arms, large antennae,
              buildings (vibrating in an earthquake, for example),  airplane wings, and so
              forth. Computer algorithms are often used to simulate  these equations in order
              to solve complex problems in these applications. With  the advent of new
              technologies, such as advanced actuators and materials, and  enhanced
              performance requirements, together with the need to better  understand and
              influence the motion of these systems, there is a necessity for  more
              sophisticated mathematical models and theoretically sound, reliable  numerical
              algorithms for model simulation and approximation. This project will  focus on
              a new approximation method which has shown significant promise for  imp acting
              exactly these types of problems.  Basic convergence properties of  the method
              will be developed, as well as associated software based on the  method.  ***
