Title       : National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a9527035

Award Number: 9527035
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: W. Lance Haworth                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87716900           (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack E. Crow crow@magnet.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1743      NATIONAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              18        Materials NEC                           
Program Ref : 1745,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9527035  Crow    The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) is 
              operated by a consortium composed of the University of  Florida, Florida State
              University, and Los Alamos  National Laboratory. The Laboratory is administered
              by  Florida State University as a national user facility,  available
              competitively to users on the basis of merit.  Established in 1990 and
              dedicated in 1994, the Laboratory  through an extraordinary state-federal
              partnership with  multi-agency participation has developed unique  facilities
              in support of magnet-related research at the  highest attainable magnetic
              fields.  The Laboratory is  structured around three major thrusts:  (1) user 
              facilities developed in response to users' needs that are  opening new
              frontiers for science opportunities, (2)  magnet science and technology
              developed in partnership  with the private sector to enhance U.S.
              competitiveness,  and (3) basic science research driven by a partnership 
              between external and in house users that drives high  magnetic field science
              and technology opportunities at  and beyond the cutting edge.  &&&  During the
              first five years, the NHMFL established the  essential infrastructure and
              demonstrated its  international leadership in magnet-related technologies  and
              science.  The second five years will focus on the  capitalization of the
              federal and state investment to  realize the full scientific potential of the
              new facility.  The Laboratory will have a science and magnet technology 
              program that will expand the current capabilities, develop  new magnet systems,
              and drive new science discoveries at  the highest fields and at the extremes of
              pressure and  temperature.  The Laboratory will provide continuous  fields (up
              to 50 tesla) in the magnetic field region  formerly thought to be reserved for
              only pulsed magnets  and pulsed fields (100 tesla for milliseconds) in the 
              range that has been a dream of researchers for over a  decade.  The
              availability of opportunities in magnetic  resonance at 900 MHz and beyond w
              ill be a critical aspect  of the Laboratory's efforts to build a users' center
              of  excellence in very high field magnetic resonance  spectroscopies.  The
              in-house science program will be  developed in cooperation with the external
              users and will  address the following research areas:  highly correlated 
              electron systems including heavy fermions, cuprate  superconductors, molecular
              conductors, and quantum  systems; magnetic materials; and magnetic resonance 
              spectroscopies as applied to the chemical, physical, and  biological sciences. 
              The laboratory is poised to become  the preeminent center for
              multi-disciplinary research  using high magnetic fields.    ***
