Title       : Aragonite Crystallography and Diagenesis: An Old Problem Viewed at a New Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1999 
File        : a9527103

Award Number: 9527103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61222              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Haywick dhaywick@jaguarl.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    251/460-6101

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Haywick  9527103   Aragonite diagenesis is responsible for much of the calcite
              cementation that lithifies carbonate sediment in contact with meteoric
              porewater.  Sedimentologists and crystallographers have long studied aragonite,
              and a considerable data base now exists concerning the mineral's physical
              properties, metastability and diagenesis.  Examination of aragonite at
              microstructural levels using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
              (HRTEM) is a comparably new technique, in part, because of the minteral's
              instability to the electron beam.  Much of what has been done to date, has
              focused on microstructural features typical of all minerals (e.g., stacking
              faults, twinning).  Some evidence now suggests that biogenic aragonite may be
              characterized by a more pervasive microstructure.  Preliminary HRTEM imaging of
              chalky bivalves has revealed that 5-15 nm-scale microdomains (variably
              orientated lattice fringes), comprise much of the aragonite.  The implication
              is that bivalves, perhaps all biogenic aragonite, is heterogeneous at the
              microstructural scale.  Aragonite dissolution and diagenesis frequently
              initiates along structural weaknesses within shells and other skeletal
              frameworks.  Microdomains may represent yet another structural weakness to
              initiate diagenetic alteration.  Alternatively, microdomains may form due to
              diagenetic processes.  The proposal seeks funds to address these, and other
              pertinent questions regarding the origin of the microdomains, and their
              ubiquity within biogenic aragonite.   The study primarily targets bivalves from
              study sites in Alabama, Florida and New Zealand.  These three areas were
              selected because they contain abundant bivalves of similar age
              (Plio-Pleistocene to modern), that inhabited similar depositional environments
              (shallow carbonate shelf).  Most importantly, the Florida an New Zealand sites,
              have well documented, aragonite-driven diagenetic histories.  It will be
              necessary to resolve the grade of diagenesis in order to assess the role of
              diss olution and alteration on the formation of the microdomains.  The New
              Zealand study site is particularly well suited to do this.  Here, shells of
              relatively pristine character occur virtually alongside those that are
              partially dissolved ("chalky"), completely dissolved (molds or calcite
              spar-filled molds), or recrystallized to calcite spar.   This study will use a
              variety of established and relatively new techniques to achieve its goals. 
              Thin-section petrography, enhanced by high-resolution video imaging, and
              scanning electron microscopy will resolve shell fabrics, degree of dissolution
              (chalkiness) and intra-and intercrystalline porosity.  X-ray diffraction will
              be employed to establish bulk crystallography and sample purity.  Geochemical
              analysis (electron microprobe, inductively coupled plasma spectrophotometry,
              stable isotopes) will be used to establish trace elemental and isotopic
              compositions, and diagenetic grade of thin-sectioned and powdered specimens. 
              These data will be used to select suitable samples for HRTEM imaging. 
              Ultimately, the results of this project will yield new information about the
              crystallography of aragonite.  Moreover, it will open up new avenues for future
              research projects examining the ultrastructure of carbonate minerals, and
              carbonate diagenesis.
