Title       : MDC: Direct Simulation of the Motion of Particles in Flowing Liquids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9527123

Award Number: 9527123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1665000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. Joseph joseph@aem.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9527123 Joseph  This project will develop highly efficient methods for computing
              the three-dimensional motion of large number of particles in solid-liquid
              flows, under the action of the hydrodynamic forces and torques exerted by the
              suspending fluid, and use these methods to elucidate the fundamental dynamics
              of particulate flows and solve problems of engineering interest.  The goal is
              to develop high-performance, state-of -the-art software packages called
              particle movers, capable of simulating the motion of thousands of particles in
              2-D and hundreds in 3-D domains, in both Newtonian fluids, governed by the
              Navier-Strokes equations, and in several popular models of viscoelastic fluids.
               Such simulations will be extremely computationally intensive.  It is therefor
              imperative to develop the most efficient possible computational schemes, and to
              implement them on parallel machines, using state-of-the-art parallel
              algorithms. The project will develop two different computational schemes for
              simulating solid-liquid flows on parallel computers.  The first is a
              generalization of the standard Galerkin finite element method in which both the
              fluid and particle equations of motion are incorporated into a single
              variational equation, containing both fluid and particle velocities as
              primitive unknowns. In the second approach, an embedding method, the fluid flow
              is computed as if the space occupied by the particles were filled with fluid. 
              The no-slip boundary condition of the particle boundaries is enforced as a
              constraint using Lagrange multipliers.  This allows a fixed grid to be used, 
              eliminating the need for remeshing, a definite advantage in parallel
              implementations. The new schemes will be used to study the microstructural
              (pair interaction) effects which produce clusters and anisotropic structures in
              particulate flows, to produce statistical analyses of particulate flows (mean
              values, fluctuation levels and spectral properties), to derive engineering
              correlations of the kind usually obtained from expe riments, and to provide
              clues and closure data for the development of two-phase flow models and a
              standard against which to judge the performance of such models.  They will also
              be used to solve practical problems of industrial interest such as
              sedimentation, fluidization an slurry transport of solid particles in Newtonian
              and viscoelastic fluids.
