Title       : MDC: Integration of Symbolic Computing with Framework of Classes and
               Problem-Solving Archetypes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1998    
File        : a9527130

Award Number: 9527130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: S. Kamal Abdali                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1828000            (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Mani Chandy mani@cs.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Pool  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel I. Meiron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Seinfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven E. Koonin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 2865      NUMER, SYMBOL & GEOMETRIC COMP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9216,GRCH,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this project is to help scientists and   engineers carry out
              computational tasks more effectively by   doing research on:   -  The
              integration of symbolic and numeric computation to    facilitate problem
              specification, exploration and result    verification.   -  Hierarchies of
              reusable computational abstractions   organized  in libraries with well-defined
              navigational   structures.  -  Exploiting commercial standards and tools for
              object-request  brokers,   compound documents, and collaboration  
              infrastructure.  The project takes a novel approach to problem-solving   
              environments (PSEs).  Its focus is on the entire process of    problem-solving
              from initial conception,  symbolic specification,  solution, visualization,
              comparison   with experimental data, and  feed back. The project focuses   on
              problem-solving environments,  not merely programming   environments.  This
              focus leads to  research on reusable   abstractions at all levels of
              problem-solving.  Important   abstractions include  the problem-solving  method
              itself, method-specific   abstractions for sequential  and  parallel program
              design, reasoning and debugging,   performance  analysis and  tuning, and
              frameworks for class libraries.    PSEs are more   useful when they  are more
              specific. However, rather  than build one problem-  solving environment  for
              one class of user,  application domain, programming   language and machine, 
              this  project aims at the basic research that will enable us   to develop 
              tools  for building specific PSEs.  To use a metaphor, rather than    doing
              research on  workbenches we want to do research on machine  tools that can   be
              used to build  workbenches.    Traditional PSEs deal with extending a  
              workstation environment  whereas this project is concerned with developing
              structured    environments for problem-solving. Scientists and  engineers  
              collaborate when  they solve problems, and they share  much more than code.  
              PSEs based on  collaboration also provide  object-request brokering and  
              compound multimedia document  interfaces. Since this vision   is both novel and
              ambitious, a  critical  aspect of the project is leveraging methods and tools  
               developed for scientific,  commercial and home-computing  applications.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
