Title       : Phylogeny of Coniferophytic Seed Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9527920

Award Number: 9527920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1996      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105156             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gar W. Rothwell rothwell@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gene K. Mapes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527920  Rothwell   Of the major groups of vascular plants (ferns, gymnosperms,
              angiosperms), the conifers and their close allies (gymnosperms) have an
              extensive fossil record extending back at least 300 million years, and in
              deposits rich enough at times to produce coal. Despite this rich base of
              material, fossil conifers and relatives are often poorly documented, with
              literature reports focusing on isolated or disarticulated plant parts but
              rarely integrating all material available. Paleobotanists Gar Rothwell and Gene
              Mapes of Ohio University are working to improve whole-plant reconstructions of
              numerous critical taxa of ancient conifers and relatives, on the basis of
              material accumulated by them as well as of specimens to be studied in museum
              collections in several countries. With character data amassed from both
              vegetative and reproductive structures, the researchers can begin to address
              the long-term goal of reconstructing the phylogenetic history of all the living
              conifers, taxads, and relatives (cycads, Ginkgo) in the wider context of their
              fossil ancestors.   Recent molecular (DNA) findings and reanalysis of
              anatomical and morphological features have changed dramatically our
              understanding of the evolutionary relationships of several gymnosperm groups
              like the genus Taxus (source of taxol) and the Gnetophytes. Studies of numerous
              fossil genera, known at present only from scattered plant parts, will improve
              our understanding of gymnosperm diversification through time, and contribute to
              robust hypotheses about lineage relationships among the seed plants.
