Title       : Experimental Manipulation of Gypsy Moth Phenology Relative to Host Budburst
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 8,  1998    
File        : a9527792

Award Number: 9527792
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1996   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph S. Elkinton elkinton@ent.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Hunter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Buonaccorsi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9527792  Elkinton    A high percentage of outbreaking species of tree-feeding
              Lepidoptera (moths and butterflies) are spring-feeding; that is, they feed in
              early spring soon after budburst of their hosts.  Also, most defoliation occurs
              simultaneously over wide areas, suggesting that regional weather plays a role
              in outbreaks, possibly through timing of budburst and insect dormancy-breaking.
               We will test the hypothesis that variable synchrony of insect emergence with
              host tree budburst in spring contributes to outbreaks.  The study insect, the
              gypsy moth (Lymantria dispar L.) shares many traits with other spring-feeding
              pests, and has been successfully used in population-level experiments.  It is
              one of the most important forest defoliators in North America.  In this study,
              the timing of gypsy moth egg hatch relative to host budburst will be
              manipulated in 25m diameter replicated plots.  The objectives of the study are
              to measure the effect of synchrony with budburst on:  overall population
              survival, larval dispersal by ballooning, growth, survival and reproduction,
              and rates of mortality from natural enemies.  Experimental populations hatching
              at different times will be created, and larvae will be collected at weekly
              intervals to determine changes in density and rates of parasitism and disease. 
               Dispersal will be measured using larvae dusted with fluorescent powder (to
              record ballooning from particular tree species) and by sampling the canopy
              outside the release plots at the end of the dispersal period.  Direct foliage
              age effects on growth and survival will be monitored on insects protected from
              predation, in mesh bags.  This will permit evaluation of the relative
              importance of these factors and quantification of the impact of variable
              synchrony with budburst on population survival.  The results will have
              implications for the dynamics of other spring-feeding forest insects, as well
              as making an important contribution to understanding gypsy moth dynamics.    If
              synchrony with budburst is an im portant component of gypsy moth dynamics, it
              will help us predict whether outbreaks will occur in a given year, and thus
              what level of control measures may be required.  Existing temperature-dependent
              models that predict the timing of gypsy moth egg hatch and tree budburst can be
              used to estimate synchrony and thus the potential for outbreaks.  A greater
              knowledge of the complex nature of population regulation of insect herbivores
              may contribute to design of integrated pest management.  It would help to
              indicate the relative importance of disease, predators, and host plant
              resistance, for population control.  The work on dispersal will increase
              understanding of the spread of invading insects.
