Title       : Cross-Site: Earthworms and Soil Processes In North American Ecosystems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1995 
File        : a9527365

Award Number: 9527365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1995    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Hendrix phendrix@sparc.ecology.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0309000   Land Use & Planning                     
              0510300   Transformation of Nitrogen              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1199,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Influences of earthworms on soil processes in agricultural and pastoral systems
              are  well recognized but there is considerably less information about their
              importance in wildland  ecosystems such as forests, grasslands and savannas. 
              Furthermore, very little is known about the  ecology of native earthworm
              species in North America, even though they are prevalent in a number of  areas
              unaffected by Pleistocene glaciations.  The few existing studies indicate that
              where they are  abundant, these organisms can have significant effects on soil
              structural  properties and on nutrient  transformations.  However. the relative
              importance of native versus invasive exotic earthworm species  remain virtually
              unknown.  This proposal requests funding for a cross-site investigation of
              native and  exotic earthworms, to determine if native species are more
              efficient than exotic species in nutrient  processing in undisturbed
              ecosystems.  They also will determine if disturbance sets the stage for 
              invasion by exotic earthworms, which may be more competitive than natives but
              less effective in  nutrient cycling.  Th ese ideas will be tested in two phases
              over a three year period at three LTER  sites (Coweeta Hydrologic Laboratory,
              Konza prairie Research Natural Area and Luquillo Experimental  Forest) and one
              non-LTER site (Apalachicola National Forest).  They will undertake field
              surveys and  collections in a variety of habitats, and will initiate field
              enclosure experiments using 13C- and  14N- enriched substrates.  Together,
              these two phases of work optimize the use of stable isotopes in  field
              studies--first, as survey tools to characterize and identify important species
              and patterns of  resource utilization across sites; and then as biogeochemical
              tracers to elaborate earthworm-microbial  interactions and to quantify
              influences of various earthworm species on C and N dynamics.  Results  from
              this study will greatly expand their understanding of earthworm ecology,
              interactions between  native and exotic species, and influences of both groups
              on soil nutrient processes across a broad  range of ecosystems.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
