Title       : Organometallic Reactivity of Metal-Centered Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1997   
File        : a9527782

Award Number: 9527782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Re-Entered for CGI Processing           
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1995  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $395000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradford B. Wayland wayland@a.chem.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9161,AMPP,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic  
              Chemistry program, will support Professor Bradford Wayland of the   University
              of Pennsylvania in his continued studies of metal-centered   radicals and their
              reactions with organic radicals, particularly in the   context of olefin
              polymerization.  Recent discoveries of new methods for   establishing
              quasi-living polymerization in free-radical polymerization   of olefins will be
              explored.  This is accomplished through the use of   metal-centered radicals to
              trap the growing end of the polymer.  The key   feature to the success of this
              strategy is the strength of the   metal-carbon bond that is formed, which must
              be sufficiently weak that   the reaction is rapidly reversible to allow for
              facile chain growth.    Living radical polymerization will provide a new
              approach for producing   low polydispersity homopolymers and block copolymers
              of olefins that can   only be polymerized by radical initiation. The initial
              research will   center on the use of alkyl cobalt tetramesitylporphyrin
              complexes to   initiate and control living radical polymerization of acrylates
              and to   provide a prototype for establishing guideline criteria for the design
              of   metal complexes that promote similar living polymerization processes.   
              Experiments are outlined to determine the metal-carbon bond strengths of   a
              variety of potentially useful alkyl derivatives.  The properties of polymers
              not only depend upon their chemical structures   but also upon their molecular
              weight.  Until recently it has been   difficult to control the molecular weight
              and especially the dispersion   of molecular weights of the individual
              molecules of polymers of certain   types of monomers.   This research explores
              a newly discovered way, which   involves the generation of `living` polymer
              chains, to control the   molecular weight including dispersion.  The term
              `living` means that the   individual polymer molecules are capable of adding
              more monomer units if   they are added to the system.  This allows the use of
              block   polymerization strategies in which a second type of monomer is added to
                the living polymer so that a region of a new type of polymer is added to  
              the original chain.  By alternating additions of two (or more) types of  
              monomers, polymers with new material properties that are not   characteristic
              of those of either monomer can be prepared.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
