Title       : Cross-Site: Saurian Malaria: A Long-Term Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1997     
File        : a9527115

Award Number: 9527115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1996    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph J. Schall jschall@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1195      LONG TERM ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              BOREAS  BSR  Ballston  BioScience  Bioinformatics  Bitnet  CEAS  CENR  COI  COV 
              CRB  Christensen Clements  Clementsian  CoI  Collins  Curtis  DCA  DD  DDD  DEB
               DEB's  DGC  Delmarva  Detling Detrended  Dioecious  Drosophila  Dulles  EROC 
              Edwards  Erag9527115 Schall This project will continue long-term ecological
              studies on the malarial parasites of lizards. Three sites will be used: (1) the
               Hopland Field Station in northern California where field and laboratory
              studies on lizard malaria have  been underway for 17 years, (2) the Luquillo
              LTER site in Puerto Rico where preliminary data were  gathered, and (3) the
              eastern Caribbean island of Saba where other recent surveys have been
              conducted.  The broad goal of this project is to continue studies at all three
              sites for at least the next decade.  The research will examine the
              distribution, abundance, sex ratio, and interspecific interactions in  three
              species of malarial parasites in lizard hosts. One species of malaria infects
              the western fence  lizard in California. The ecology of this species is perhaps
              the best known of any non-human malaria.  Two other malaria species coexist in
              the Caribbean. Parasite abundance, sex ratio, and interspecific  associations
              all interact over ecological and evolutionary time. These long-term studies
              will provide  the necessary base-line data for understanding this host-p
              arasite system.   Three issues will be  addressed. First, the distribution and
              abundance of the parasites will be followed over time and  compared among
              sites. Classical and recent models of parasite prevalence will be explored with
              these  data. Second, recent theory on sex ratios of malarial gametocytes will
              be tested by taking advantage  of the different levels of prevalence at the
              tropical and temperate sites and as parasite prevalence  changes over time.
              Third, interspecific interaction, especially facilitation, will be explored for
              the  two coexisting species of malarial parasites at the two tropical sites.
              The relative and absolute  abundances of the two parasites could effect
              interactions between the lizards.   Malarial parasites  are a diverse,
              geographically widespread group. Their importance to the biology, including
              population  biology, of humans is well documented. Studies on lizard malaria
              now suggest that Plasmodium can be of  central importance to non-human hosts as
              well, including population and even community-level effects.  The Anolis
              lizards of Caribbean islands are extremely abundant and influence the entire
              biotic  environment because of their diet of insects. Thus, lizard malaria can
              stand as a model system to  study host-parasite ecology and its impacts on
              other aspects of the biota.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
