Title       : Collaborative Research: Initial Sedimentological Characterization of the Late
               Cretaceous-Early Cenozoic Drill Cores from Cape Roberts, Antarctica
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9527481

Award Number: 9527481
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ross D. Powell ross@geol.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 0000,1304,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Krissek  OPP 9527008  Powell  OPP 9527481    Abstract    An international
              initiative to collect 1500 m of drill core from  offshore of Cape Roberts,
              McMurdo Sound Antarctica, is intended  to provide a better understanding of
              Antarctic history through  the late Cretaceous and early Cenozoic.  Events
              during this  period, which extends from before the final breakup of Gondwana 
              through the onset of Antarctic glaciation, are ill-defined by  existing data. 
              The Cape Roberts Project (CRP) aims to provide  new data about the development
              of the West Antarctic rift system,  the subsidence history of the Ross Sea, and
              ice sheet  fluctuations on Antarctica through this critical time interval. 
              These regional events must be documented better because they have 
              ramifications of regional and global significance, including: 1)  impacts on
              both regional and global climatic development, with  its terrestrial and marine
              effects, and 2) impacts on the  preservation of such climatic records through
              the regional and  global influences of Gondwana tectonics.    CRP is partly an
              extension of previous drilling efforts on the  Antarctic continental margin,
              and is partly a new initiative to  more completely document the developmental
              history of the Ross  Sea sector of the Antarctic and southern Pacific region
              through  the late Cretaceous - early Cenozoic.  It will draw on the  successes
              of previous drilling efforts to document regional and  environmental
              development with good spatial and temporal  resolution, and it will also draw
              upon newly compiled geophysical  data bases.    CRP is a collaborative endeavor
              and is currently being supported  by six participating countries.  This award
              supports the U.S.  contribution to the stratigraphic logging and initial 
              sedimentological characterization of the drill core.  Pursuit of  more specific
              research goals will be accomplished via proposals  from individual scientists
              in the future.    Tasks involved in the proposed work will include initial 
              description and characterizatio n of the stratigraphic  successions; these
              results will be used as the fundamental data  base for other analyses.  The
              stratigraphic sections will also be  used as reference sections for modeling
              observed marine and  geophysical events.  Initial sedimentological
              characterization of  the successions will allow the definition of facies, the 
              construction of facies sequences, and the interpretation of  depositional
              environments through time.  The end result of the  proposed work will be an
              Ocean Drilling Program-style initial  report for each drilling season.  These
              reports will include the  stratigraphic log, initial facies and depositional
              system  interpretations, sedimentary petrologic and petrogenetic  analyses, and
              initial clay mineralogical analysis.  Information  provided by other
              specialists will also be included in the  reports, including biostratigraphy,
              magnetostratigraphy,  geophysical logs and geochemical interpretations.  The
              initial  interpretations of regional history will be presented in these 
              reports, and the regional and global ramifications of this  history will be
              highlighted.
