Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9453498

Award Number: 9453498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $505000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James S. Clark jimclark@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0304040   Fire                                    
              0510100   Global Carbon Cycle                     
              64        Environmental Biology                   
Program Ref : 1306,9296,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Biomass burning is a key component of past and future global change.  Fire
              profoundly affects atmospheric chemistry, the carbon cycle, and climate and may
              have done so for millions of years.  Literature estimates place carbon
              sequestration during biomass burning in excess of 20% of the total
              anthropogenic C releases to the atmosphere, which, failing oxidative losses,
              could tie up the globe's surface C in less than 106 yr.  Past fire is suspected
              to have been one of the dominant forces shaping existing patterns of
              biodiversity, past changes in C and O2 cycles, air quality, and climate. 
              Changes in the structure, distribution, and productivity of biomes forecast for
              the near future are contingent on poorly understood changes in burning
              practice.    Analysis of burning transitions that have attended past
              environmental change has become a tool for assessing its potential importance
              with climate and cultural change.  I propose to determine the role of fire and
              to quantify biomass burning emissions that have attended regional changes in
              climate and changing cultural practices of last 15,000 yr.  This interval spans
              rapid changes in global climate at the end of Pleistocene, changes in
              seasonality that have forced the glacial/interglacial modes of atmosphere and
              ocean circulation and therefore fire seasons, subcontinental scale changes in
              fuels with shifting vegetation types, cultural burning patterns, including
              slash-and-burn (swidden), modern agriculture, and industrialization.  The role
              of fire during past times of rapid climate change is especially relevant to
              challenges faced by modern resource managers in the face of environmental
              transformations of the next decade.    Lake sediments contain a legacy of past
              biomass burning in the form of combustion products that can be extracted from
              sediment cores.  By analyzing changes in the abundances of those constituents
              in successively older sediments we can determine how the importance of fire has
              changed together with other aspects of the environment.  I  plan to address
              several aspects of the paleofire record, including i) improvement of extraction
              methods for combustion products in sediments, ii) expansion of an incipient
              global data base on past emissions, and iii) extension of fire analyses from
              those currently underway in eastern North America and Siberia to tropical
              woodlands and grasslands in Brazil and east Africa, currently threatened by
              changing climate and intensive management, including widespread burning. 
              Together with previous results, we expect to establish a global picture of
              biomass burning back through the past.  Those estimates will be used with our
              knowledge of changing climate and cultural transition to determine whether fire
              was among the agents responsible for rapid environmental change.  These results
              will aid our interpretation of its potential role in future global change.
