Title       : Better Interfaces and Better Tools for Hardware-Software Codesign
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a9453964

Award Number: 9453964
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $787500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard O. Chapman chapman@eng.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Loretta A. Moore  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                As time spent on design becomes an increasingly significant  fraction of the
              cost of digital system design, concurrent hardware  and software development
              through codesign becomes increasingly  important.  Also, emerging field
              programmable logic technologies  permit digital system codesigners to easily
              migrate system  functionality between software and hardware during the design 
              process.  Yet few codesign tools exist currently, and among those  there is
              often an inverse relation between usability and  functionality.  They lack
              interfaces that fit with designers' ways  of working, or they do not integrate
              with existing frameworks for  chip and program development.    We propose to
              recruit five students from Spelman College, Jackson  State University, and
              Tuskegee University, all Historically Black  Colleges and Universities (HBCUs),
              and provide them with support,  mentoring, and advising as they pursue courses
              of study leasing to  the PhD degree in Computer Science and Engineering at
              Auburn  University, investigating topics in hardware-software codesign 
              interface and tool development.  We can significantly increase not  only the
              supply of codesign specialists but also the nation's  supply of African
              American computer scientists by guiding students  in investigations of topics
              in hardware-software codesign tool and  interface development:  language
              development, graphical user  interfaces, algorithms for automatic migration of
              functionality,  inter-tool frameworks, and formal methods for codesign.
