Title       : USI--Urban Systemic Initiative in Mathematics, Science and Technology Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 19,  2001   
File        : a9453668

Award Number: 9453668
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael A. Moses superintendent@dallasisd.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chad Woolery  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Dallas Independ Sch Dist
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75205    /   -

NSF Program : 7358      URBAN SYSTEMIC INITIATIVE PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453668  Woolery  The Dallas Urban Systemic Initiative (DUSI) has as its core  a
              vision that seeks to provide the mathematics and science  fundamentals which
              will permit all students to participate  fully in a technological society and
              enable a significantly  greater number of Dallas students to pursue careers in 
              mathematics, science, engineering, and technology.  The DUSI  has three major
              components: (1) the development of a new  management structure for the Dallas
              Independent School  District (DISD) based on the principles of Total Quality 
              Management; (2) the development and implementation of a  theme-based, K-12
              science, mathematics and technology (SMT)  curriculum and; (3) an effective use
              of technology to  advance the teaching of the SMT curriculum.  The management 
              structure will be developed jointly by the DISD and experts  provided by the
              District's community partners.  The new  curriculum will be developed by teams
              of master teachers,  educators and science and mathematics professionals from
              the  community and will include the use of process oriented,  student centered
              pedagogy.  The reforms brought about by  DUSI will be supported by continuous
              professional  development for all teachers and by the extensive use of 
              educational technology in all classrooms.  The District will  implement policy
              changes and redirect its resources to  further support the plan.  Resources
              have already been, and  will continue to be, provided by the District's
              academic and  corporate partners.
