Title       : EPWG: Girls in Science: Museum, University, School and Community Connections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1997     
File        : a9453112

Award Number: 9453112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $526511             (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Dyanne M. Tracy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dawn M. Pickard  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cranbrook Inst of Science
	      
	      Bloomfield Hills, MI  483030801    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453112  Johnson    Inter-connected activities of Cranbrook Institute of Science
              and Oakland University seek to help  change the infrastructure of schools and
              the University.  The project aims to create a new  generation of teachers
              trained to be gender fair, and to make gender-fair teaching practices more 
              pervasive.  It seeks to measure science club and other informal science
              experiences for girls as  vehicles for changing classroom climates; and it aims
              to assess the value of a community-based  resource center to help sustain
              support for girls in science education.      The project builds upon a
              NSF-funded Model Project for Women and Girls at Cranbrook, which  has addressed
              basic issues of gender equity through informal science activities, as well as
              upon  more than a decade of experience in collaborative work with pre-service
              university students who  will be the science teachers of tomorrow.  These
              students have not yet established their patterns  of classroom leadership
              behavior, and their attitudes toward younger students and teaching  practices
              can still be influenced to recognize and eliminate conscious/unconscious
              discrimination  against girls.  Teams of experts on classroom gender bias are
              to serve as trainers in gender-fair  behavior, which is then to be applied and
              evaluated in classrooms.  A second thrust focuses on  girls' science clubs and
              builds upon accumulating evidence that informal science activities for  girls
              outside the classroom favorably impacts in-school science learning.  Intensive
              evaluation  is to determine if middle school girls who choose to join weekly
              science clubs in Pontiac  demonstrate more positive behaviors in their science
              and math classes, and if they contribute to  changes in the classroom climates.
               Trained Oakland University pre-service students and  Cranbrook staff will lead
              the girls' science clubs.  The third element is to provide continuing  support
              for girls, teachers, and parents, through a resource center at Cranbrook. 
              Mentoring  assistance, ref errals, workshops, information and materials are to
              be readily accessible to help  sustain connections among girls, parents,
              teachers and SEMs (science, engineering and  mathematics) professionals.    ***
