Title       : The Internet as Knowledge Integration Partner: Improving Science Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1998    
File        : a9453861

Award Number: 9453861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anthony E. Kelly                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1994   
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1571606            (Estimated)
Investigator: Marcia C. Linn MCLINN@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453861  Linn    Although the Internet offers a vast resource of scientific 
              information and experiences, even experts regularly report  confusion,
              frustration, and inefficiency when participating in  network activities.  What
              are promising roles of human and  electronic guides to the Internet?  The
              project will explore  tradeoffs between human and electronic resources, group
              and  individual exploration, as well as between immediate and long-term 
              benefits.    How can Internet tools encourage students to continuously build on
               their ideas and integrate information into more abstract,  comprehensive
              explanations or models?  As the information highway  reaches homes, schools,
              and the workplace we seek to prepare  students who will continue to use it long
              after they complete their  science courses.    How can we help students solve
              personally relevant problems,  develop a firm foundation of science
              understanding, and continue to  explore scientific questions?  The project will
              draw on the  Internet participants to create innovative approaches that 
              dramatically improve what scientists can contribute and what  educators can
              deliver.  The project will document particular  solutions as well as identify
              broad strategies to capitalize on  this amazing resource.    The project will
              research solutions that encourage learners to link  and connect ideas rather
              than to isolate them and that allow  students to solve relevant, personally
              compelling problems rather  than perform exercises.  Project networking tools
              will build on  Mosaic and World Wide Web to take advantage of the science 
              information on the Internet.  The tools will help teachers design  activities
              that draw on Internet information, guide students as  they complete projects,
              and allow students from all over the  Internet to jointly discuss topics that
              interest them.  A central  research question for this project concerns the sort
              of guidance  each type of user needs to organize knowledge including users who 
              are autonomous as well as those who  are not.  ***
