Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 29,  2000  
File        : a9453422

Award Number: 9453422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $424681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yilu Liu Yilu.Liu@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 0000,9296,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9453422  Liu  Develop intelligent diagnostic methodologies to detect incipient 
              failures in power system equipment using adaptive recognition  techniques and
              artificial neural networks.  We will continue the  work of power system
              equipment diagnosis using artificial neural  networks.  The previously
              developed methods and experiences will  be widely tested.  An important task
              for failure diagnosis is to  determine the most representative parameters of
              equipment status,  and the most likely cause of a particular failure or
              performance  deterioration.  These will be achieved through sensitivity tests 
              of individual or a group of parameters in ANNs.  Although ANN-  based diagnosis
              systems are problem-dependent, some general rules  on input feature selection,
              ANN architecture, and training  algorithms will be developed for use as
              guidelines in similar  applications.      Develop dynamic contingency analysis
              and control algorithms using  Satellite-Based Phasor Measurement Technology. 
              Develop real-time  dynamic models in order to investigate the possibility of 
              tracking power system dynamics in real-time.    Establish research programs in
              characterizing harmonic noise in  power systems by developing an integrated
              probabilistic harmonic  flow algorithm that considers the nonlinear dependence
              of  harmonic voltages and currents, and random variations of  operation modes
              and switching status of harmonic sources.  More  effort will be devoted to
              develop algorithms for identifying  harmonic sources based on limited
              measurements for multiple  circuit nodes.    The computer animation packages
              for teaching difficult concepts  will be expanded and more complex field
              problems and concepts  will be illustrated with animation.  Multimedia tools
              will be  gradually added to the conventional classroom teaching.    The power
              engineering core course materials will be updated and  revised in order to
              establish an ideal knowledge mix for today's  Electrical Engineering graduates.
               The Power Quality Teaching and  Research  Lab are being planned and lab
              equipment are being  researched.  It is planned that new lab equipment will be
              added  for harmonic measurements.  This will allow us to begin data  gathering
              and analysis.  Also, lab experiments will be developed  for students to use in
              the new power quality course.       ***
