Title       : EPWG: Girls with Disabilities on Line
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1995     
File        : a9453092

Award Number: 9453092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298812             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura C. Koch KOCHX001@TC.UMN.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lynda Price  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kimerly J. Wilcox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453092  Koch    The work proposed addresses attitudinal and educational
              barriers faced by girls with severe  disabilities, grades K-8, in preparing
              them to undertake demanding courses of study leading to  career options in
              science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM).  The project involves the 
              collaborative efforts of the University of Minnesota General College, the
              Minnesota State  Department of Education, the Minneapolis Public Schools, the
              St. Paul Public Schools, and the  Parents Advocacy Coalition for Equal Rights. 
              In order to promote traditional self-determination  characteristics of
              assertiveness, creativity, self-advocacy, and decision making, this project
              seeks  to achieve its goals through a focus on the computer-based technologies
              which support self-  determination skills, taking full advantage of powerful
              computer technologies, both extant and  emerging.  This should provide a
              structure through which girls with disabilities can take more  autonomous roles
              in their education, social lives, and educational, occupational, and 
              independent-living decision-making.  The project targets girls in elementary
              and junior high  grades in view of the need to make early adaptations and
              decisions, especially regarding  mathematics course success to permit students
              to be in a position to pursue rigorous secondary  and postsecondary courses of
              study in relevant fields.    The project is focused upon:  (1) aggressive
              training in state-of-the-art and emerging adaptive  computer technology which
              makes the learning and doing of science, engineering, and  mathematics more
              possible for persons with severe disabilities; (2) peer training, with mentor 
              and role model interactions; (3) immersion via telecommunications in
              opportunities to interact  with other girls with disabilities, as well as with
              mentors and school personnel; (4) training of  school-based personnel to better
              ensure early, meaningful accommodations in SEM courses and  co-curricular
              activities; and (5) aggressive dissemination to promote ch ange in the ways in
              which  the futures of girls with disabilities are imagined by the girls
              themselves, their families, and  those charged with their education and futures
              planning assistance.  The project builds on a  history of successful
              collaboration among the participant entities in serving the needs of students 
              with disabilities.  It addresses the fact that these girls face barriers of
              gender and disability, and  thus often are blocked from pursuit of study and
              careers in SEM, growing up to become women  with disabilities--currently the
              most underemployed segment of our population.  ***
