Title       : Texas Center for the Replication of Excellence in Advanced Technological
               Education (Texas Create)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1994       
File        : a9453257

Award Number: 9453257
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48362              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Rodi   (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert E. Johansen  (Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Weese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph A. Morgan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Therese A. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Harold D. Albertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hassan Moghaddam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert H. Benson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Austin Community College
	      5930 Middle Fiskville Road
	      Austin, TX  78752    512/223-7000

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453257  Johansen                                             Leading math,
              science, and technology educators from Texas are  forming a state-wide
              consortium, Texas Center for the Replication  of Excellence in Advanced
              Technological Education, or Texas CREATE.  The consortium has established
              Long-Range Goals for a Center: to  link the consortium state-wide; to establish
              partnerships in  education, industry, and government that result in regional
              science  academies; to validate the skills requirements of regional  employers;
              to produce and implement interdisciplinary curricula and  methodologies for
              delivery of instruction in mathematics, science  and technology core courses;
              to produce and implement integrated  curricula in environmental technology; to
              strengthen enrollment,  retention, and job placement for women and minorities;
              to establish  a network between industry and education that results in 
              internships and cooperative exchanges; and to disseminate the  results of the
              Center's activities.  Texas CREATE anticipates the following activities during
              planning  year: organization of interdisciplinary teams; commitments from 
              regional partners that will lead to science academies;  establishment of the
              scope of investigation to be performed by the  center; development of
              communication links; brainstorming with  partners at regional meetings;
              development of a canvassing  instrument for surveying industries; development,
              testing, and  refinement of a model instruction module; development of a model 
              for faculty enhancement and teacher training; development of a  strategy for
              recruitment, retention and job placement for women and  minorities;
              recommendation on several environmental technology  programs and a plan for
              integrating environmental technology into  programs that exist; and a model for
              curriculum development.  ***
