Title       : EPWG: GET SET, GO (Girls and Educators Teaming in Science Education to Generate
               Opportunities)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1998    
File        : a9453136

Award Number: 9453136
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ruta Sevo                               
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1995       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $796798             (Estimated)
Investigator: Angela G. King kingag@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy R. Crouch  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jacqueline A. Hundt  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453136  Crouch    To ensure that women will be an effective and integral part
              of the scientific community, the  Western Triad Science and Mathematics
              Alliance (WTSAMA), a regional partnership in the  North Carolina Statewide
              Systemic Initiative (NC SSI), has forged a partnership of business, 
              industrial, university, community college, and school system leaders to provide
              direction, energy  for a broadly based initiative to recruit, encourage, and
              support students to participate and  achieve in science and mathematics.  Input
              from the WTSAMA collaborative partners has  formed a solid ground for the
              planning of this project as well as for continued monitoring to  ensure
              consistency and quality of effort.  Project GET SET, GO (Girls & Educators
              Teaming  in Science Education) will focus on four major objectives:  (1) to
              build an awareness, raise  expectations, and change everyday practices among
              teachers, parents, and school administrators  at WTSAMA middle schools, thus
              assuring equal access to opportunities and education in  science; (2) to bridge
              the educational levels in science through peer mentoring, cross-age  teaching,
              and role modeling; (3) to create a physical, social, and psychological
              environment  within each school that reinforces the importance and relevance of
              women in science; and (4)  to research, locate, modify/design hands-on science
              activities which complement the science  curriculum and are adapted to promote
              equal participation of all students in the classroom.   These objectives are to
              be matched with activities specifically suited to the needs and population  of
              the region.  Activities are to include the Teacher Institute for Gender Equity
              Training and  Science Research, Parents' Night Presentations and Activities,
              Saturday Science Symposiums,  and the Science Women's Studies Program.  These
              activities should increase the interest and  involvement of students, teachers,
              parents, and administrators in science, and create an  environment that
              supports and encourages young wome n to pursue studies and careers in science 
              and related areas.    Because this region is representative, in microscale, of
              the entire state, this project serves as a  model for statewide implementation.
               The WTSAMA and its key collaborators provide an  essential operational
              structure and support network that ensures project success.  GET SET, GO 
              builds on current successful programs, and introduce new activities and
              opportunities, to create  a cohesive whole.  Extensive dissemination is planned
              at regional, state, and national levels.    ***
