Title       : The KITES Project: Kits in Teaching Elementary Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1998  
File        : a9453159

Award Number: 9453159
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joyce B. Evans                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1849914            (Estimated)
Investigator: MacGregor Kniseley mkniseley@ric.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald Kowalczyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhode Island College
	      600 Mount Pleasant Ave
	      Providence, RI  029081924    401/456-8000

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453159  Kniseley    This Local Systemic Change Through Teacher Enhancement
              project is  the result of a collaboration between the East Bay Educational 
              Collaborative (EBEC) and Rhode Island College.  Resources from a  consortium of
              higher education institutions, the Rhode Island  Department of Education,
              community organizations and agencies,  and the private sector will be combined
              to implement an  integrated, hands-on, kit-based science curriculum in the 
              elementary schools of the eight school districts in EBEC.  The  project will
              make a long term commitment to bringing this  curriculum into the middle and
              high schools.    During the project, elementary teachers will work
              cooperatively  with academic and industry scientists to learn effective science
               teaching methods through the use of nationally acclaimed and  validated
              modular units.  Science professionals will keep linked  together with the
              teachers via the Internet throughout the  project so to build ongoing support
              and leadership for systemic  change.    During the five-year project, there
              will be four two-year cycles  of professional development.  Year one will
              consist of a seven-  day summer institute to explore modular units that will be
               implemented in the classroom.  Direct support for project  teachers will be
              included throughout the school year. Year two  will be a three-day
              "mini-institute" to re-examine all four  modules used in year one and discuss
              instructional strategies and  interests.  Preservice college students will
              co-teach with new  project teachers during this year.  Six hundred EBEC
              teachers  will be enhanced over the life of the project and 800 preservice 
              college students will have participated in the project.    Cost sharing is 219%
              of the total NSF requested budget.  9453159  Kniseley  This Local Systemic
              Change Through Teacher Enhancement project is  the result of a collaboration
              between the East Bay Educational  Collaborative (EBEC) and Rhode Island
              College.  Resources from a  consortium of higher education insti tutions, the
              Rhode Island  Department of Education, community organizations and agencies, 
              and the private sector will be combined to implement an  integrated, hands-on,
              kit-based science curriculum in the  elementary schools of the eight school
              districts in EBEC.  The  project will make a long term commitment to bringing
              this  curriculum into the middle and high schools.    During the project,
              elementary teachers will work cooperatively  with academic and industry
              scientists to learn effective science  teaching methods through the use of
              nationally acclaimed and  validated modular units.  Science professionals will
              keep linked  together with the teachers via the Internet throughout the 
              project so to build ongoing support and leadership for systemic  change.   
              During the five-year project, there will be four two-year cycles  of
              professional development.  Year one will consist of a seven-  day summer
              institute to explore modular units that will be  implemented in the classroom. 
              Direct support for project  teachers will be included throughout the school
              year. Year two  will be a three-day "mini-institute" to re-examine all four 
              modules used in year one and discuss instructional strategies and  interests. 
              Preservice college students will co-teach with new  project teachers during
              this year.  Six hundred EBEC teachers  will be enhanced over the life of the
              project and 800 preservice  college students will have participated in the
              project.    Cost sharing is 219% of the total NSF requested budget.    ***  ***
