Title       : Portland Area Partnership for the Advancement of Preservice Preparation of
               Future Teachers of Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  1996  
File        : a9453617

Award Number: 9453617
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald B. Narode ron@ed.pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carl C. Wamser  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marjorie Enneking  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Eleven higher education institutions, including community  colleges, private
              liberal arts colleges, and public  institutions, will collaborate with local
              schools and  community agencies in the Portland metropolitan area.  The 
              overlapping goals of this partnership are three-fold:  1)  develop a coherent
              and coordinated plan to increase and  support minority students in mathematics
              and science  education, and work to secure commitments from member 
              institutions to implement the plan; 2) develop a plan for  establishing a
              Middle School Science Program modeled on the  successful Middle School Math
              Program at PSU; 3) develop a  plan for a coordinated program of mathematics and
              science  courses recommended for preservice mathematics and science  teachers,
              and include plans for revision and design of  courses to be added.  Anogher
              goal is to develop and  disseminate an inter-campus catalogue of course
              listing,  descriptions of relevant faculty, programs, placement  affiliations,
              departmental strengths, enrollments, and  student demographics.  Each goal will
              be met through task  forces dedicated to each of these individually, but with
              the  collective efforts of all task force members who will be  informed of
              developments through electronic bulletin board.  The three task forces will
              each be chaired by teams of two  members from the Steering Committee.  Each
              task force will  have eight task force leaders responsible for coordinating 
              their task force's activities.  Anb additional 22 members  will join each task
              force to develop plans for change in  their respective focus area.  All plans
              will be completed to  the extent that member institutions should be able to
              begin  implementation by the end of this grant period.
