Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9453534

Award Number: 9453534
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Derrick K. Rollins drollins@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9296,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT - 9453534  Derrick Rollins/Iowa State University        Because of the
              "quality" revolution and global competition, engineers are finding a greater
              need to learn and apply statistical techniques.  However, statisticians and
              engineers often find interaction difficult due to language barriers imposed by
              differing academic cultures.  As a result, engineers frequently rely on one
              another to teach and apply statistical concepts.  However, since the majority
              of engineers have little formal education in statistics, their statistical
              understanding is progressing slowly.  Hence, the PIs main teaching goal is to
              increase the proper understanding and application of statistics in engineering,
              in particular, chemical engineering.  Five areas in chemical engineering are
              targeted for research in the next five years:  industrial data reconciliation
              and gross error detection, statistical modeling and sensor validation in space
              life support systems, statistical methods to enhance neural networks, improving
              powder mixture homogeneity, and statistical process control.  These research
              projects will involve faculty and graduate students from statistics, chemical
              engineering, and a number of other engineering disciplines.      The teaching
              and research goals will be accomplished in the following ways.   A new
              undergraduate statistics course for chemical engineering students will be
              developed which will be the basis for a new textbook.  In addition, a graduate
              course in chemical engineering on advanced statistical modeling that will come
              primarily from research in modeling complex chemical engineering systems will
              also be developed.  The advanced process control course for chemical
              engineering graduate students which the PI has recently developed will be
              updated to use a state-of-the-art distributed control system.  In terms of
              outreach, the PI will develop a number of statistics courses that can be taught
              to a variety of engineering and scientific disciplines.  Research, as mentioned
              above, will be active in  five areas.  In the areas of data reconciliation and
              gross error detection, major progress is expected in the development of methods
              and their implementation into industrial processes.  Secondly, funds will be
              used to develop statistical techniques that validate and improve measured
              variables in space closed-loop life support systems (CLLSS), which is a major
              challenge because of the required accuracies and the low concentrations of
              chemical species.  Hence, this funding will be used to develop a working
              algorithm (i.e. a computer program) to validate sensor measurements for the
              initial phase of modeling CLLSS.  Artificial neural networks (ANN) have
              received considerable attention in recent years in many scientific and human
              behavioral disciplines and the PI will attempt to:  (1) increase understanding
              of the strength and weaknesses of ANN as they apply to chemical processes;  (2)
              increase theoretical understanding of ANN as they relate to model development
              in order to evaluate them against current statistical model building
              techniques;  (3) determine the best modeling approach for a given application
              -- statistical or ANN and;  (4) investigate the development of statistical
              procedures to cross-validate ANN models  Specific applications will include
              modeling and controlling the product moisture content in industrial grain
              dryers.  The PIs research program to improve powder mixture homogeneity will
              continue by looking at:  (1) improving the ability to determine if mixtures are
              significantly segregated;  (2) increasing understanding of mixing phenomena; 
              (3) improving the ability to diagnose inhomogeneity and; (4) transferring
              theoretical and empirical knowledge to the manufacturing processes in the form
              of operating guidelines and process and equipment improvements.
