Title       : A Distributed Multi-Server Architecture for Scalable Educational Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1995   
File        : a9453764

Award Number: 9453764
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $523030             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wallace Feurzeig   (Principal Investigator current)
              William Barowy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bolt Beranek & Newman Inc
	      
	      Cambridge, MA  02138    /   -

NSF Program : 7263      NETWORKING INFRASTRUCT-EDUCAT
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9453764  Feurzeig    The projected National Information Infrastructure will have
              to  accommodate a tremendous level of user traffic, with great dynamic 
              fluctuations in both user load and computational demand-and it will  have to do
              this in a user-transparent seamless fashion.  At the  same time, the system
              will need to be a great deal more accessible  and friendly than current
              networks, to better serve users of widely  varying degrees of sophistication. 
              This calls for the development  of new networking technologies incorporating
              significant advances  in the underlying technological foundations.  It also
              calls for a  new and more natural superstructure based on a distinctly
              different  organizational paradigm that will provide the required salability 
              while supporting the rich, complex, multi-media communication,  computation,
              and collaboration essential for distributed  educational networking
              applications.  We propose to develop and  demonstrate MuseNet, a sophisticated
              technological infrastructure  for network-mediated science and math education. 
              MuseNet is a  generic distributed computer and communications environment 
              simultaneously accessible by multiple users over interactive  computer network
              connections.  The system will support  instructional interactions centered on
              student work with science  and mathematics microworlds including visual
              simulations and  models.  The programs will be distributed through network
              servers  for local operation on client machines.  The enabling technology  will
              support the communication, computational, and educational  environments for
              supporting an extensive and diverse set of science  education projects.  It
              will serve as a pilot facility for  exploring and investigating the technical
              and educational issues  posed by high bandwidth networks such as the projected
              NII system.  ***
