Title       : MPWG: Project Parity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1995   
File        : a9453719

Award Number: 9453719
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lola E. Rogers                          
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99662              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lydia H. Gibb   (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna Rand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Talcott Mt Science Center
	      
	      Avon, CT  06001    /   -

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453719  Gibb    Project Parity is to be a model for schools, community groups
              and parents to interest young girls  in science.  The program is designed to
              bring together a synergistic network of adults and  children to increase the
              involvement of young girls in science and mathematics, while  heightening their
              levels of enjoyment and self-confidence in these area.  Ultimately, programs 
              such as this will serve a longer range goal to increase the number of women
              entering into  scientific and science-related fields.  The focus is to provide
              motivational, hands-on science  experiences, both inside and outside the
              classroom, to fourth and fifth grade girls, and to  establish the support
              necessary to maintain an interest in science.  A positive change in attitude 
              toward science can be achieved by providing the girls with exciting, hands-on
              materials,  opportunities to experience success in science, and support from
              teachers and parents.  Thus,  the project's overall goals are:  to create a
              supportive environment for young girls to pursue  science studies; to provide a
              model that can be replicated by schools, community groups and  parents; to
              foster, in young girls, a positive attitude toward science, technology and
              related  mathematics; to encourage participation in science and related math
              activities; to increase  teachers' and parents' awareness of social bias toward
              women in science.    Approaches will be employed to develop self-esteem and
              build confidence in the use of scientific  and technological equipment. 
              Participants will be directly involved in scientific investigation and 
              cooperative learning.  Components of this program include: specific training
              for parents and  teachers; hands-on science workshops for girls in grades 4 and
              5;  classroom activities with  mixed-gender groups; and female role models in
              the sciences.  Training sessions for teachers  and parents will consist of
              attitude awareness exercises, teaching and patenting strategies, and  hands-on
              science instruction.  Parents w ill participate in an initial evening hands-on
              science  workshop with their daughters.  During the year there will be five
              additional, hands-on science  workshops at Talcott Mountain Science Center for
              the girls and their teachers.  Parents will be  encouraged to attend and to
              work with their daughters on science activities at home.  Following  each
              hands-on science workshop, the teachers will conduct hands-on science
              activities in the  regular classroom on related topics.  All participants and
              collaborators will be linked via an  established computer network through the
              Science Center.  Students will have the opportunity  to dialogue with local
              female role models at work and explore applications of science to potential 
              career choices.  Students also will have access to national role models through
              Project  PROMMISE, (Providing Role Model Minorities In Science Education). 
              Dissemination, with the  goal of replication by others, is an important aspect
              of this project.  Vehicles of dissemination  include a live interactive
              telecast, and newsletter, a handbook for developing a model program  and an
              accompanying training video tape.  ***
