Title       : Cooperative NSF/ILI and ASEE/DELOS Symposia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 23,  1994     
File        : a9453690

Award Number: 9453690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1995        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24603              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Genalo genalo@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9353690  Genalo  This is a proposal for NSF to continue to support a mutual
              endeavor  to provide a highly visible outlet for the dissemination of NSF/ILI 
              results.  The 1992 ASEE Annual Conference in Toledo, Ohio marked  the seventh
              year that the Division for Experimentation and  Laboratory-Oriented Studies
              (DELOS) of ASEE and the National  Science Foundation cooperated in holding
              sessions at which grantees  from the Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement
              Program have  presented their results, and the first time that this work was 
              supported by NSF.  The current NSF Grant covers the expenses for  this
              operation through the 1994 ASEE Annual Conference.  These  sessions have proven
              to be immensely successful as measured in both  quality and, especially
              recently, quantity of presentations.  At  the last three years' meetings, the
              number of papers have selected  for greater exposition in a separate session. 
              All of the papers in  both the poster and paper sessions are eligible for
              inclusion in  the reviewed proceedings of the conference.  Our DELOS group,
              working with NSF, sends out a "call for papers"  through the U.S. Mail to
              grantees from the ILI Program from recent  years.  We ask them to submit an
              abstract, through E-mail if  possible, to be reviewed for inclusion in the
              poster session. After  reviewing these abstracts and notifying the authors, we
              ask for a  complete paper to be reviewed for inclusion in the proceedings.  
              These complete papers are the basis for selection in the technical  paper
              session.  Again, authors are notified about the review.  As  much of this
              procedure as can be handled through E-mail is, but  there are always many
              things which need to be handled through  Express Mail, regular mail (if time
              permits, which it rarely does  on this tight schedule), FAX, and telephone.
              With so many excellent  presenters to be heard from, the costs for putting on
              these  sessions is excessive.  NSF has provided financial assistance under  the
              following arrangements.  Dr. Lawrence J. Gen alo (DELOS Chair - 1992 and
              current PI for grant  number DUE 9255358), of Iowa State University, will
              continue to  serve as the principal investigator on this project.  The three 
              year award should begin May 1, 1995 in order to help defray and  costs for the
              1995 conference sessions.  Dr. Ed Roche, Jr. and Dr.  C. Stewart Slater will
              serve as consultants on the grant.  This  will allow them to receive travel
              allowances and reimbursement for   expenses directly from Iowa State without
              having to compound the  indirect costs at their own schools.  Our schools will,
              in effect,  be contributing out time in this endeavor.  Additional funding 
              necessary for travel, and not covered by proposed budget, will be  provided by
              Iowa State University.  DELOS will assume any  additional costs with mailing,
              phone, etc. which are not covered by  the proposed budget.
