Title       : EPWG: Gender Equity in Science and Mathematics Education Through Institutional
               Reform
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1997     
File        : a9453106

Award Number: 9453106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $821088             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carolyn C. Thorsen c thorsen@gitvml.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Denise S. Mewborn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donna C. Llewellyn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Aaron Bertrand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn W. Meyers  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Robert A. Pierotti  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1201,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453106  Thorsen    This project is a collaboration between Georgia Tech, the
              Georgia Initiative in Mathematics and  Science (GIMS), Clark Atlanta
              University, Georgia Southern University, Georgia State  University, and the
              University of Georgia.  It focuses upon changing the structure of educational 
              programs which prepare mathematics and science teachers, which should lead to
              significant  changes in the ways girls are taught mathematics and science.  The
              goal is for quality  mathematics and science education to be equally accessible
              to both boys and girls in the state  of Georgia, i.e., that all students are
              encouraged to explore and discover mathematics and  science, are challenged,
              are successful in their explorations, and have opportunities to develop 
              awareness of career opportunities in these fields.  In order for access and
              equity to become  realities, permanent changes must be made in the structure of
              science, education, engineering  and mathematics departments.  These changes
              include incorporating the current understanding  of social, learning, and
              teaching factors which facilitate the interest, motivation, and achievement  of
              girls and women in science, engineering, and mathematics.  This goal is
              consistent with the  vision and goals of Georgia's Statewide Systemic
              Initiative, the Georgia Initiative in Mathematics  and Science (GIMS).  This
              project furthers and enhances the work of GIMS, and is structured  so that
              collaboration with GIMS is intrinsic.  The projects's specific objectives are: 
              (1) to  initiate and implement the redesign of teacher-preparation programs,
              including instruction in  science, engineering, and mathematics courses, so
              that they address issues that impact girls and  women; and (2) to provide
              professional development opportunities for faculty and  graduate/undergraduate
              teaching assistants of pre-service students emphasizing positive  interventions
              strategies on gender issues.    To achieve the goals, project strands have been
              developed.  These are:  (1) a framew ork for  institutional self-study
              (colleges/universities); (2) a tool kit of materials for teacher-preparation 
              courses; (3) professional development of faculty and teaching assistants; and
              (4) a prototype  teacher-preparation program.  Concurrent project-wide
              evaluation will occur on an ongoing basis  and will be used to assess and
              refine the strands.  To develop equitable learning environments  in science,
              engineering, education, and mathematics, and to create permanent changes,
              strategies  are being developed to address factors that have traditionally
              discouraged girls and women from  pursuing science, mathematics, and
              engineering.  As these strategies are tested by the  participating
              institutions, they are to be promulgated and incorporated throughout Georgia's 
              Statewide Systemic Initiative.  ***
