Title       : Arizona Collaborative for Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2001   
File        : a9453610

Award Number: 9453610
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joan T Prival                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1995      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5511184            (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan Wyckoff wyckoff@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9103,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Arizona Collaborative for the Excellence in the Preparation of Teachers
              (ACEPT) is comprised of   Arizona State University (science, engineering, and
              mathematics faculty), Maricopa Community College District (10 colleges in the
              Phoenix metropolitan area), and the Navajo Community College in the northeast
              corner of the state.  ACEPT is collaborating with and has its goals aligned
              with the Phoenix Urban Systemic Initiative project.      Specific innovations
              to be  implementation include:  1. a new middle school endorsement with a
              secondary certification which will have science and  math options,  2. reform
              of elementary curricula-- Introductory Physical Science and Patterns in Nature
              (a series of  integrated-curriculum, issues-oriented lab courses),  3. reform
              of middle school curricula-- biology, chemistry, geology and mathematics,  4.
              reform of secondary curricula-- upper level physics courses,  5. incorporation
              of computers and other multimedia devices into the reformed curricula,  6.
              increased field experiences for beginning teachers and increased supervision, 
              7. establishment of a resource center for in-service teachers,  8. a
              significant increase in the number of teachers well-prepared in science and
              math who are  members of underrepresented groups, and  9. establishment of
              gender-neutral learning environments.    Specific products to be delivered
              include instrutional CD-ROMs and multi-media software packages,
              internet-accessible software, curricular materials (lesson plans, teaching
              guides, books), evaluation materials (science concepts inventory) and a new
              middle school program.    ACEPT intends to seek state approval for a
              post-baccalaureate Middle School Endorsement within the existing secondary
              certification.  Should this effort fail, ACEPT will still have achieved
              teachers with secondary certification, who are amply qualified to teach at the
              middle school levels.  Course reforms (principally at the introductory level)
              are planned for mathematics, physics, geology, and biology.     The particular
              experiences planned for the novice teachers include: being paired with
              supervising teachers who support appropriate pedagogical methods for teaching
              science and mathematics, receiving rich and stimulating field experiences which
              will allow them to utilize the teaching methods learned from the ACEPT
              curriculum within their own classrooms.    ACEPT is committing to provide 10
              graduate fellowships (at $5600 each) each year to attract out-of-state minority
              students into the middle school endorsement program.  Within the state of
              Arizona, ACEPT will seek to recruit minorities and women from affiliated
              pre-college programs (PRIME, CRCM, and USI), current science, engineering and
              mathematics students, and existing minority female teachers' aides.  Increasing
              the number of education majors who are members of groups underrepresented in
              science, mathematics, and engineering from 250 to 500.    ACEPT plans to
              establish, at ASU, a Center for Learning Science and Mathematics to serve as a
              teacher resource in the Phoenix area.  ACEPT also plans to make extensive use
              of information technology-- linking all ACEPT institutions by internet and
              emphasizing the development of multimedia presentations which can be
              distributed via CD-ROM and the internet.    Outcomes to be achieved within the
              grant period include:  1. Increase from 250 minority education majors to 500 
              2. 8200 K-12 teachers educated (165 certified in math and science  see letter
              dated February 16,  1995 ).  3. 50 university and community college faculty
              enhanced  4. 75 K-12 teachers will receive in-service education (down from 100
              in proposal, see letter dated  February 16, 1995).    Evaluation of ACEPT
              activities to measure achievement of desired pedagogic outcomes includes use of
              the widely respected Force Concept Inventory developed by Hestenes and
              co-workers as well as the newly developed Science Concept Inventories. 
              Additionally, two generic inventories will be used to assess students attitudes
              toward science and student beliefs  about the processes of science. 
              Assessments using the inventories will occur in both ACEPT and non-ACEPT
              programs.    ACEPT's project activities are being closely coordinated with
              other large grants made by NSF and other agencies within Arizona
