Title       : Treasure From The Cliffs: Exploring Marine Fossils -- The Calvert Marine
               Museum's Paleontology Exhibit
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  1994 
File        : a9453762

Award Number: 9453762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173473             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Gottfried   (Principal Investigator current)
              M. Lynne Warren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              S. Curtis Bowman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Calvert Marine Museum
	      P.O. BOX 97
	      Solomons, MD  20688    410/326-2042

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453762  Gottfried    The Calvert Marine Museum will develop an exhibit and
              complementary  programming interpreting the Miocene Age marine life.  Treasure 
              from the Cliffs: Exploring Marine Fossils will use the world famous  fossils of
              Calvert Cliffs as the basis for the exhibit.  It is  their intention to convey
              a strong sense of the personal process of  discovery and the creative component
              of scientific inquiry to the  exhibit visitors.  In their words, "The
              overriding purpose of  Treasure from the Cliffs is to model a new paradigm for
              natural  history exhibits: to take a humanistic and holistic approach that 
              recognizes the centrality of imagination to the scientific  enterprise, and
              that engages curiosity and creativity -- as well as  intellect -- in the
              process of science learning."  Upon entering  the exhibit, a visitor's interest
              will be peeked by seeing the  large, dramatically lit, fossil Great White Shark
              Tooth.  Visitors  will get involved in the wonder and process of science at the
               beginning of the exhibit in the Paleontology Office/Lab and Fossil 
              Identification area.  They will then move on to see a replicated  section of
              the Calvert Cliffs and cases illustrating how fossil  deposits form.  Two
              recreated Miocene dioramas one of which will  include a full-size skeletal
              reconstruction of the giant fossil  Great White Shark come next.  Visitors will
              then be able to  investigate on their own in a reading station and a video and 
              demonstration theater.  Visitors will exit the exhibit after a  section that
              shows how the modern Chesapeake Bay was formed.  This  leads them seamlessly
              into the museum's next exhibit hall Estuary  Patuxent: A River and its Life. 
              The museum will develop a series  of complementary programs in association with
              this exhibit to reach  a wider audience that will include formal educators
              among others.   They will organize a speakers service, develop a fossil field 
              guide, and produce a video about the Great White Shark.
