Title       : EPSCoR States Information Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1995   
File        : a9453744

Award Number: 9453744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1994      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218792             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher W. Allen cwallen@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George M. Happ  (Principal Investigator former)
              Rebecca R. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,9139,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstarct 744  Happ  EPSCoR States Information Network    The project, involving
              four EPSCoR states (Vermont, West  Virginia, Idaho, and Arkansas), will
              establish a pilot electronic  document delivery network utilizing transmission
              of digitized  information over networked telecommunications systems to meet the
               information needs of over one hundred widely-disbursed EPSCoR  researchers. 
              By providing immediate access to high-quality  copies of articles from
              scientific journals in multiple research  collections, the base of scientific
              and technical information  accessible to these researchers will be greatly
              enhanced, thus  stimulating the development of competitive research in many 
              arenas.    Rapid access to essential scientific information is a critical 
              component in the development of a fully competitive research  environment. 
              Although the resources of major research  collections in other states have long
              been available to  institutions supporting EPSCoR projects through conventional
               interlibrary loan arrangements and systems such as OCLC, the time  involved in
              processing such requests often lessens their  usefulness in the conduct of
              competitive research.  Commercial  document delivery services based upon fax
              technology have  recently emerged, but their viability is limited by restricted
               coverage of the scientific/technical literature and dependence  upon a
              transmission medium which lacks the high resolution  necessary for accurate
              copying of critical plates, photographs,  formulae, and tables.    The
              enhancement of existing resource sharing networks in the four  participating
              states with electronic transmission technology will  be a one-time investment
              with a lasting effect upon the quality  and timeliness of information delivery
              in support of research.   Extending this access to the four states' pooled
              collections and  strengthening research journal holdings in specialized
              targeted  areas in each of the lead institutions will further augment the  base
              of available information.  Once the i nitial investment in  journal backfiles
              and transmission equipment has been made, the  enhancements introduced  in this
              project will be maintained by  the institutions' base budgets, bringing about a
              systemic change  in the information infrastructure necessary for competitive 
              research.  Once tested, this concept will be developed in later  phases to
              include the remaining fourteen EPSCoR states, many of  which have expressed
              interest in joining this project in the  future.  In addition, the opportunity
              for placing receiving  equipment directly into the laboratories of EPSCoR
              researchers  and partner corporations in the private sector may be considered, 
              enabling information delivery to the researchers' desktops.
