Title       : Northwest Regional Center for Sustainable Resources Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1995     
File        : a9453262

Award Number: 9453262
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 15,  1994  
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wynn W. Cudmore wync@chemeketa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles D. Getter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chemeketa Community Col
	      P O BOX 14007
	      Salem, OR  973097070    503/399-5121

NSF Program : 7412      ADVANCED TECH EDUCATION PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 1032,9177,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453262  Cudmore                                              The Northwest
              Regional Center for Sustainable Resources (NWRCSR)  project is a collaborative
              effort of high schools, community  colleges, higher education institutions,
              private industry, and  government in Oregon, Washington, and Northern
              California to create  a comprehensive center of innovative educational programs
              which can  support the efforts of government agencies, industry, and business 
              to restore and preserve the environment. Students who complete one  of the
              associate degree programs will be ready to enter the  workforce as advanced
              technicians in a variety of science-based  occupations which target both
              sustaining and restoring natural  resources, or they can continue for advanced
              degrees. Associate  degree programs in diverse natural resource/environmental
              fields  are being created or are undergoing major curricular revisions to 
              focus on aquatic/terrestrial ecosystems. Secondary schools and  colleges and
              universities  complete the conduit that is providing  a seamless delivery of
              basic scientific content, principles, and  processes culminating with hands-on
              applications.  Internships in industries and agencies are providing the fertile
               ground to produce a workforce capable of contributing to a unified  approach
              to restoration, environmental clean-up, watershed  enhancement, sustainable
              forestry and fisheries, and habitat  restoration. Innovative programs in
              biotechnology and energy  management are being developed in a region where
              industry itself is  driving the programs. The Center programs provide
              innovative,  transportable models for developing problem solving,
              communication,  and collaborative skills that match the requirements of an
              advanced  scientific/technologic workforce necessary to transform the 
              workplace to high performance. The NWRCSR is providing a model for 
              collaborative efforts to address important regional and national  needs.  ***
