Title       : Presidential Faculty Fellows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9453358

Award Number: 9453358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Z. Zhang zhang@quantum.chem.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9296,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Zhang is supported by a Presidential Faculty Fellow Award from the  
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to develop new   theoretical
              and computational methodologies from first principles that   will enable
              chemists to understand and predict complex chemical reactions   accurately and
              reliably.  The research will focus on two areas of   interest including
              gas-phase reaction dynamics and gas-surface reaction   processes.  The
              gas-phase work will seek to develop practical   computational methods for
              accurate and reliable quantum dynamics   calculations of polyatomic reactions
              with immediate applications to   diatom-diatom reactions of experiential
              interest.  The primary   methodology to be employed is the time dependent wave
              packet approach.    The gas-surface work will also use the time dependent wave
              packet   approach to explore reaction processes on rigid solid surfaces which  
              include corregation.     Although the physical laws that underlie chemistry
              have been elucidated   since the discovery of quantum mechanics over half a
              century ago,   practical and useful applications of these laws to solve real
              chemical   problems still remains a remote possibility due to the extreme
              difficulty   of solving the complex quantum mechanical equations.  Despite the 
               significant progress that has been made in electronic structure theory,   only
              the simplest chemical reaction systems are amenable to study by   first
              principle theoretical methods.  Zhang has developed a number of   computational
              approaches which provide fundamental theoretical insights   into the chemical
              dynamics of simple reacting systems, and he is applying   these techniques to
              simple chemical reactions for which reliable   experimental data exists.
