Title       : MPWG: Development of a Southern Illinois SEM Women and Girls Support Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1997       
File        : a9453099

Award Number: 9453099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Shea sshea@siumed.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary H. Wright  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frances J. Harackiewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453099  Shea    The long-term objective  of this project is to create a climate
              in which parents, teachers and  peers encourage girls to develop their own
              natural interest in SEM, and to provide a sequence  of exciting SEM activities
              appropriate for age, experience, and skill levels.  Geographically, the 
              project targets the Southern Illinois (SI) region consisting of 22 mostly rural
              counties, including  the 9 poorest counties in the state, where the percentage
              of girls preparing for college is  significantly lower than statewide or
              national averages.  The target populations are: pre-college  girls, their
              parents, teachers, and school counselors.  The project is unique in that:  (1)
              it  encompasses a wide geographic area; and (2) its long-range plan is to
              provide a sequence of  SEM experiences for girls, beginning with a broad
              "taste" of many SEM disciplines, and leading  through successively more intense
              experiences to a level of mastery in chosen fields that will  give the girls
              the self-confidence to continue on to college.      A sequence of SEM
              activities will be set up in cooperation with the Shagbark Council of the Girl 
              Scouts, in the St. Louis Science Center, and in the Carbondale Science Center. 
              In grade school,  the participants' curiosity will be piqued via Science
              Experiences for Girl Scout troops,  including visits to the St. Louis Science
              Center.  Attending Expanding your Horizons  Workshops (EYH) will provide more
              intensive, hands-on experiences, as well as role-models  of women scientists at
              work.  For somewhat older girls, participation includes the Science Fair 
              Cooperative Workshops; small-group work on an exhibit for the Carbondale
              Science Center;  and in-depth, hands-on science, engineering, mathematics (SEM)
              experiences at a WISE  summer camp.  Guided by female SEM faculty and graduate
              students, the participants are to   interact with older girls who already have
              experienced a more advanced phase of the project,  and with role-model women
              scientists.  Participants also a re to give a helping hand to younger  girls in
              the pipeline.  The involvement of parents, teachers and school counselors is
              essential,  in discussions of how females best learn science, what career
              opportunities are open to women  in SEM, etc., and in hand-on SEM experiences
              that they can share with the girls.  The climate  change envisioned for SI will
              be supported by a Database of Science Activities for  disseminating information
              about SEM activities to the community, available to SI students,  parents,
              teachers, and to public libraries, throughout the calendar year.  This database
              will be  widely advertised through SI schools, libraries, and community
              organizations.    ***
