Title       : PMSA: "Sacramento Schools/MESA Partnerships for Minority Student Achievement"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1996   
File        : a9453852

Award Number: 9453852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra King                          
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1994 
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2500000            (Estimated)
Investigator: James Harold   (Principal Investigator current)
              L. C. Johnson  (Principal Investigator former)
              Jim Sweeney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sacramento Cty Unified Sch
	      520 Capitol Mall
	      Sacramento, CA  95814    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PMSA-9453852  Sacramento City Unified School Dist.  Sacramento, CA  Johnson, L.
              C. and James Harold    "Sacramento Schools/MESA Partnerships For Minority
              Student  Achievement"    Building on a ling-standing collaborative
              relationship, the  Sacramento City Unified School District (SCUSD) and
              Sacramento MESA  (Mathematics, Engineering, Science and Achievement) propose to
               undertake a systemic reform of K-12 science and mathematics  education in 50
              high-minority schools.  Multiple allies in this  concerted effort are from
              industry, government, education agencies,  universities, the statewide MESA
              network, community groups and  parents of the 17,000 underrepresented minority
              students who are  the SSM-PMSA project's focus.  Among the changes that
              SSMA-PMSA  proposes to effect are:  increases in quality and quantity of 
              hands-on science and math instruction, availability of and access  to
              college-preparatory courses, use of technology in educational  delivery,
              multilevel curricular articulation, and parent  involvement and empowerment;
              inclusion of cross-cultural curricula  free of gender bias; heightened
              multicultural understanding and  sensitivity among constituents in the school
              environment;  institution of improved testing, measurement and assessment 
              techniques; and a strong emphasis on college preparation, academic  counseling,
              and math-based careers and career paths.  Project  activities will include a
              variety of student enrichments;  educational and training opportunities for
              teachers, principals,  parents, and students; provision and use of hands-on
              math and  science materials, summer programs; and industry participation.  By 
              year V, over 35,000 students in SCUSD will have benefited directly  and
              indirectly from SSM-PMSA activities and the number of  underrepresented
              students who are motivated and qualified to enroll  in SEM majors will double
              or triple.  NSF/PMSA funding will enable  the partnership to initiate, expand,
              and continue meaningful and  lasting reforms that its individual member s could
              not successfully  accomplish.  the accelerated standards, enriched education
              program, and upgraded  teacher skills.
