Title       : MPWG: WISE Beginnings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1994    
File        : a9453676

Award Number: 9453676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1994     
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sheila E. Blumstein   (Principal Investigator current)
              Karen T. Romer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David M. Targan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank G. Rothman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lydia English  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1544      EHR ACT FOR WOM & GIRLS IN SEM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9252,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453676  Blumstein    Nationally, many fewer women than men study science as
              undergraduates and ultimately pursue  careers as scientists.  This disparity is
              not the result of any inherent difference in ability between  men and women,
              but instead grows out of the culture of undergraduate science:  the climate of 
              science classrooms, and the way in which science classes tends to be taught,
              are often such that  women who have an initial interest in science choose to
              leave in favor of academic fields that  they find more congenial.  The first
              year of college is an especially critical time, as it is during  this period
              that students are first exposed to college-level science and form their
              opinions about  whether or not they wish to become scientists.  With previous
              support from the National Science  Foundation, Brown University initiated the
              Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program,  which was designed to enhance
              the environment experienced by all undergraduate women  science students. 
              While successful, it did not focus specifically on the concerns of first-year 
              students, an area which student researchers from the program itself have
              identified as a  particularly crucial area.  Thus, the development and
              inauguration of a new program, to be  called WISE Beginnings, is proposed. 
              Building on the successes of the original WISE program,  the goal of this new
              initiative will be to increase the participation and retention of women in 
              Brown's undergraduate science programs by focusing on and enhancing the
              experience of first-  year women in introductory science courses, the first
              major challenge that these students face.     The program will develop a new
              paradigm for introductory science courses which brings  together many recently
              developed approaches which have been shown to make science education  more
              inclusive.  WISE Beginnings will feature three components:  1) an academic
              program  centered on study groups, facilitated by upperclass women science
              students, that will be attached  to each of  the introductory science classes
              at Brown, will provide a feedback mechanism to  faculty about the nature of the
              problems and challenges the students face, and are anticipated to  result in
              permanent changes in introductory science courses and curricula; 2) an
              informational  and advising program to run during Brown's Orientation Week; and
              3) a co-curricular program  of academic, advising, and other support activities
              that will complement students' in class  experience.  ***
