Title       : Electric Space: Exploring our Plasma Universe
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1994  
File        : a9453798

Award Number: 9453798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Barbara H. Butler                       
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1994  
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $680542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul B. Dusenbery dusenbery@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Space Science Institute
	      3100 Marine Street
	      Boulder, CO  803091058    /   -

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              10        Physical Sciences                       
              11        Astronomy                               
              13        Physics                                 
              98        Multi-Disciplinary                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453798  Dusenbery    The Space Science Institute of Boulder, Colorado in
              partnership  with the Franklin Institute Science Museum and the Electric 
              Producers Research Institute will develop a 3000 sq. ft. traveling  exhibit
              entitled Electric Space: Exploring Our Plasma Universe.   Visitors to the
              exhibit will be introduced to the physics of the  sun and the polar aurora. 
              They will learn about the effect solar  variability has on technology and
              humans working in space.  The  exhibit is divided into seven sections: Space is
              Not Empty;  SkyWatchers; Plasma: the Fourth State of Matter; The Dynamic Sun; 
              Planet Earth: a Great Magnet; Reaching Toward the Starts: the  Heliosphere; and
              The Cosmic Connection.  Its design is guided by  the desire to create a total
              immersion environment that will allow  visitors to explore the many realm of
              the plasma university from  Earth's upper atmosphere to distant galaxies.  It
              is the developers  intention to demystify science by concentrating on process
              rather  than facts, to create a stimulating informal learning environment,  to
              reach a diverse audience, to motivate young people to pursue  science as an
              interest and a career, and to have the exhibit serve  as an interface between
              the scientific community and the general  public.  In addition to the exhibit,
              supplemental curriculum  modules using an inquiry-based approach will be
              developed in  cooperation with the Science Discovery Project at the University
              of  Colorado.  These materials will provide teachers, students, and  parents
              the opportunity to explore the concepts presented in the  exhibit.  An
              extensive evaluation plan will be carried.  The  exhibit will open at the
              Maryland Science Center the summer of  1995.  It will then travel to nine major
              US cities reaching an  estimated two million adults and children who represent
              a great  diversity of ages and education an ethnic backgrounds.
