Title       : Toward a General Scientific Visualization Architecture for Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  1997   
File        : a9453715

Award Number: 9453715
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nora Sabelli                            
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1995     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $565022             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Edelson d-edelson@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy D. Pea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7257      APPLICATS OF ADVANCED TECHNOLS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453715  Edelson    The techniques of scientific visualization have had a
              tremendous  impact on the practice of science over a relatively short period of
               time because of the unparalleled capacity scientific visualization  provides
              for human observations of relationships, patterns, and  processes in large
              quantities data.  This research will attempt to  demonstrate that the
              techniques of scientific visualization can  have a similar impact in
              educational environments for similar  reasons.  The goal of the research is to
              assess whether the use of  scientific visualization in the course of
              inquiry-based learning  can enable students across the spectrum of academic
              ability to  develop a scientific understanding of complex, even chaotic 
              phenomena, such as climate, weather, and atmospheric greenhouse  effect. 
              Understanding of these complex natural phenomena has been  out of reach of all
              but the brightest and most highly motivated  students with traditional
              instructional techniques.    Our previous research has demonstrated that
              scientific  visualization can be a valuable learning tool for students engaged 
              in inquiry-based learning.  However, this research also revealed  the need for
              a software architecture for scientific visualization  that provides learner
              support targeted specifically at the use of  visualization in the course of
              inquiry-based learning.  This  research-guided transformation of tools and
              techniques developed  for use by scientists into environments to support
              students in the  development of robust scientific understanding is a
              significant  challenge.  As part of this research, we will develop  and
              evaluate  supportive scientific visualization environments for the study of 
              two important areas of atmospheric science: climate/weather and  atmospheric
              greenhouse effect.  Using these environments, we will  conduct a set of four
              studies designed to examine the prospects and  the challenges of scientific
              visualization as technology for  secondary science education.  In these
              studies, we  will examine the  ways in which the supportive scientific
              visualization architecture,  in comparison to other instructional approaches,
              can impact both  students' conceptual understanding and the process by which
              they  conduct scientific inquiry.  We uill examine the process by which 
              students learn to make sense from scientific visualizations and the  way that
              scientific visualization environments are adopted in  inquiry-based classrooms.
               ***
