Title       : A Graduate Research Traineeship Program in Coastal Ocean Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DGE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9453990

Award Number: 9453990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul W. Jennings                        
	      DGE  DIVISION OF GRADUATE EDUCATION          
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1994    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan H. Sharp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 7173      GRADUATE TRAINEESHIPS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A Graduate Research Traineeship (GRT) program is proposed for the  priority of
              Geosciences are of "Coastal Ocean Processes".  In the  Oceanography Program of
              the Graduate College of Marine Studies  (CMS), we have a PhD degree program
              that we propose to modify to  provide an additional new specialization in
              "Coastal Ocean  Processes" (COP).  This COP program is built on an existing 
              emphasis in nearshore oceanographic areas, an advanced course in  coastal and
              estuarine oceanography, an advanced physical  oceanography course, and a course
              in marine policy for  oceanographers.  There are 15 faculty members from the
              CMS who have  agreed to participate in this initial program.  An additional
              equal  number who teach and do research in the general area of nearshore 
              oceanography will add to the resource base for this traineeship  program;
              although not contacted for this program initially, some  may join later as
              potential advisors for the students.    Over the past decade, 17 students have
              received PhD degrees in  Oceanography from the CMS in which there was an
              emphasis in each  one's dissertation research in nearshore oceanography. The
              six  faculty who advised these students are participants in the new  program
              that is proposed here.  Although these previous students  did not have the same
              specific requirements as are proposed for the  new program, many did take one
              or more advanced estuarine and  coastal oceanography courses and several of the
              non-physicists did  take advanced physical oceanography courses and used
              dynamical  physical oceanographic modelling in dissertations and refereed 
              publications.  Most took a course in marine policy.    We feel that we have
              demonstrated the ability to give training in  a coastal ocean processes
              orientation for an oceanography degree  and that we have the capacity to
              recruit and advise the additional  number of students that this GRT grant would
              support.
