Title       : READING RAINBOW
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9453016

Award Number: 9453016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1995       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $865455             (Estimated)
Investigator: Twila C. Liggett   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Rockwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Nebraskans for Public TV
	      P.O.Box 83111 - 1800 N 33rd St
	      Lincoln, NE  685013111    402/472-3611

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9453016  Liggett      ABSTRACT    Nebraskans for Public Television are producing
              three programs in the "Reading Rainbow" series that focus on mathematics and
              developing and implementing a special math outreach effort aimed at parents
              with a secondary audience of teachers.  The programs will take a
              literature-based approach to mathematics which helps make it possible ". . .
              for children to have the same authentic experiences with math that they are
              coming to have with language, social studies, science and the arts." (Read Any
              good Math Lately? by Whitin and Wilde).  The goal of the project is to expand
              the impact of the "Reading Rainbow" series by:    - integrating quality
              math-oriented books with science and literary selections into the series, and  
               - making quality children's math-oriented books more visible to parents,
              public librarians, and teachers and to engage children's interest in reading
              about and exploring math in the real world.     The outreach effort will
              develop a special math effort directed to parents, children, and teachers.  A
              special publication for parents and a teacher guide will be created for the new
              math-focused programs.  The producers will work with the Family Math Project at
              the Lawrence Hall of Science in training parents and children and will also
              direct community outreach efforts towards economically and socially
              disadvantaged families.  This effort will engage these families in math related
              activities through partnerships with community-based organizations and local
              public television stations involved in PBS's Ready to Learn Project. 
              Partnership organizations include the National Council for Teachers of Math,
              Girls Inc, The Connecticut Academy for Education in Mathematics, Science and
              Technology, EQUALS Family Math Project, and the Weekly Reader Corporation. 
              "Reading Rainbow" partnerships also have been established between three SSI's
              -- Louisiana, Michigan, and Ohio -- and PBS stations in those states.
