Title       : Further Investigation of the Impacts of Cold Load Pickup on Design and Operation
               of Electric Power Distribution Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a9721447

Award Number: 9721447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186470             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil Pahwa pahwa@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9721447  Pahwa    Restoration of power after an extended outage in a
              distribution system results in load much higher than normal load due to cold
              load pickup.  In addition to initial transients, the load during cold load
              pickup has an enduring component that can be 2 to 5 times normal load and may
              last for several hours.  The enduring component is mainly due to loss of
              diversity in the cycling type of loads, such as air conditioners, refrigerator
              etc.  Since utilities would like to utilize the existing assets to the maximum
              extent, cold load pickup is an important issue in design and operation of
              distribution systems.    The PI received funding for a project (Award Number
              9311257) in 1994 from the National Science Foundation to investigate the
              impacts of cold load pickup on distribution systems from both operation and
              from design points of view.  Techniques for determination of the optimal
              sequence of sections for step-by-step restoration of distribution systems were
              investigated.  Also, system design to determine the optimal number of
              sectionalizers and the optimal size of substation transformer needed for the
              system was investigated.  Three journal papers and three conference papers were
              published based on the research.  The research also formed partial dissertation
              of one Ph.D. student and full Ph.D. dissertation of another student.    This
              proposal is being submitted to request funding for further investigation of the
              impacts of cold load pickup on distribution systems.  Specifically, the
              research will address 1) modification of the transformer loading model, 2)
              further investigation of the optimal restoration sequence, 3) inclusion of
              better models for cost of transformers and cost of interruption in the
              optimization problem, 4) inclusion of voltage drop and feeder capacity
              constraints in the optimization problem, and 5) issues related to estimation of
              the cold load pickup model parameters.    The proposed research lays a
              foundation for integration of distribution automation into design  of
              distribution systems.  So far distribution automation has mostly been discussed
              from the point of view of system operation.  However, as a result of
              distribution automation, new methods of designing distribution systems will be
              needed.  The new designs should utilize automation effectively and at the same
              time keep the system cost low.  As the penetration of distribution automation
              increases, the new design procedures will become an integral part of
              distribution system design.  These issues will gather more attention in the
              future due to the changes that are taking place presently in the utility
              business.  These changes will result in the restructured utility environment
              under which the distribution companies will be required to manage their assets
              more efficiently and effectively.    The proposed project will offer a novel
              opportunity for a graduate student to pursue the Ph.D. degree and receive
              training in the field of distribution systems as well as in various
              mathematical and computational techniques.  The results of this research also
              will be extremely useful for the PI for integration into research-based
              courses.
