Title       : Theory of Electrons in Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 2,  1999   
File        : a9721444

Award Number: 9721444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lu J. Sham lsham@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9721444  Sham  This is a renewal grant to fund a broad program of theoretical 
              research on the electronic properties of condensed matter  systems.  A
              fundamental digital electronic device involves two  states of the system.  In a
              quantum system there is also the  additional information of the phase
              difference of the wave  functions for the two states.  This additional quantum
              property  is called the coherence.  The importance of a coherent quantum 
              device lies not just in the addition of one more piece of  information, but in
              the propagation of the properties in a chain  of such devices.  For example, if
              each unit device is a logic  gate, then the chain forms a quantum computer. 
              Coherence  dynamics is much studied in quantum optics.  A logic gate using a 
              trapped ion or an atom passing through an optical cavity has been  demonstrated
              to work, but a long chain of such devices is  impractical.    A semiconductor
              heterostructure seems to be a more practical  medium for a coherent quantum
              device.  A theory of the physical  processes which occur in the operation of a
              coherent  semiconductor device constitutes the first research area.  The 
              issues germane to a quantum device are (1) addressing, (2)  interaction, and
              (3) the various times in the process: onset,  recovery, decoherence.  The
              problem with applying the optically  excited coherence to semiconductors is
              that the coherence lasts  no more than a few picoseconds, and only at low
              temperatures.  Neither condition enhances the prospects for a device.  Ways of 
              transferring the coherence to spin states with much longer  decoherence time
              will be studied.  Kikkawa et al. have found that  doping of a quantum well and
              strong optical excitation make the  optically excited spin memory several
              nanoseconds long, which  persists even at room temperature.  One possible
              explanation to  be investigated is the polarization of the electron sea (from 
              doping) by the optically excited electrons with a common spin  direction.  The
              Coulomb interaction effect create s a collective  spin which is then not easy
              to perturb.  The next step is to  explore what interaction mechanism can be
              utilized for quantum  coherence control.    An electron optically excited
              leaves behind a hole.  It has been  suggested that such electron-hole coherence
              may exist in nature  without laser excitation and that the collective action of
              many  pairs may form a strongly correlated semiconductor.  The second  research
              area is to explore properties of such semiconductors and  to look for likely
              materials.  Of various classes of such  correlated semiconductors, the most
              interesting possibility is  electronic ferroelectrics.  Large dielectric
              constants in a few  samarium compunds are an encouaging sign.  The electronic 
              ferroelectrics would be more versatile than the conventional  ferroelectrics
              for device purposes and the understanding of their  strong electron correlation
              would be a piece of important basic  physics.  The third topic, related to the
              first one, is the  theory of electrons carrying spins from a ferromagnet to a 
              semiconductor.  This is of relevance to the development of spin-  dependent
              electronic devices, which would integrate magnetic  devices with electronics. 
              %%%  This is a broad theoretical project to study the properties of 
              semiconductor devices as components of quantum computers and  other quantum
              devices.  The properties necessary for new and  novel states in matter will be
              explored and relevant materials  identified.  In particular, novel
              semiconductors will be  investigated.  ***
