Title       : Interdisciplinary Study of Conformal Field Theory-Mathematics and Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9721423

Award Number: 9721423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Gieseker dag@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto D. Peccei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mathematics has recently seen extensive interaction with physics,  especially
              with the ideas of quantum field theory (QFT), string  theory, conformal field
              theory and Seiberg-Witten theory.  These  theories provide our deepest
              understanding of basic physical  laws. Mathematics, especially algebraic and
              differential  geometry, has provided the correct framework for these theories, 
              and mathematical techniques have enabled the physicists to  establish many of
              their results, especially in string theory and  conformal field theory. On the
              other hand, physicists, such as  Witten, Candelas and many others, have
              discovered many truly  amazing mathematical relationships using physical ideas.
              However,  few mathematicians are fully conversant with the concepts of 
              physics. It is imperative that we train our students to  understand these
              theories.  Professor Gieseker's objective is to  learn conformal field theory,
              which is a very basic theory which  is also a building block for string theory.
               From this, he will  develop a course which will be accessible to mathematics
              graduate  students, who are eager to learn these theories.  On the research 
              side, Professor Gieseker's recent research has been in the  deformation theory
              of infinite dimensional integrable systems,  which is closely connected to
              conformal field theory. So  understanding conformal field theory will enrich
              his research. In  this project, Professor Gieseker will collaborate with
              Professor  Eric D'Hoker of the UCLA Physics Department.    This IGMS project is
              jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and
              the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
