Title       : Seismic Retrofit of Suspension Bridges in the Central and Eastern U.S. Using
               Distributed Supplemental Damping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2001   
File        : a9721452

Award Number: 9721452
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156993             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash C. Goel subhash@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin R. Collins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Almost all of the suspension bridges in the central and eastern U.S. (CEUS) were
              built long before seismic design concepts were understood and widely practiced.
               These bridges carry extremely high volumes of traffic, often in densely
              populated urban areas.  Seismic demands on these bridges often exceed the
              capacities of the nonductile members.  There is a need to retrofit these brides
              to ensure survival during and after seismic events. 

The objective of this
              research is to evaluate the use of distributed supplemental damping in the
              retrofit of suspension bridges in the central and eastern portions of the
              United States.  Supplemental damping is a type of passive control in which
              damping devices are incorporated into the structural system.  Distributed
              damping refers to the placement of these devices evenly throughout the
              structure.  Preliminary investigations of the system suggest that large
              reductions in response are possible.  

The program of research shall consist
              of numerous activities intended to fulfill the above mentioned research
              objective:

	O Collection and evaluation of strong motion records typical of
              sites in the CEUS.
	O Re-processing of collected records to recover long
              period content.
	O Extensive analytical modeling of typical suspension
              bridges.
	O Determination of most effective distribution of damping
              elements.
	O Evaluation of different damper types and characteristics.
	O
              Investigation into the reduction or elimination of stiffness from the
              stiffening truss
                  system and its side effects.
	O
              Constructability and cost investigations of the proposed retrofit
              method.

Impacts of the research could include reduction of loss of life and
              economic losses following a major seismic event, improved design of isolation
              systems, longer and lighter future suspension bridges, and greater awareness of
              the seismic risks in the CEUS.

