Title       : Research Experiences in Biological Materials, Composite Materials, and
               Automotive Safety
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a9721375

Award Number: 9721375
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $425627             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Kline kline@eng.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michele J. Grimm  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal No.: 9721375  PI:  Kline  University: Wayne State University     
              ABSTRACT      This REU project is designed as a two year, continuous program to
              expose junior and senior engineering students to mechanical engineering
              research in both a university and an industrial setting.  The overall goal is
              to increase the number of students who continue on to graduate study following
              the completion of their engineering degree, especially for female and minority
              students.  Six students each year will be accepted to the program, and
              recruitment efforts will be directed at local community colleges and
              universities with limited research opportunities for undergraduates as well as
              Wayne State.  During their first year, participating students will spend one
              summer (full-time) and two semesters (10 hours/week) becoming acquainted with
              the research activities within either the Bioengineering Center or the Advanced
              Composites Research Laboratory, or both, of Wayne State University.  They will
              be introduced to the techniques used within these laboratories and will begin
              to develop an independent project to be completed during their second year of
              participation.  For the summer between their junior and senior years, students
              will work in an industrial internship conducting research in a more applied
              setting.  These internships will be matched with the students' overall
              interests and typically draw on the skills learned during their first year of
              participation.  During the second year of the program, each student will work
              (20 hours/week) to complete an independent research project and present the
              results of their research at a regional conference.  All research activities
              are supplemented by a program on oral and written communication skills.  In
              addition, during the winter semester each second year student will develop a
              teaching module directed at middle and high school students based on their
              research and results.  These teaching modules will be presented to secondary
              school students invited from the Detro it Public School District.  The students
              and their teachers, with coaching from the university students, will then
              develop lesson plans and materials based on the lectures which they have heard
              so that the material can be presented to their peers within the Detroit Public
              School system.  The goals of this portion of the program are to introduce
              secondary school students to engineering research, provide role models for them
              in the field of engineering most of the participants in this REU program have
              been female or members of minority groups, and have the participating secondary
              school students act as ambassadors of science and engineering to their peers
              within the school district.
