Title       : Investigations in Mixed Integer Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1998    
File        : a9721402

Award Number: 9721402
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eva K. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A primary focus of this research is to develop effective  computational methods
              for mixed integer programs. A nonlinear  interior-point based branch-and-bound
              solver will be developed,  emphasizing effective implementation of the
              nonlinear subproblem  solver within the tree search environment, and its
              practicality  in solving real-world instances. Parallelism will be exploited to
               take advantage of concurrent computing and to enhance the  solver's capability
              for solving these NP-hard problems.    Another focus of this research is to
              explore new applications of  mixed integer programming. As applications provide
              invaluable  insight and motivation for advancing the frontiers of an evolving 
              discipline, the work will, in part, focus on structures arising  from practical
              applications. The first problem arises from the  computationally intensive area
              of statistical classification,  which has close connections with machine
              learning, neural  networks and pattern recognition. This work will build on 
              previous work involving a classification model  formulated initially as a
              nonlinear MIP. The novel aspects of the  model are that it allows a level of
              control on misclassification  probabilities and allows entities to be
              classified into a  reserved judgment region. Such an approach is well-suited
              for  applications in which misclassification can have  dire consequences (e.g.,
              medical diagnosis). Variations in the  basic model will be explored in an
              attempt to uncover a version  that is both computationally tractable for large
              scale problems,  and effective in generating rules that yield accurate 
              classification.    A second application concerns treatment planning
              optimization for  brachytherapy --- a type of radiation therapy that involves 
              implanting radioactive sources (seeds) in or near tumors. The  optimal
              placement and dosage of the radioactive seeds in  brachytherapy is a
              challenging problem. A novel mixed integer  programming model has been
              developed, and the focus now lies  in developing effective co mputational
              strategies based on the  polyhedral structure of the model. Clinical
              computational tests  will be performed using data from prostate cancer cases.
              The  resulting optimization solver will be designed, along with  graphical
              evaluation tools, for real-time use in the operating  room.
