Title       : Minimizing Nonlinear Process Model Uncertainty for Motion Control and
               Friction-Based Diagnostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  2002        
File        : a9721468

Award Number: 9721468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178288             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laura E. Ray laura.e.ray@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the need for accurate friction process  models during all
              operating conditions of a machine for friction-  based diagnostics and motion
              control. Slow or sudden changes in  friction characteristics due to wear,
              temperature, humidity,  lubricant conditions, and loads can lead to undetected
              changes in  the parameters of a governing friction process model. For model- 
              based diagnostics, accurate friction process models are required  to detect
              faults that may lead to machine failure. For motion  control, friction process
              model uncertainty must be minimized to  maximize performance. This research
              develops estimation methods  for mechanical systems with nonstationary sliding
              or rolling  friction to detect and compensate for changes in friction process 
              models. To accomplish this, a synergistic combination of non-  model-based and
              model-based estimation is developed to separate  friction force observation
              from friction process model  identification. For friction force observation,
              nonlinear  estimators that do not require a structured friction model or 
              direct measurement of friction force will be developed. Friction  observers
              will use models of the physical system (apart from the  friction model) and
              measured motion to estimate friction force  through state extended filtering.
              Friction force observation will  supply inputs for model-based, multiple-model
              estimation to  identify a physically relevant friction model using Bayesian 
              selection. Experiments combining estimation and control will  focus on
              maximizing accuracy of high-speed, repetitive, motion  control for diverse
              applications such as semiconductor  manufacturing, positioning hard disk
              read/write heads, and  machine tool position/velocity control. Use of the
              estimation  methods to enhance friction based diagnostics will be  demonstrated
              by simulation in the context of model-based  condition monitoring of bearings. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
