Title       : Determining Molecular Structures over the Web via SnB
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2000   
File        : a9721373

Award Number: 9721373
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303787             (Estimated)
Investigator: Russ Miller miller@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Weeks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 4080      ADVANCED COMP RESEARCH PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9721373
Miller

This proposal will design and implement an efficient Web
              server that will provide a critical resource for the determination of molecular
              crystal structures.  Crystallographers will utilize this Web site to run a
              computationally-intensive direct-methods program (SnB) in an effort to solve
              difficult molecular structures.  

The new version of the SnB program
              includes a Java-based graphical user interface (GUI) and a computational engine
              that is significantly more efficient than the one included with the previous
              version of the program. As the Shake-and Bake project, upon which SnB is based,
              is quite active, and as new application domains for SnB continue to
              materialize, significant advances will also be made to the SnB program.  Such
              advances include the handling of multiple data sets, the application to
              derivative data, compatibility with other input and output formats,
              optimizations for efficiency, advances in the pre- and post-processing of data,
              and so forth.  

The SnB program is computationally intensive, and few
              laboratories have the facilities necessary to run it on important/difficult
              structures of significant size.  This Web site will satisfy the needs of a
              significant population by providing a state-of-the-art program coupled to a
              reasonable computational platform, The site is powered by a multiprocessor
              machine that provides security, which is important in this setting due to the
              proprietary nature of many data sets. In addition, a flexible queuing system
              will be developed and employed that will prioritize job submissions.

SnB has
              proven to be critical to the crystallographic and medical communities.  For
              example, it has been used to determine the structure of vancomycin; an
              antibiotic typically regarded as "the last line of defense against bacteria." 
              This structure determination allows for the possibility of designing a new form
              of the drug that will circumvent the resistance problem and preserve the
              last-resort utility of vancomycin.


