Title       : Computational Problems in Biomedical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9721436

Award Number: 9721436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lothar Reichel reichel@mcs.kent.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph H. Danks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kent State University
	      P.O. Box 5190
	      Kent, OH  442420001    330/672-2851

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The design of successful numerical methods for image processing  and other
              biomedical applications require a thorough  understanding of the underlying
              problems and of the desired  solutions, as well as of the instrumentation for
              data collection  and the computational environment.  This proposal seeks
              support  for the PI to spend his sabbatical year, and part of the summers 
              attached to it at the Biomedical Engineering department at Case  Western
              Reserve University.  J. Duerk and D. Wilson will serve as  hosts to the PI
              during his stay.  A year of full time immersion  in the biomedical environment
              at CWRU will give the PI an  opportunity to strengthen and broaden his image
              processing  knowledge and to view the field from the engineering   perspective.
               He will also acquire significant insight in various  biomedical engineering
              applications whose solution is  computationally challenging.    The PI's
              expertise on numerical methods for large-scale  computations and the recent
              applications to the restoration of  images will make it possible to begin
              interacting with faculty  and students in the hosting department from the
              start, thus  allowing him to take advantage of all learning opportunities.  It
              is envisioned that this interaction will develop into a solid  and fruitful
              cooperation on the development of better numerical  methods for novel medical
              applications, e.g., interventional MRI  for a new less invasive cancer
              treatment.  The new knowledge and  skills will significantly broaden the PI's
              expertise and will  open new avenues for his future research. Upon returning to
              his  home institution, where there is neither an engineering school  nor a
              medical school, he will divulge his new knowledge of  medical imaging and of
              the engineering perspective on it by  directing the work of Masters and PhD
              students, designing  new, interdisciplinary courses and giving a series of
              lectures  and seminars.    Upon return to his department the PI will be able to
                 -introduce applications from biomedical enginee ring in graduate  and
              undergraduate courses on numerical analysis and scientific  computing   
              -assign computational problems arising in biomedical engineering  for Ph.D. and
              Masters theses, possibly in collaboration with  members of the Department for
              Biomedical Engineering at CWRU.   This should yield thesis topics that students
              would find  interesting and attractive, as well as make the students more 
              attractive on the job market    -organize seminars on computational problems in
              biomedical  engineering, and if there is interest, develop courses on 
              "Computational Problems in Biomedical Engineering"    -serve as liaison between
              his department and the Department of  Biomedical Engineering at CWRU.    This
              IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
