Title       : Interdisciplinary Research and Education: Statistics/Chemical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1998     
File        : a9721416

Award Number: 9721416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wojbor A. Woyczynski waw@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Bassett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An interdisciplinary research and education project between the  Statistics
              Department at the CWRU College of Arts and Sciences,  and the Chemical
              Engineering Department at the CWRU Case  School of Engineering is being
              proposed. Its principal component  is Professor Woyczynski's residence in the
              Chemical Engineering  Department during his 1998/99 sabbatical, with Professor
              J. Adin  Mann playing the role of a host.  This residence will be a part  of,
              and will help to jump start a broader collaborative effort in  research and
              education being developed by Professor Woyczynski on  the Statistics side, and
              Professors Jay Mann, John Angus and Phil  Morrison on the Chemical Engineering
              side.    Professor Woyczynski's expected duties will include three  components:
                 (a) A joint research program to help in the development of a   virtual
              integrated prototyping and synchroneous  manufacturing/control of vapor/plasma
              deposition processes for   thin and thick films of wide band gap
              semiconductors, such as  gallium nitride and diamond.  The proposed control
              design will be  model-based, and the main effort will be directed at a detailed
               study of the required interfacial growth models.    (b)  Design of
              undegraduate statistics courses to fit chemical  engineering needs, including
              creation of interactive,  Mathematica-based, chemical engineering-oriented
              computer  packages, to complement the about-to-be-published text  "Introductory
              Statistics and Random Phenomena:  Uncertainty,  Complexity, and Chaotic
              Behavior in Engineering and Science"  (joint with M. Denker, Birkhauser, 1998,
              505 pp.).    (c) Creation of a framework for joint recruitment, supervision, 
              and job placement of statistics and chemical engineering graduate  and, more
              generally, materials science, students; initiation of  the writing process of a
              graduate text on random media for that  population.    The PI's expectation is
              that his residence at the Chemical  Engineering Department will produce lasting
              impact on the  research and educational en vironment at CWRU and beyond, 
              including:    -Development of new statistical and mathematical tools needed in 
              the virtual integrated prototyping of thin films.  Without such  tools the
              optimization of such processes does not seem to be  feasible;    -Direct
              application of these tools to the practical issues  related to the design of
              plasma reactors for vapor deposition of  such films, including development of
              industrial-strength software  for that purpose.  The latter will be done
              jointly with  industrial software vendors, such as ControlSoft Inc., of 
              Cleveland, Ohio, and CFD Research Corp. of Huntsville, AL, that  collaborate
              with the Chemical Engineering department.    -Development and fine tuning of
              statistics courses well adapted  to the needs of undergraduate students
              majoring in materials  sciences and engineering.  The hope is that this will
              increase  the attractiveness and relevance (as measured by enrollment) of  such
              courses.  The publication of the Uncertainty book should  have an impact on the
              way statistics is taught to engineering and  science students nationwide.   
              -Creation of an interdisciplinary environment for graduate  students would
              attract new types of students to the program, but  more importantly, would
              improve the marketability of new Ph.D.'s  and their flexibility in the job
              market.      The PI plans to apply the acquired expertise to broaden 
              experience and career options of the students by:    - Developing and
              fine-tuning statistics courses to fit the needs  of chemical engineering and
              other materials sciences  undergraduate students.    - Developing chemical
              engineering oriented packages and modules  for the Uncertainty book.   
              -Writing a graduate level book on random media.    -Developing a formal
              framework for joint advisorship and rotation  of Ph.D. level students between
              the Statistics and Chemical  Engineering Departments.    -To widen the
              employment opportunities for undergraduate students  with interdisciplinary
              training, special co-op programs will be  pu rsued with selected industrial
              companies that indicated  interest in broadly educated statistics and
              engineering students.    This IGMS project is jointly supported by the MPS
              Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
