Title       : Unitary Representations of Reductive Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a9721441

Award Number: 9721441
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $528045             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Vogan dav@math.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract of "Unitary representations of reductive groups."    The philosophy of
              coadjoint orbits of Kirillov and Kostant predicts  that most irreducible
              unitary representations of reductive Lie groups  should arise by (parabolic or
              cohomological) induction from the (still  undefined) unipotent representations.
               Each reductive group should  have just finitely many unipotent
              representations, and these should be  related to the (finitely many) nilpotent
              orbits of the coadjoint  representation.  This proposal has two parts.  The
              first (partly joint  with Susana Salamanca-Riba) concerns a precise version of
              the  Kirillov-Kostant prediction.  The goal is to characterize nicely a  small
              set of unitary representations with the property that every  unitary
              representation can be obtained from it by induction.  (The set  will include
              all unipotent representations, and also various  complementary series.)  The
              second (partly joint with William Graham)  concerns an idea for constructing
              unipotent representations.    More than fifty years ago, I. M. Gelfand set
              forth a program of  abstract harmonic analysis, a very general way to study
              mathematical  problems with symmetry.  Such problems appear in physics, and in 
              almost every part of mathematics.  One of the most fundamental  examples arises
              in connection with musical sounds.  In that case the  symmetry is passage
              through time: any two times are indistinguishable  in terms of what kinds of
              sounds can appear.  Gelfand's harmonic  analysis amounts to decomposing a sound
              into the "pure tones" produced  by a tuning fork (which change in an extremely
              simple way with the  passage of time).  Gelfand showed that a similar analysis
              was possible  in the presence of more complicated symmetry.  The role of the
              pure  tones is played by "irreducible unitary representations."  This  project
              continues work done by many people on irreducible unitary  representations. 
              The central idea is this.  The formal definition of  an irreducible unitary
              representation involves linear a lgebra and  Euclidean geometry, in the form of
              what are called Hilbert spaces and  unitary operators.  These are exactly the
              objects needed to formulate  quantum mechanics.  In physics, quantum mechanical
              systems arise from  Newtonian ones by an (imperfectly understood) process known
              as  quantization.  An idea going back to Kirillov and Kostant in the 1960s  is
              that irreducible unitary representations should also arise by  "quantization"
              of some simple "Newtonian" analogues.  These Newtonian  analogues are fairly
              well understood, but the problem of quantizing  them is difficult.  On the
              other hand, similar quantization problems  appear in many parts of mathematics
              and physics, so there is no  shortage of examples to consider and ideas to try.
