Title       : REU SITE: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biosciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BIO 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1991       
File        : a9101213

Award Number: 9101213
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Sneider tsneider@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 9145      SPECIAL PROGRAMS-RESERVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to the Department of Biochemistry at                 
              Colorado State University to establish a Research Experience for               
              Undergraduates (REU) Site.  The program in Molecular Biosciences               
              will enable qualified undergraduates to spend a summer doing                   
              independent research projects in a range of areas and using a                  
              variety of experimental approaches.  Biochemistry/molecular                    
              biology employs the methods of chemistry, physics, cellular                    
              biology, microbiology, and genetic manipulation to study the                   
              structure and function of complex biomolecules, how these                      
              molecules generate the phenomenon we call life, and how                        
              alterations in these molecules perturb the living organism.                    
              Because of its breadth, biochemistry/molecular biology serves to               
              integrate didactic and experiential material learned in a                      
              multitude of basic science courses.  The REU program is designed               
              to ?a! offer the participants a wide variety of research areas                 
              from which to choose an independent studies project; ?b! offer                 
              project areas that are meaningful and exciting to the student;                 
              ?c! teach the student how to formulate and test hypotheses; ?d!                
              help develop the ability to trouble-shoot and problem-solve when               
              confronted with the unexpected; ?e! instruct the participant in                
              state-of-the-art techniques and instrumentation of                             
              biochemistry/molecular biology; ?f! develop the ability to                     
              communicate with one's peers concerning ongoing research efforts               
              as well as more formal presentations of completed research                     
              projects; and, ?g! provide, in CSU faculty and in outside                      
              scientists invited to speak to the REU students, role models that              
              will reinforce the intellectual excitement of a scientific                     
              career.
