Title       : Dissertation Research: Physiological/Biochemical Tradeoffs with Host
               Specialization: Ecological Implications for Generalist and Specialist
               Saturniids (Callosamia spp)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1991      
File        : a9101121

Award Number: 9101121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8400               (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Mark Scriber scriber@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelly Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Few insect herbivores utilize Magnolia virginiana (sweetbay) as a              
              hostplant, one being the sweetbay silkmoth, Callosamia securifera              
              (Saturniidae).  However, closely related species suffer 100%                   
              mortality on this plant.  Preliminary phytochemical work indicates             
              that mortality is due to at least two insecticidal compounds,                  
              magnolol and biphenyl ether.  This study will characterize                     
              physiological/biochemical adaptations of C. securifera to Magnolia             
              by comparing its detoxification mechanisms with those of two                   
              congeners unable to tolerate this host's chemicals.  In vitro and              
              in vivo experiments will be used to identify enzymatic                         
              detoxification systems.  In addition, because the three Callosamia             
              species appear to have recently diverged and have some overlap in              
              host use, possible tradeoffs in digestive efficiency and                       
              detoxification enzyme activity that may have favored hostplant                 
              specialization in the genus will be tested.  Specifically,                     
              predictions that 1) specialists have higher digestive efficiency               
              than generalists and 2) generalists have higher levels or 3) higher            
              inducibility of broad substrate-specificity detoxification activity            
              than specialists will be tested.  With the detailed                            
              characterization of specific detoxification mechanisms used by C.              
              securifera to cope with toxins in its host, it may be possible to              
              formulate better hypotheses concerning biochemical tradeoffs                   
              associated with host specialization.
