Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic and Computational Techniques for Amplitude
               Equations and Weak Turbulence Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1991      
File        : a9101371

Award Number: 9101371
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1991      
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul K. Newton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigator will continue his              
              study of several problems related to the stability and                         
              bifurcation of time-dependent solutions of amplitude equations                 
              arising in fluid dynamics.  In particular, he will investigate                 
              the Ginzburg-Landau equation from the theory of hydrodynamic                   
              stability theory and the Zakharov system of equations from the                 
              theory of weak plasma turbulence.  In addition, the principal                  
              investigator will consider these two sets of equations in their                
              nonlinear Schroedinger limits.  The method of attack will be a                 
              combined analytical and numerical approach that seeks to derive                
              asymptotic versions of the equations that are tractable and that               
              contain the essential physics of the phenomena being modelled.                 
                   Much of the natural phenomena of everyday life involves what              
              mathematicians and physicists call "stability and bifurcation"                 
              phenomena.  That is, a system will continue more or less in a                  
              stable mode of operation until it is perturbed sufficiently to                 
              the point where a new type of behavior arises out of the old one.              
              When this happens one says that a "bifurcation" has occurred and               
              one is then interested in the "stability" of the new solution.                 
              That is, how long will the new mode of behavior exist and how                  
              large of a perturbation will it take to kick the system into a                 
              new mode of behavior?  In this project the principal investigator              
              will examine such problems as they arise in the modelling of                   
              plasmas and turbulence by using analytical and numerical methods.
