Title       : Immobilization of Homogeneous Catalysts: Supported Aqueous Phases, Ion Exchange
               Resins, and Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9101846

Award Number: 9101846
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian E. Hanson hanson@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1401      Kinetics,Catalysis &Molec Proc
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Effective immobilization of homogeneous catalysts is                           
              technologically important for the petrochemical and fine-                      
              chemical industries.  This work addresses techniques for                       
              catalyst immobilization that are applicable both to large-                     
              scale and to small-scale production.  The use of supported                     
              aqueous-phase (SAP) catalysts has already been shown to be                     
              effective for hydroformylation of a variety of olefins.  The                   
              present work examines the unique properties of SAP catalysts                   
              using physicochemical approaches, in particular the role of                    
              water in the determination of catalytic activity.  The SAP                     
              concept is also extended to catalytic oxidations.                              
              Additionally, other immobilization techniques are explored,                    
              including ion-exchange resins as a means to immobilize                         
              catalysts with functionalized ligands, and the use of very                     
              large, but soluble, ligands combined with membrane separation                  
              technology.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Many homogeneous (soluble) catalysts are known to facilitate                   
              chemical transformations with high selectivity under mild                      
              conditions, but their commercial use is inhibited by the high                  
              cost of separating the products from the solution containing                   
              the catalyst and the fact that reusing the catalyst is often                   
              difficult if not impossible.  Immobilization techniques offer                  
              the prospect of circumventing these problems by making the                     
              homogeneous catalysts behave more like heterogeneous                           
              catalysts.  Accomplishing this while preserving the desirable                  
              catalytic properties has proven to be difficult, but the                       
              benefit in potential new processes would be enormous.
