Title       : Support for Upgrade of the Ichthyology Database of the Academy of Natural
               Sciences of Philadelphia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9101852

Award Number: 9101852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135606             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Schaefer   (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Smith-Vaniz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    /   -

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The Ichthyological Collection in the Philadelphia Academy of              
              Natural Sciences contains approximately 1.5 million specimens                  
              representing more than 10,000 species, as well as 12,000 type                  
              specimens.  The collection ranks among the ten largest fish                    
              collections in the western hemisphere, and was the first to                    
              computerize its entire holdings with MUSE, an NSF-supported                    
              database program for microcomputers.  Dr. Scott Schaefer, Curator              
              in charge of the fish collection, proposes to validate the data                
              records entered from early (pre-1954) catalog ledgers.  These                  
              records fail to include many important pieces of information                   
              (locality descriptions, species identifications, specimen                      
              measurements) that are available on the labels attached to the                 
              specimens themselves.  Dr. Schaefer also proposes to standardize               
              the geographic place names in locality records, and to determine               
              latitudes and longitudes of localities wherever possible.  These               
              improvements to the locality records will allow the database                   
              records to be used directly by Geographic Information Systems                  
              (GIS) and other mapping software for biogeographic research.  A                
              modem will be added to the Collection's computer network,                      
              allowing remote dial-in for querying the database.                             
                   The proposed improvements will add significantly to the                   
              research impact of this important collection.  Computerization of              
              natural history collections is proving beneficial to collection                
              management and to research, and the Ichthyology Collection in the              
              Academy of Natural Sciences in Philadelphia continues to show                  
              vision and leadership in this area.
