Title       : Phosphorous Diagenesis and Burial in Marine Sediments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  1992  
File        : a9101495

Award Number: 9101495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185081             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Ruttenberg kruttenberg@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward R. Sholkovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 1670,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Phosphorus is an essential nutrient for biological production                  
              in the ocean.  Diagenetic processing and burial efficiency of P                
              in marine sediments exert a major control on marine                            
              biogeochemical cycles.  Over geologic time, the level of P in                  
              the ocean will be controlled to a large extent by its rate of                  
              burial in marine sediments.  This is crucial to the development                
              of realistic, predictive, biogeochemical models and to the                     
              interpretation of the sedimentary record.  Detailed solid-phase                
              p data, generated using a new selective sequential extraction                  
              (SEDEX) technique, will be collected for a diverse suite of                    
              typical marine environments and one river-estuary-delta system                 
              (the Mississippi).  Phase s responsible for P retention by                     
              marine sediments will be identified by examining solid-phase P                 
              redistribution with depth in sediments in conjunction with pore                
              water and other solid-phase data.  This approach provides                      
              insight into the early diagenetic chemical reactions                           
              responsible for formation and preservation of these phases.                    
              Diagenetic modeling will be used to test interpretations made                  
              on the basis of solid-phase and pore water data and to draw                    
              further conclusions as to rates of the chemical processes                      
              inferred.  Comparison of the quantity and chemical nature of                   
              solid-phase P to pore water gradients over fine-scale (mm)                     
              depth intervals near the sediment-water interface will permit                  
              quantification and characterization of P cycling and burial                    
              efficiency near this interface.  The extent of biogeochemical                  
              processing of particulate P during transit across a particular                 
              continent-ocean interface will be quantified by comparing                      
              solid-phase P speciation in Mississippi River/Estuary suspended                
              matter with that in associated deltaic sediments.  Depositional                
              environmental controls on P burial will be generated from which                
              to construct a global marine P budget.
