Title       : Inorganic Polymer-Derived Ceramic Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1997     
File        : a9101658

Award Number: 9101658
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163960             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. Jeffrey Brinker jbrinker@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas M. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1417      SEPAR & PURIFICATION PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The proposed research program is a collaboration between the                   
              University of New Mexico, Air Products, and Sandia National                    
              Laboratories.  It is aimed at the development of a new class                   
              of ceramic membranes based on inorganic silicate polymers                      
              synthesized be sol-gel processing.  Using concepts of polymer                  
              physics, fractal geometry, and drying theory, the project                      
              develops strategies to tailor the membrane pore diameters                      
              within the range 0.2 - 3.0 nm appropriate for ultrafiltration                  
              and molecular separation of gaseous and liquid mixtures.                       
              Because the membranes are amorphous polymers rather than                       
              polycrystalline solids, the pore size is not limited by                        
              particle size as in normal ceramics.  Moreover, phase                          
              transitions and grain growth are avoided.  The gels and gel-                   
              derived films are characterized by surface acoustic wave                       
              methods, by imaging ellipsometry, and NMR proton spin                          
              relaxation.  Such ceramic membranes have excellent thermal,                    
              chemical, and mechanical stability and can be used in gas                      
              separations and industrial waste treatment.                                    
                                                                                             
              This proposal is jointly supported by NSF and the Electric                     
              Power Research Institute (EPRI), following a special NSF-EPRI                  
              research initiative on polymeric materials.
