Title       : U.S.-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research: Numerical Methodsfor Nonlinear
               Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  1992       
File        : a9101901

Award Number: 9101901
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5250               (Estimated)
Investigator: Jorge Nocedal nocedal@ece.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 5918      FRANCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 2865,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support continued collaborative research in                    
              computer science between Dr. Jorge Nocedal, Northwestern                       
              University, and Dr. Claude LeMarechal, French National                         
              Institute for Information Science and Automation (INRIA). The                  
              main object of the project is the solution of large scale                      
              non-linear optimization problems.                                              
                                                                                             
              One of the most promising approaches in weather forecasting                    
              is the variational assimilation technique, which can be used                   
              to adjust various physical quantities, including the forcing                   
              data.  Its versatility is due to the fact that the physics of                  
              the problem is incorporated both in the cost function and in                   
              the constraints.  The fundamental problem is the determi-                      
              nation of initial conditions for the numerical models.  Since                  
              observations are very sparse, the key idea is to estimate the                  
              unknown observations by means of the nonlinear optimization                    
              code. Once a good set of initial conditions has been                           
              determined, atmospheric and oceanographic forecasting can be                   
              performed by simulation of the dynamical questions.  In this                   
              project, Drs. Nocedal and LeMarechal plan to develop a pilot                   
              code, encompassing algorithmic and theoretical developments                    
              that will be tested on the assimilation problem in meteorology.                
              This program will evolve to incorporate new algorithmic ideas                  
              and will also be applied in the future to two other areas:                     
              crystallography and transonic flow. This project will                          
              benefit from complementary expertise of the two investigators                  
              in the proposed topic of research.
