Title       : Dinuclear Reductive Elimination Reactions of Dimeric Platinum Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  1992      
File        : a9101834

Award Number: 9101834
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon K. Anderson ganderson@umsl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Saint Louis
	      8001 Natural Bridge Road
	      Saint Louis, MO  631214499    314/516-5897

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A series of dimeric platinum complexes containing bridging                     
              (diphenylphosphino)cyclopentadienyl (dppc) ligands will be                     
              prepared and characterized by NMR spectroscopy and X-ray                       
              diffraction.  Dinuclear reductive elimination reactions will                   
              result in carbon-carbon bond formation, and the mechanism(s) of                
              these processes will be investigated using isotopic labeling                   
              and variable temperature NMR techniques.  The dppc-bridged                     
              platinum system will be developed in two ways.  The first will                 
              be to introduce one or more methyl groups onto the cyclopenta-                 
              dienyl ring.  This will enhance the coordinating ability of the                
              ligand and prevent reversible dissociation of the cyclopenta-                  
              dienyl ring, which appears to be a feature of the dinuclear                    
              eliminations.  Secondly, a bis(phosphino)cyclopentadienyl                      
              ligand will be prepared and used to construct homo- and hetero-                
              metallic trimeric and oligomeric complexes.  Where two                         
              different metals are present in a single complex, chemistry                    
              different from that found for either metal alone is expected.                  
              %%%                                                                            
              In this project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organo-                    
              metallic Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Gordon K.                      
              Anderson of the University of Missouri at Saint Louis will                     
              prepare dimeric platinum complexes for use as catalysts in                     
              carbon-carbon bond forming reactions.  This type of reaction is                
              involved in reforming processes and the production of fuels                    
              based on ethylene, methanol, or synthesis gas. In addition,                    
              complexes containing many metal atoms of different elements                    
              will be synthesized for the same purpose.
