Title       : Japan Long-Term Visit: Finite Difference Time Domain Analysis of
               Electromagnetics Interactions with Special Materials and Geometries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1991 
File        : a9101449

Award Number: 9101449
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice Cassidy                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Luebbers lu4@psuvm.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510304   Electron & Energy Sources               
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1455,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a long-term research visit by                          
              Professor Raymond J. Luebbers, Department of Electrical                        
              Engineering, Pennsylvania State University, University Park,                   
              to Japan for a cooperative research project with Professor                     
              Saburo Adachi, Laboratory of Electromagnetics at Tohoku                        
              University, at Sendai.  The researchers will attempt to                        
              extend the applications and analysis capabilities of Finite                    
              Difference Time Domain (FDTD) methods as applied to problems                   
              in electromagnetics.  The FDTD method involves dividing a                      
              computational space into small cells.  The material occupying                  
              each cell may be specified independently.  The simulated                       
              electromagnetic source field is propagated through the                         
              computational space in small time steps.  The electric and                     
              magnetic fields in each cell are computed at each time step.                   
              Other quantities, including voltage, current, Pointing                         
              vector, and energy density are available for each cell at                      
              each time step.  The areas of concentration will include                       
              development of an FDTD antenna modeling capability, assessing                  
              effectiveness of methods used to shield persons and electronic                 
              equipment from electromagnetic waves, improving methods for                    
              analyzing dispersive electric and magnetic materials such as                   
              plasmas, and developing improved methods for modeling and                      
              predicting biological effects of electromagnetic fields.                       
                                                                                             
              The Laboratory of Electromagnetics at Tohoku University is                     
              one of the most highly recognized and prestigious electromag-                  
              netics research institutions in Japan.  Professor Adachi is                    
              internationally recognized as a leader in electromagnetics                     
              research.  Professor Luebbers has been heavily involved in                     
              the area and contributed to the development of FDTD modeling                   
              of dispersive media.  Applications for these improved FDTD                     
              methods include antennas, radar scattering, electromagnetic                    
              performance of dielectric and magnetic materials, electromag-                  
              netic shielding, microwave circuits, fiber optics, and                         
              biological effects.  Since there is an agreement of Academic                   
              Exchange between the Pennsylvania State University and Tohoku                  
              University, it is believed that collaboration between the                      
              researchers will continue beyond the termination of this                       
              formal agreement.
