Title       : Renormalized Electron Propagator Theory: Development, Application and
               Interpretation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1993     
File        : a9101777

Award Number: 9101777
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $173000             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. V. Ortiz   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,9216,
Abstract    :
              With this grant in the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry                 
              Program of the Chemistry Division Professor Ortiz will apply                   
              electron propagator theory to the computation of the electronic                
              structure of small molecules. The computations will aid in the                 
              interpretation of  the electronic structure and bonding of many                
              interesting atomic and molecular systems.                                      
                                                                                             
              Electron propagator theory provides a correlated one-electron                  
              picture of bonding through accurate calculations of electron                   
              binding energies and Feynman-Dyson amplitudes. Improvements to                 
              existing codes will concentrate on propagator renormalizations.                
              Reference state averages will be improved with certain infinite                
              order corrections by employing amplitudes from coupled cluster                 
              singles and doubles calculations. Diagonalization of the                       
              superoperator Hamiltonian matrix with an algorithm based on                    
              inverse iterations will result in operator manifold                            
              renormalizations. Full two-electron transformations will                       
              facilitate calculations on large molecules and interface with                  
              other codes. The dependence of one-electron states and energies                
              on chain length and on local conformations will be explored for                
              polysilane oligomers. Relationships between bond energies and                  
              ionization energies will be studied for half-sandwhich                         
              organometallics. Nonresonant emissions in triatomic radicals                   
              will be considered through calculations of ground and excited                  
              state potential energy surfaces. Explanations for the                          
              stabilities of various double Rydberg anions will be sought                    
              through one electron pictures.
