Title       : Towards Overcoming the Transitive-Closure Bottleneck: Efficient Parallel
               Algorithms for Directed Graphs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1992       
File        : a9101385

Award Number: 9101385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dana S. Richards                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56580              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ming-Yang Kao   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              In parallel computation using parallel random access machines, very            
              few efficient algorithms are known for problems involving directed             
              graphs.  The most demonstrative example of this situation is the               
              problem of directed graph reachability.  In its simplest form, the             
              problem is to test whether a graph contains a directed path from a             
              given vertex to another.  The best sequential algorithms for the               
              problem use simple graph searches and run in optimal linear time.  In          
              contrast, the best known parallel algorithm for the same problem               
              computes the transitive closure of the given graph, and uses a                 
              superlinear number of processors.  Therefore, there is a significant           
              gap between the optimal sequential and the best known parallel                 
              complexities of the problem.  This reliance on transitive closure              
              techniques and the resulting inefficiency are also present in the best         
              known parallel algorithms for many other fundamental problems in               
              directed graph theory.                                                         
              The goal of this project is to remove the complexity bottleneck                
              resulting from this undesirable reliance on transitive                         
              closure techniques.  For fundamental problems on directed graphs,              
              parallel algorithms will be designed that run in polylogarithmic time          
              and use only a linear number of processors, and therefore, achieve an          
              optimal complexity within a polylogarithmic factor.
