Title       : Variations in Fall-Winter Temperatures on Spring ZooplanktonPopulation Dynamics
               and Coupling with Phytoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9101985

Award Number: 9101985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann G. Durbin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward G. Durbin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will examine the hypothesis that the principal                    
              spring biomass peak of the copepod, Acartia hudsonica, is not an               
              immediate response to the winter-spring phytoplankton bloom, but               
              instead reflects processes controlling zooplankton population                  
              dynamics prior to the bloom, and interannual variation in winter               
              and spring temperatures.  Thus the spring biomass peaks of                     
              phytoplankton and zooplankton are not closely coupled in spite of              
              their temporal association.  Model predictions suggest that small              
              variations in temperature significantly affect rates of copepod                
              development and maturation, and the timing and size of the spring              
              zooplankton population peak.  This in turn influences the degree               
              of coupling with phytoplankton and higher trophic levels late in               
              the bloom.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The project combines field and laboratory studies to determine                 
              the influence of seasonally important factors controlling the                  
              population dynamics of the copepod, Acartia hudsonica, and its                 
              coupling to other trophic levels in Narragansett Bay, R.I. The                 
              effect of interannual variation in temperature conditions will be              
              examined in large outdoor mesocosms.  The mesocosm work will be                
              coordinated with a NOAA/Sea Grant funded study of the effect of                
              temperature on growth and survival of larval winter flounder,                  
              Pseudopleuronects americanus.
