Title       : Dissertation Research: netic Analyses of Captive and Wild Populations of Nene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1991    
File        : a9101233

Award Number: 9101233
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13542              (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth H. Rave  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1127      SYSTEMATIC & POPULATION BIOLO
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The nene, or Hawaiian goose, underwent a severe population                     
              bottleneck during the early part of this century.  To increase                 
              numbers, two captive propagation programs began in Pohakuloa,                  
              Hawaii and Slimbridge, England.  After initial inbreeding                      
              depressions, the programs became productive,although population                
              reintroduced into the wild have not been self-sustaining.                      
              Several reductions in population size can result in reduced                    
              genetic variability and increased inbreeding. Molecular genetic                
              methods such as DNA fingerprinting can be used to assess this                  
              genetic variation and can identify relatedness of individuals                  
              within populations.  Results from DNA fingerprinting in captive                
              nene indicate a low level of genetic diversity.  Detailed                      
              pedigrees from the captive breeding stocks were used to calculate              
              coancestry coefficients, and these were found to be correlated                 
              with band sharing coefficients from DNA fingerprinting analyses.               
              Both conancestry and band sharing coefficients in captive birds                
              will be compared to measures of reproductive success to assess                 
              levels of inbreeding depression.  Similar analyses will be                     
              conducted for wild pairs of nene on the islands of Hawaii and                  
              Maui, with the hope that decreased levels of inbreeding and                    
              increased level of reproductive success exist.
