Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Real and Complex Analysis on Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  1992  
File        : a9101104

Award Number: 9101104
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven G. Krantz sk@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigator will continue                  
              working on three problems involving real and complex analysis on               
              domains.  The first problem concerns an examination of function                
              spaces designed for boundary value problems for partial                        
              differential operators defined on domains in real Euclidean                    
              space.  The second problem concerns the study of automorphism                  
              groups of domains in complex n-space and how their group-                      
              theoretic properties are determined by the geometry of the                     
              boundary of the domain.  The third problem concerns various                    
              subproblems in the function theory of several complex variables;               
              to wit, boundary uniqueness theorems for holomorphic mappings,                 
              biholomorphic exhaustions of domains by other domains, and the                 
              boundary behavior of holomorphic functions.                                    
                   Complex analysis is one of the oldest branches of modern                  
              mathematics.  The principal objects of study in complex analysis               
              are functions with special properties called holomorphic or                    
              analytic functions.  Holomorphic functions are capable of                      
              expressing relationships and equivalences between complex                      
              quantities in two or more space dimensions.  In this project the               
              principal investigator will study the behavior of holomorphic                  
              functions at the boundaries of their domains of definition.  The               
              boundary behavior of holomorphic functions is very often the most              
              interesting (and difficult|) aspect of the theory.
