Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Bifurcation and Symmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9101836

Award Number: 9101836
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Golubitsky mg@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Melbourne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The investigators continue studies of the effect                          
              that symmetry has on the solutions of differential equations.                  
              Three particular topics are the stability of heteroclinic                      
              cycles (which is related to the existence of intermittency and                 
              bursting phenomena), the symmetry of chaotic attractors (which                 
              may be related to some of the distinctive patterns observed in                 
              turbulent fluid flow), and the coupling of gauge and spatial                   
              symmetries (such as occurs in the Ginzburg-Landau model for                    
              superconductivity).  They will also attempt to relate their                    
              results to specific experiments.  They believe that both the                   
              bursting phenomena associated with heteroclinic cycles and the                 
              symmetry-increasing bifurcations of chaotic attractors have                    
              been observed in the Couette-Taylor experiment; part of their                  
              work will be to make these connections more precise.                           
                   Many models of physical phenomena including topics as                     
              diverse as the transition from conduction to convection in fluid               
              dynamics and the ways in which animals walk contain symmetries in              
              their formulation.  These symmetries are known to influence the                
              kinds of solutions that are found in such models.  Most previous               
              work has focused on the kinds of equilibria and periodic                       
              solutions that appear.  This project undertakes to broaden the                 
              class of solutions that are studied to include such topics as                  
              chaos and intermittency in symmetric systems.  Recent research                 
              and experiments indicate that this is both reasonable and                      
              tractable.
