Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of Habitat Selection Behavior in Mediating
               Trophic Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1991       
File        : a9101389

Award Number: 9101389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : April 30,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5400               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary G. Mittelbach Mittelbach@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew M. Turner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An understanding of how consumers choose among habitats is                     
              essential to predicting community level responses to predator and              
              resource manipulations.  Current models predict individual                     
              habitat choice when mortality risk and feeding rates vary among                
              habitats, but do not incorporate dynamic resources.  This study                
              will extend these models to include resource dynamics, showing                 
              how the distribution of consumers among habitats is dependent on               
              mortality risk and resource productivity.                                      
                                                                                             
              Specifically, the response of consumers and resources to predator              
              and nutrient manipulations in simple, two habitat, experimental                
              systems will be tested.  In these systems, small bluegills                     
              (Lepomis macrochirus) are free to move between paired                          
              experimental pools, but their predators, largemouth bass                       
              (Micropterus salmoides) are confined to specific pools.  These                 
              pools also contain self-supporting populations of zooplankton                  
              (the bluegill's resource).  The research will address the                      
              following specific questions: 1) Under the situation where                     
              consumers can choose among habitats with differing mortality                   
              risks and self-renewing resources, do consumers use habitats                   
              optimally, 2) How does the portion of the consumer population in               
              each habitat vary with varying resource productivity, and 3) What              
              are the consequences of consumer habitat choice to resource                    
              dynamics within habitats?  These studies provide the first                     
              empirical test of  theory linking the behavior of habitat                      
              selection to its consequences for community dynamics.
