Title       : Research Experiences for Undergraduates SITE at Mechanical and Aerospace
               Engineering Department, Syracuse University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1991       
File        : a9101145

Award Number: 9101145
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sue Kemnitzer                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darshan S. Dosanjh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1360      HUMAN RESOURCES DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0105000   Manpower & Training                     
              50        Engineering                             
Program Ref : 9250,
Abstract    :
              The Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department at Syracuse                
              University plans to award research stipends to motivated and                   
              academically superior engineering undergraduates who have completed            
              their junior year studies.  The program has both the summer and                
              academic year components.  Each year, five of the eight REU                    
              participants are selected for summer research participation from               
              applicants from colleges and universities other than Syracuse                  
              University.  The remaining three students are selected for summer              
              research participation from the seniors in Mechanical and Aerospace            
              Engineering at Syracuse University.  A particular focus of                     
              recruitment effort is to attract qualified participants from                   
              minority, women, and physically disabled students, both from within            
              and without Syracuse.  Six faculty members in the Mechanical and               
              Aerospace Engineering Department have expressed active interest in             
              supervising the research efforts of the participants.  The areas               
              in which these faculty members are actively engaged in research                
              span experimental and computational fluid mechanics, gasdynamics,              
              aerodynamics, heat transfer, aeroacoustics, noise control,                     
              composite materials, and mechanical behavior of fibrous materials.             
              A REU participant may select a research problem in any one of these            
              research areas.  For faculty supervision, research participant's               
              choice of a research project and faculty supervisor's field of                 
              specialization will be matched.
