Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Chloroplast Enslavement in Marine Oligotrich
               Ciliates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1991 
File        : a9101759

Award Number: 9101759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45600              (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Dolan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
              40        Environmental Sciences                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1650,
Abstract    :
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Chloroplast Enslavement in                       
              Marine Oligotrich Ciliates                                                     
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Program for Long-& Medium Term                         
              Research at Foreign Centers of Excellence, which enables                       
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve                       
              months of research abroad at research centers of proven                        
              excellence.  The program's awards provide opportunities for                    
              joint research, and the use of unique or complementary                         
              facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad.                      
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research                   
              visit by Dr. John Dolan with Fereidoun Rassoulzadegan,                         
              Director of Research at the Station Zoologique, Villefranche-                  
              sur-Mer, France.  The researchers will focus on the oligotrich                 
              ciliates which often dominate marine microzoplankton                          
              communities, about which recent work has shown a large                         
              fraction (. 1/3) are mixotrophic; that is, in addition to                      
              herbivory they use photosynthate produced by chloroplasts                      
              sequestered from ingested algae.  The researchers propose to                   
              use field work and laboratory work to ask what large-scale                     
              environmental properties influence the abundance of these                      
              forms and what cellular mechanisms may be involved in                          
              chloroplast enslavement.  Field work will examine the                          
              variability of mixotrophic oligotrichs in relation to                          
              changes in the abundance of autotrophic nanoplankton, light,                   
              and heterotrophic competitors.  Laboratory work will                           
              investigate cellular mechanisms.  The postulate that a                         
              chemical cue, derived from the algae source of chloroplasts,                   
              modifies the normal course of food vacuole processing is                       
              justified.  A set of experiments designed to locate the                        
              chemical cue and examine the effect of the state of the                        
              source algae as well as the state of the oligotrich is                         
              outlined.  The study will add significantly to knowledge of                    
              how some plankters survive in nutritionally dilute environ-                    
              ments and also will further understanding of the cellular                      
              mechanisms involved with symbiosis.                                            
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a dependents' allowance.
