Title       : Plasma Polymers for the Optimization of Metal-Polymer Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1991      
File        : a9101723

Award Number: 9101723
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1991     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hirotsugu Yasuda yasudah@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earl J. Charlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine M. Charlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1403,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a research project jointly funded by the Electric                      
              Power Research Institute (EPRI) and the National Science                       
              Foundation (NSF).  Since the 1960's, polyethylene-insulated                    
              cable rated for 15 to 35 KV service has been used extensively                  
              to provide underground service to residences.  Polyethylene is                 
              inexpensive, is easily spliced and terminated and has very                     
              good dielectric properties.  Such polyethylene-insulated                       
              cables often fail before the expected 40 year lifetime.                        
              Examination of insulation from failed underground cables                       
              frequently reveals the presence of diffuse bush- or fan-like                   
              structures which develop only in the presence of water.  These                 
              structures, know as "water trees", are usually in the 0.1 to                   
              1.0 mm size range, consist of a collection of voids and                        
              originate at the interface between the insulation and another                  
              material.  Plasma polymerization refers to the formation of                    
              polymeric materials from the plasma state of a gas or monomer                  
              at low pressure (vacuum).  The resulting materials are                         
              significantly different from most conventional polymers.                       
              Plasma polymerization is system dependent and a variety of                     
              polymeric materials including diamond, graphite, carbonaceous                  
              films, to polystyrene-like films can be prepared using plasma                  
              polymerization of styrene.  The key factor which determines                    
              the properties of the material which results is the design of                  
              the plasma polymerization reactor.                                             
                                                                                             
              This research project is a fundamental investigation of the                    
              potential use of plasma polymerized films (plasma polymers)                    
              for the optimization of metal-polymer interfaces which are                     
              relevant to application in electric power cables.  The study                   
              is focussed on three major objectives: (1) improvement of the                  
              moisture barrier characteristics of jackets and primary                        
              insulators, (2) improved corrosion protection of the center                    
              conductor and neutral, and (3) development of a                                
              triboelectrically graded interface to minimize breakdown due                   
              to charge injection.  The work involves studies of the basic                   
              phenomena associated with the metal-polymer interface, such as                 
              adhesion, and water and/or electrical-treeing.
