Title       : Distribution and Geochemical Cycling of Cerium and Cobalt inthe Upper Water
               Column
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1992  
File        : a9101497

Award Number: 9101497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217153             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. Moffett jmoffett@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Derek W. Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a study of the oxidation and reduction chemistry of the                
              trace elements Co and Ce in the upper marine water column to                   
              evaluate the role redox processes play in their geochemistries.                
              Existing data suggest that both elements have similar upper                    
              water column distributions and undergo similar redox                           
              transformations analogous to Mn in seawater.  Particularly,                    
              all three elements frequently exhibit surface concentration                    
              maxima.  For Mn this has been partially attributed to a dynamic                
              photochemical/microbial redox cycle, although the relative                     
              importance of redox and non-redox processes are not known.                     
              Measurements of redox and adsorption kinetics made at ambient                  
              levels in the field will be incorporated into an upper ocean                   
              scavenging model for these elements and compared with actual                   
              distributions to evaluate the importance of the redox                          
              reactions.  Non-redox processes for Ce will be constrained by                  
              following its non-redox reactive neighbor lanthanides                          
              simultaneously.  Ce and Co will be studied comparatively to                    
              determine how the role of Co as a biologically essential                       
              element (cf. Ce) influences its upper water column geochemistry                
              and distribution.
