Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotically Holomorphic Functions and Certain of Their
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1992       
File        : a9101788

Award Number: 9101788
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Brennan   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander L. Volberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   In this project the principal investigators will continue                 
              their study of what are called "asymptotically holomorphic" (AH)               
              functions.  AH functions are smooth functions that share many of               
              the uniqueness properties of true holomorphic functions.                       
              Specifically the principal investigators will establish certain                
              unifying results based upon a general Phragmen-Lindelof principle              
              for AH functions and upon the idea of a generalized Fourier-                   
              Carleman transform.                                                            
                   Asymptotically holomorphic (AH) functions are a recent                    
              generalization of holomorphic (i.e., analytic) functions that                  
              arise naturally in connection with problems in approximation                   
              theory, harmonic analysis and dynamical systems theory.  In this               
              project the principal investigators will extend our knowledge of               
              AH functions and at the same time, examine further applications                
              of these functions in the three areas just mentioned.  The                     
              researchers are working currently on a monograph that will make                
              these important ideas available to a wide audience. ***//
