Title       : Japan JSPS Program: "Polymeric Micelles: A New Molecular Architecture for in
               Vivo Drug Carriers"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 26,  1992       
File        : a9101850

Award Number: 9101850
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9220               (Estimated)
Investigator: Sung Wan Kim   (Principal Investigator current)
              Glen S. Kwon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              62        Life Science Clinical Medical           
Program Ref : 5959,
Abstract    :
              This award will provide supplementary support                                  
              to enable Dr. Glen Kwon of the University of                                   
              Utah to conduct collaborative research with Dr.                                
              Teruo Okano for 16 months at the Institute of                                  
              Biomedical Engineering, Tokyo Women's Medical                                  
              College, in Tokyo, Japan.  Kwon and Okano will                                 
              apply Kwon's knowledge of polymeric                                            
              microspheres and controlled delivery systems to                                
              conduct research on polymeric micelles as a                                    
              drug carrier for adriamycin.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Colloidal drug carriers, such as polymeric                                     
              microspheres, liposomes, and soluble polymeric                                 
              carriers, have been developed to increase the                                  
              efficacy of drug action in vivo.  The                                          
              disadvantages of these systems, however,                                       
              preclude their ability to increase the                                         
              therapeutic index of many drugs.  A new drug                                   
              carrier synthesized of polymeric micelles has                                  
              been developed in Japan and has proven to                                      
              increase the efficiency of adriamycin without                                  
              the problems associated with the other methods.                                
                                                                                             
              Leading-edge research on polymeric micelle drug                                
              delivery systems is advancing quickly in Japan,                                
              and Okano's laboratory is one of the best.                                     
              Kwon's knowledge of pharmaceutics and                                          
              controlled drug delivery systems involving                                     
              proteins and polypeptides complements Okano's                                  
              expertise in synthesizing polymeric micelles.                                  
              This collaborative research will provide Kwon                                  
              with first-hand knowledge of the Japanese                                      
              approach to novel polymer synthesis methods and                                
              applications of biomaterials as drug carriers.
