Title       : Interannual Variability of Tropical Climate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1993     
File        : a9101097

Award Number: 9101097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Herman Zimmerman                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1991       
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $369387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stefan L. Hastenrath slhasten@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 5740      CLIMATE DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 1577,
Abstract    :
                   This research project seeks to extend and broaden a study                 
              concerned with the general-circulation functioning of tropical                 
              climate anomalies and leads from diagnostics to prediction.  The               
              approach is primarily empirical, but is being combined with GCM                
              applications.  The project shall over the next few years                       
              concentrate on (a) climate prediction for selected "targets of                 
              opportunity", (b) the relation of convection to surface                        
              temperature variations on the scale of the global tropics, (c)                 
              interannual and decadal-scale variations in the Indian Ocean                   
              monsoon systems, and (d) the South Atlantic Convergence Zone.                  
                   (a) Climate prediction methods of high performance have been              
              developed for Northeast Brazil rainfall and Guyana river                       
              discharge.  In collaboration with local colleagues it is intended              
              to bring these to operational application.  Other "targets of                  
              opportunity" include the West African Sahel, the costal regions                
              of Eastern Africa, and the Parana river catchment of southern                  
              South America.  (b) Interannual variations of convective patterns              
              over the global tropics shall be studied in relation to the                    
              varying surface temperature conditions, using a combination of                 
              novel surface, upper-air, and satellite-derived datasets;                      
              empirical analyses shall be complemented by GCM experiments.  (c)              
              Variations in the Indian Ocean monsoon systems shall be studied                
              with particular attention to eastern Africa, where rainy seasons               
              fall into transitions in the planetary-scale annual cycle.  (d)                
              The South Atlantic Convergence Zone is well developed in austral               
              summer when it plays an important role in the rainfall regime of               
              southern America.  A combination of novel data banks invites a                 
              comprehensive diagnostic investigation.  The project components                
              are interrelated.  Thus, analyses of convection and surface                    
              temperature in the global tropics (b) also serve two regional                  
              diagnostic studies (c and d), which in turn create firmer                      
              foundations for prediction (a).                                                
                   This research is important because it seeks to provide an                 
              improved understanding of climate processes in the tropics, an                 
              area of the globe that has strong influence on the weather and                 
              climate over the remainder of our planet.
