Title       : New Teaching Technologies in Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1992      
File        : a9250502

Award Number: 9250502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24906              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerard P. Gilfoyle ggilfoyl@richmond.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael F. Vineyard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Richmond
	      
	      Richmond, VA  23173    804/289-8100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The rapid development of computer power is shifting the focus                  
              of undergraduate science teaching away from reproduction of                    
              prescribed procedures to observing, investigating, and even                    
              discovering physical laws.  This project is using the                          
              analytical tools that were once available only to the research                 
              scientist, and that can now be used by undergraduates to                       
              visualize data and mathematical functions, to broaden the range                
              of problems accessible to them, and to develop model-building                  
              and simulation skills.  Also, the computer has itself become an                
              integral part of nearly all scientific instrumentation and its                 
              use must be included in the modern physics curriculum.The                      
              project is being implemented by developing a computing                         
              laboratory using the software packages Mathematica (for                        
              visualization and computational power), LabView (a data                        
              acquisition and analysis code), and LogicWorks and PSPlCE                      
              (electronics simulation codes).  The codes are being run on                    
              Macintosh IIci computers using computer interfaces and                         
              associated hardware from National Instruments.The Department of                
              Physics of the University of Richmond is applying these new                    
              technologies to the introductory course program and are now                    
              being extended to the upper-division courses.  Quantum                         
              mechanics is one of most mathematically foreboding courses                     
              undergraduates face.  The laboratory is enabling students to                   
              experiment graphically and symbolically and to investigate the                 
              science more deeply.  We are also incorporating modern                         
              simulation and data acquisition and analysis techniques into                   
              our two-semester electronics sequence.  The students are                       
              learning to transform physical measurements into electrical                    
              signals, process the signals, and collect them with the                        
              computer.  They are using simulation software to design,                       
              develop, and test circuits.
