Title       : Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science, Math and Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1997   
File        : a9250062

Award Number: 9250062
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9696493            (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Richardson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert M. McNamara  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank J. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Robert Prigo  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Laura Gonyeau  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Maura O. Carlson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : VT State Dept of Educ
	      120 State St
	      Montpelier, VT  056022703    802/828-3333

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The Vermont Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science, Math                     
              and Technology is a collaborative project between five                         
              sectors:  education, business, higher education, government,                   
              and the community at large to increase the mathematics,                        
              science and technology performance of all students.  In                        
              order to carry out this project, the Vermont State Board of                    
              Education and the Agency for Development and Community                         
              Affairs will jointly establish the Vermont Institute for                       
              Mathematics, Science and Technology.                                           
                                                                                             
              A two-pronged approach will couple school-based change                         
              efforts with state policy initiatives.  Major components                       
              include:                                                                       
                                                                                             
              1.   A statewide Science/Mathematics/Technology (S/M/T)                        
                   working curriculum framework to guide local curriculum                    
                   development, professional development, and assessment.                    
                                                                                             
              2.   Intensive professional development for teachers through                   
                   summer institutes, year-round support and a variety of                    
                   other professional development strategies.                                
                                                                                             
              3.   Redesigning college science, mathematics and technology                   
                   courses to strengthen practical training for new                          
                   teachers, and developing alterative pathways for second                   
                   career S/M/T teachers.                                                    
                                                                                             
              4.   Developing a statewide, integrated strategy for                           
                   Science/Mathematics/Technology performance assessments                    
                   that build on Vermont's existing assessment of student                    
                   work through mathematics and writing portfolios.                          
                                                                                             
              5.   Creating a statewide S/M/T telecomputing network                          
                   linking schools, representatives from business, and                       
                   higher education.
