Title       : Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science and Mathematics Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 15,  1998     
File        : a9250052

Award Number: 9250052
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Gerald E. Gipp                          
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Manuel Gomez m_gomez@upr1.upr.clu.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Julio E. Lopez Ferrao  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Carmen L. De Oliva  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Diana Rivera  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Federico Matheu  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative in Science and                   
              Mathematics Education is a joint venture between the Puerto                    
              Rico Department of Education, the Resource Center for                          
              Science and Engineering, and the Puerto Rico General Council                   
              of Education to revise its science and mathematics                             
              curriculum in grades K-12.  This collaboration provides a                      
              method to link expertise in science and mathematics                            
              education, institutions of higher education, and policy                        
              initiatives to systemically alter Puerto Rico's educational                    
              system.                                                                        
                                                                                             
              The project will:                                                              
                                                                                             
              1.   Revise science and mathematics curriculum focused on                      
                   students' cognitive skills and depth of scientific                        
                   understanding.                                                            
                                                                                             
              2.   Revise teacher preparation curriculum to upgrade                          
                   subject matter understanding and instructional methods.                   
                                                                                             
              3.   Promote parent and community involvement in school                        
                   improvement efforts.                                                      
                                                                                             
              4.   Develop, pilot, and adopt new assessment methods                          
                   consistent with revised curriculum materials and                          
                   instructional practices.                                                  
                                                                                             
              5.   Establish and measure island-wide standards of                            
                   excellence in science and mathematics education.                          
                                                                                             
              Twenty-one model schools (one elementary, middle, and                          
              secondary school in each of the Commonwealth's seven                           
              geographic regions) will be the vehicles for testing and                       
              disseminating the reforms.  They will serve as regional                        
              centers for ten additional schools.  By the year 2000, all                     
              1,600 schools in Puerto Rico will have restructured their                      
              science and mathematics education programs.
