Title       : Protein Chemistry in the Undergraduate Biochemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1992       
File        : a9250345

Award Number: 9250345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26946              (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. Hartsel hartsesc@uwec.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thao Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jack R. Pladziewicz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Warren H. Gallagher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Eau Claire
	      Park & Garfield
	      Eau Claire, WI  54701    715/836-2637

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project gives biochemistry/molecular biology and chemistry                
              students experience in modern protein/peptide synthesis and                    
              purification techniques as part of a two-semester laboratory                   
              sequence.  The methods incorporated into the revision are fast                 
              protein liquid chromatography (FPLC), peptide synthesis and                    
              high speed gradient centrifugation.  In the first semester                     
              students learn all of the basic biochemical methods through a                  
              unified sequence of experiments on a single, well characterized                
              protein, cytochrome c.  The second-semester course allows                      
              students to use the techniques learned in a more independent                   
              exploration of biochemical problems.  Students aid in the                      
              design, synthesis, isolation and characterization of a                         
              bioactive peptide.  Throughout the sequence, students use                      
              modern methods of biochemical information retrieval and                        
              analysis in their projects.  The ultimate goal of this course                  
              sequence is to bring advanced students to the point of being                   
              able to define a problem, assess what is currently known, adapt                
              a published procedure, do related original work and summarize                  
              their results in a professional technical report.
