Title       : An Innovative Engineering Materials Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1992 
File        : a9250461

Award Number: 9250461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1995        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70749              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jed S. Lyons lyons@engr.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walter H. Peters  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elmer G. Schwartz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
               In order for mechanical engineers to make informed choices                    
              with respect to material selection they need a solid                           
              understanding of the relationships between material structures,                
              properties, and processing.  To accomplish this objective, an                  
              undergraduate Engineering Materials course has been                            
              restructured and student-conducted laboratory experiments have                 
              been added.  The unique approach taken in the laboratory is                    
              first to select representative materials from each of the three                
              basic classes of materials (metals, ceramics, and polymers),                   
              and then concurrently characterize these materials with a                      
              series of experiments which include microstructure morphology                  
              determination, microconstituent properties, bulk mechanical                    
              properties, and the effects of processing on structure and                     
              properties.  By following the same set of materials through the                
              same sequence of experiments, the students will more easily                    
              grasp the concepts of structure-property interrelationships.                   
              The result will be graduates who are more capable of making                    
              intelligent materials selection decisions for design                           
              applications. The project provides devices for examining and                   
              characterizing the materials on a microstructural scale, a                     
              uniaxial test machine, equipment for studying time-dependent                   
              deformation, and state-of-the-art data acquisition systems.
