Title       : Undergraduate Controls Experiences Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9250179

Award Number: 9250179
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Lewis flewis@controls.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Fitzer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Control of today's multi-input/multi-output robotic,                           
              manufacturing, aerospace, etc., processes requires modern                      
              control algorithms and multichannel digital signal processors                  
              (DSP).  It is important that undergraduates participate in some                
              laboratory experiences in DSP real-time digital control.                       
              However, it is difficult to learn basic controls implementation                
              as well as the programming and structure of DSPs in one                        
              laboratory course.A project being developed at the UTA                         
              Automation and Robotics Research Institute (ARRI) allows                       
              seamless integration of the TI TMS320 C30 DSP with Labview                     
              software.  Currently the DSP interface is not seamless, but                    
              requires one to learn Labview as well as the DSP operation -                   
              this is not possible in a one semester laboratory course.The                   
              ARRI DSP/Labview interface will allow Labview to be utilized in                
              real-time controls as it has been in signal processing, and                    
              will be available to institutions nationwide.  It will allow                   
              the DSP to be treated as the operational amplifier is now                      
              treated in continuous-time control, making it possible to use                  
              the device without knowing the details of its operation.  The                  
              data passing, sampling, etc., processes will reside as virtual                 
              instruments (VI) in Labview.  In a laboratory course, the                      
              controller VI is selected and its coefficients set by the user.                
              Advanced use in a project laboratory allows the implementation                 
              of sophisticated control algorithms by writing simple C                        
              programs without worrying about the DSP protocol.  ARRI was                    
              recently funded by a Texas ATP grant to develop the DSP/Labview                
              interface.  This ILI grant will allow porting of that                          
              technology to a prototype undergraduate controls laboratory by                 
              purchase of four MAC/Labview stations.
