Title       : Hypermedia Laboratory Classroom
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1992 
File        : a9250411

Award Number: 9250411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $33124              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl R. Nave RodNave@gsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              In the laboratory/classroom in use here, the students (pre-                    
              service and in-service teachers) have before them the entire                   
              course content from the first day of class.  In hypertext form                 
              guided by concept maps, the student are able to freely navigate                
              through the course material and use the aids there to do                       
              numerical calculations, examine illustrations and simulations,                 
              and of course find discussion of the relevant concepts.  The                   
              HyperCard stacks on a Macintosh computer are projected on a                    
              screen to form the basis for lecture and discussion in the                     
              class, enabling the student to have the same illustrations and                 
              calculations in front of them.  With two students to a machine,                
              class members choose to follow along or do independent                         
              calculations or explorations, knowing they are able to merge                   
              back with the track of the lecturer at any time.  Laboratory                   
              exercises are integrated as a part of almost every session, and                
              the versatile laboratory interface plus spreadsheet and                        
              graphics software allow the students to analyze and present                    
              data in an atmosphere typical of modern research facilities.                   
              The HyperCard knowledge base is accessible to the student at                   
              any point during the laboratory, containing not only detailed                  
              information about lab equipment and procedure, but also links                  
              to the classroom material for review of concepts.  This project                
              has equipped the multimedia laboratory classroom needed to                     
              implement this instructional strategy on a pilot basis with                    
              this target group and to lay the base for expanding this                       
              approach to other undergraduate courses.
