Title       : Influences on Preservice Teachers' Instructional Decision Making
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1998      
File        : a9250044

Award Number: 9250044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Haver                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1077180            (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl A. Lubinski   (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert D. Otto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly S. Rich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois State University
	      North and School Streets
	      Normal, IL  61790    309/438-2111

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Illinois State University seeks funds to develop a model                       
              mathematics program for elementary teachers grades K-6, both                   
              preservice and inservice, focusing on the cognitive guided                     
              instruction approach to instruction.  Teams of experienced                     
              teachers will be selected and prepared in CGI for a year and                   
              these teachers will establish learning environments in their                   
              classrooms that reflect current research findings on how                       
              children learn mathematics.  Subsequently, these teachers and                  
              new teams will work with preservice teachers in mathematics                    
              and mathematics education required coursework and school-based                 
              experiences.  The preservice teachers will be in seminars                      
              together with the inservice teachers.  These seminars will                     
              address teaching and learning as related to problem solving                    
              with understanding in the topic areas of the Curriculum and                    
              Evaluation Standards  of the National Council of Teachers of                   
              Mathematics.  The preservice teachers will be studied in the                   
              research component of the project as they become new teachers                  
              and are followed by the proposers into their own teaching                      
              years throughout the duration of the project.  The College of                  
              Education and the Department of Mathematics are collaborating                  
              in the implementation of this program together with school                     
              systems in the area.                                                           
                                                                                             
              The contribution of Illinois State University accounts for 22%                 
              of the NSF budget.
