Title       : New Mexico Science and Math Systemic Challenge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1998     
File        : a9250024

Award Number: 9250024
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Gerald E. Gipp                          
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10004627           (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Colton   (Principal Investigator former)
              Pedro Atencio  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Michael A. Wartell  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              New Mexico will foster systemic change which improves mathematics              
              and science education in New Mexico's K - 8 public schools.  The               
              systemic change will be based on the Re:learning model of school-              
              based reform and will incorporate new content, pedagogy and                    
              assessment in mathematics and science.  The project will:                      
                                                                                             
              1.   establish a state-level Council of stakeholders to provide                
                   guidance and oversight for systemic change activities;                    
                                                                                             
              2.   establish regional technical assistance centers whose staffs              
                   will work directly with K-8 schools in implementing systemic              
                   change;                                                                   
                                                                                             
              3.   initiate staff development programs in approximately 90                   
                   elementary and middle schools in each year of the program,                
                   with each school participating in a two-year program of                   
                   summer and academic year staff development activities guided              
                   by the Re:Learning model of school-based change;                          
                                                                                             
              4.   assist in the development/dissemination of state standards,               
                   assessment systems, teacher licensure requirements, and                   
                   staff development policies which are aligned with the                     
                   standards being prepared by the NCTM, NSTA, and AAAS;                     
                                                                                             
              5.   support post-secondary curriculum reforms and community                   
                   organizations initiatives which are consistent with (4)                   
                   above;                                                                    
                                                                                             
              6.   encourage the engagement of resources and programs which                  
                   support the other objectives of the systemic initiative;                  
                                                                                             
              7.   create the conditions needed to reduce the performance gaps               
                   typically associated with gender and ethnicity in math and                
                   science performance; and                                                  
                                                                                             
              8.   evaluate annual progress in meeting these goals.                          
               ***
