Title       : Significance of Exosporium Enclosure of Parasporal Inclusions of Bacillus
               thuringiensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1992     
File        : a9250086

Award Number: 9250086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eve Ida Barak                           
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11994              (Estimated)
Investigator: LaJoyce H. Debro ldebro@jsucc.jsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jacksonville State Univ
	      North Pelham Road
	      Jacksonville, AL  36265    205/435-9820

NSF Program : 1134      FUNCTINL ORGANIZATN & DYNAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9136,
Abstract    :
                 Bacillus thuringiensis is a Gram-positive sporulating bacterium             
              that produces large amounts of sporulation specific proteins.                  
              These proteins accumulate as parasporal inclusions and are                     
              protoxins with selective activity for insect larvae.  Generally,               
              the inclusion is deposited outside the exosporium and is released              
              into the environment separately from the spore.  In subspecies                 
              finitimus, however, the inclusion and the spore share the common               
              exosporium and are released together.  The exosporium is more                  
              hydrophobic than the spore (Koshikawa et al., 1989), and exosporium            
              enclosed inclusions are expected to be more hydrophobic than free              
              inclusions.  The availability of protoxins to susceptible larvae               
              may be dependent upon the hydrophobicity of the inclusions.                    
              Subspecies israelensis produces inclusions composed of protoxins               
              active on mosquito larvae.  The inclusions of israelensis are                  
              released separately from the spore and are probably hydrophilic and            
              not readily available to these larvae in nature. If the inclusions             
              of israelensis were enclosed within the exosporium, then the                   
              protoxin should be more accessible and thus a more effective                   
              biological control agent.  The aims of the preliminary planning                
              study are to determine the effects of the exosporium on the                    
              hydrophobicity of parasporal inclusions, and to determine the                  
              feasibility of engineering, by genetic techniques, the protoxin of             
              israelensis inside an exosporium.                                              
              %%%                                                                            
              This is a planning study to determine the feasibility of developing            
              a biological insecticide effective against mosquito larvae.  The               
              approach is to take advantage of natural antilarval proteins                   
              produced by a bacterium in the course of sporulation.  Mosquito-               
              borne diseases of man and other animals represent an extremely                 
              significant world health and economic problem, particularly in the             
              third world; one alone, malaria, is the number one cause of                    
              childhood mortality in the world.  Chemical insecticides are not               
              only unattractive because of their toxicity to animals and the                 
              environment, but they are becoming less and less effective as                  
              insects increasingly develop resistance to them.  This research on             
              biological pest control is therefore of great significance to both             
              human health and the environment.
