Title       : Development of a Rapid Prototyping Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9250614

Award Number: 9250614
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Surendra K. Gupta skgeme@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Sias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Hefner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              P. Venkataraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas R. Cleminshaw  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Engineering and industrial design students at the Rochester                    
              Institute of Technology are developing their design projects                   
              using stereolithographic techniques for rapid prototyping.                     
              With stereolithography, students build mock-ups of their                       
              designs, evaluate their fit, style, and capabilities, and make                 
              modifications and changes quickly and inexpensively.  This                     
              allows the development of a design project through its most                    
              critical phase - the transformation from a concept to a three-                 
              dimensional CAD model, and then to a prototype for testing and                 
              evaluation - enhancing the creative and productive capabilities                
              of the students.  The three-dimensional model is obtained using                
              existing computer-aided design and drafting (CADD) systems.                    
              Students experiment with models they design and build using the                
              flow visualization equipment in a wind tunnel, in projects in                  
              their fluid mechanics and aerospace courses.  In other design                  
              courses, stereolithography allows iterative modifications of                   
              designs.  Industrial Design students make complex physical                     
              parts for evaluation.  With stereolithography, they can explore                
              unusual and creative designs with graceful, sweeping shapes,                   
              smooth bends, and rounded corners.
