Title       : An Interdisciplinary Design and Manufacturing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1992      
File        : a9250928

Award Number: 9250928
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51262              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Beck   (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary Rhoades  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael V. Coler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas St Col Sweetwater
	      300 College Drive
	      Sweetwater, TX  79556    915/235-7333

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project establishes an interdisciplinary laboratory for                   
              the education of manufacturing engineering technicians,                        
              robotics technicians, and drafting/design technicians in a                     
              realistic, collaborative environment.  The laboratory involves                 
              a CAD-based advanced prototype design and production system                    
              involving participation by students from all three disciplines.                
              In this interaction, students from the different programs                      
              collaborate on the design, prototyping, and manufacture of                     
              discrete parts.  The equipment used includes a computer-                       
              controlled system utilizing a ultra-violet laser and photo-                    
              sensitive resin to produce accurate prototypes of parts from                   
              CAD drawings.  Additional equipment allows these prototypes to                 
              be measured and refined and then used to reconfigure an                        
              existing factory laboratory to manufacture the parts.  As a                    
              result of this lab, students in the three disciplines gain                     
              knowledge in the use of advanced prototype production equipment                
              and, more importantly, in how the different disciplines must                   
              interact and collaborate in an industrial setting.  Thus, the                  
              proposed laboratory improvement upgrades the education of                      
              technical and engineering students in the different                            
              disciplines, and provides a model for how those disciplines can                
              and should interact in order to prepare those students                         
              realistically and effectively for careers in an industrial                     
              environment.
