Title       : Laser Demonstration and Experiment Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9250289

Award Number: 9250289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ruth H. Howes                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $47559              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen H. Cobb steve.cobb@murraystate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Tarvin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louis M. Beyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Murray State University
	      Main Street
	      Murray, KY  42071    270/762-3537

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of the proposed laboratory is two-fold:  1) to                     
              enhance and enrich the content of the existing curriculum                      
              through the demonstration of physical principles by optical and                
              laser techniques;  and 2) to enable the introduction of two new                
              laboratory courses focusing on laser fundamentals and their                    
              various applications.  A well equipped laser laboratory with                   
              supporting optical equipment is being used to provide hands-on                 
              experience in many existing courses, ranging from the basic                    
              concepts of interference and diffraction in optics courses to                  
              measurements of hyperfine structure in modern physics courses.                 
              The new courses are designed to enhance the understanding of                   
              and appreciation for applied laser techniques.  One course,                    
              Laser Physics was initiated earlier without laboratory support                 
              and is aimed at upper-level physics and engineering physics                    
              majors.  This course is one step in the establishment of an                    
              area of specialization in electro-optics in our engineering                    
              physics program.  The second proposed course is designed to                    
              provide students in science-related fields other than physics                  
              with an overview course in laser types, operating principles,                  
              and applications.  The proposal includes items to equip six                    
              workstations with the optics and low power lasers for                          
              fundamental investigations.  Versatile general purpose                         
              equipment and more sophisticated data gathering devices to                     
              support any work station or demonstration are requested in                     
              single quantity.
