Title       : VPW: Ethical Issues in the Use of Computer Decision Models (Ethics/Computer
               Science)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1992    
File        : a9250118

Award Number: 9250118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147992             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah G. Johnson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
                    Computerized decision models are increasingly being used                 
              in the public and private sector for decisions that affect everyone.           
              Pension funds are invested on the basis of computer models;                    
              medical student interns are matched with hospitals on the basis of             
              a computer model; air traffic is controlled on the basis of a                  
              computer model; income tax laws are changed on the basis of                    
              models; and so on.  Yet, often those who make decisions on the                 
              basis of a computer model do not understand the algorithms                     
              used, or the assumptions made, in  the model.  They cannot                     
              critically assess the model's output.  Moreover, decisions made                
              using computer models are often not accessible to the public that              
              is affected by them.  Hence, increasing use of, and dependence                 
              upon, computer models raises important ethical questions.  The                 
              most serious issues center on the effects of the use of models on              
              the democratic process, the responsibilities of the model                      
              designers to their clients and to the public, and the treatment of             
              risk that is often buried in a model.  While a good deal of research           
              has been done in recent years on the social impact of computers                
              and on the ethical issues surrounding computers, only rarely have              
              the ethical issues arising from the use of computer decision                   
              models been addressed.                                                         
                    The investigator will collaborate in identifying and analyzing           
              the ethical issues surrounding the use of computer models.  The                
              analysis will lead to recommendations for change in the way                    
              models are designed and used, and in the way modelers function                 
              in their professional roles.  This project furthers VPW program                
              objectives to provide opportunities for women to advance their                 
              careers in science or engineering through research, and to                     
              encourage other women to pursue careers in these areas through                 
              the investigator's enhanced visibility as a role model on the host             
              campus.  The proposed activities which contribute to the second                
              objective include:  presenting seminars; arranging informal                    
              discussion groups for women faculty and students; and                          
              teaching/co-teaching a course.
