Title       : Development of K-8 Mathematics Specialists in North Dakota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1994  
File        : a9250032

Award Number: 9250032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $509585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Merwin J. Lyng BITNET:CANNON@NDSUVM1  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard G. Holman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald L. Semmens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Darryl J. Gulbranson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mayville State University
	      
	      Mayville, ND  58257    701/786-2301

NSF Program : 7348      TEACHER PREPARATION PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Mayville State University seeks funds to develop a model                       
              Mathematics Specialist Program for grades K-8.  A preservice                   
              teacher preparation program will be designed, developed and                    
              tested for implementation in North Dakota and Western                          
              Minnesota elementary schools.  With adjustments, the                           
              preservice program will also serve inservice teachers who will                 
              be prepared as mathematics specialists and mathematics                         
              stewards for their schools.  Through a cooperative arrangement                 
              with twelve area school districts and four Native American                     
              Reservations, the university will prepare inservice teachers                   
              as mathematics specialists and will define the role of a                       
              mathematics curriculum steward:  an individual with a                          
              mathematics concentration, who is a professional advocate and                  
              a counselor in mathematics education, and provides on-site                     
              consultant service to improve and coordinate mathematics                       
              instruction throughout their schools.  Program evaluation will                 
              be an integral part of the development process and an active                   
              dissemination network will be developed for purposes of                        
              educating teachers throughout North Dakota and the region.                     
              The goal of the program is to implement the NCTM Curriculum                    
              and Evaluation Standards in over 1,000 elementary classrooms                   
              by 1997.  National experts in mathematics education will                       
              assist the proposers in the development and implementation of                  
              the project.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              The contribution of Mayville State University accounts for 53%                 
              of the NSF budget.
