Title       : Classroom equipped for Innovative teaching of the Dynamics Sequence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9250638

Award Number: 9250638
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Purdy david.j.purdy@rose-hulman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry M. Fine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daryl L. Logan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David I. Stienstra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip J. Cornwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech
	      5500 Wabash Avenue
	      Terre Haute, IN  47803    812/877-1511

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project dramatically changes  the method of instruction of                
              the engineering mechanics course, Dynamics, which is                           
              traditionally taught in a lecture discussion environment, to                   
              sophomore students from several engineering disciplines.  The                  
              project's innovative learning climate will consist of a                        
              classroom filled with NeXT computer workstations, ample desktop                
              space, white boards, screen projection system, and symbolic                    
              algebra packages.This highly advanced classroom makes possible                 
              revolutionary teaching of dynamics, and in doing so will: (1)                  
              allow a focus on problem solving rather than mathematical                      
              gymnastics (2) allow the instructor to construct and                           
              illustrate, online and in class, the problem analysis and set-                 
              up using symbolic algebra; (3) permit the instructor and                       
              student to check answers to complicated problems using symbolic                
              algebra; (4) experience "what if" conditions to problem                        
              analysis and instantaneously observe (graphically) the                         
              consequences of change; (5) continue to reinforce the                          
              workstation learning approach used in the integrated freshman                  
              curriculum and math department at Rose Hulman; (6) provide an                  
              opportunity to present material and problem solving heretofore                 
              omitted because less class time will be spent solving                          
              equations; (7) empower instructors with an opportunity to                      
              expand the complexity, scope, and fidelity of dynamics problems                
              8) reinforce the question of "Does the answer make sense?"                     
              afforded by faster solutions, graphical verification, and                      
              online animation.
