Title       : Michigan Statewide Systemic Initiative for Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1998 
File        : a9250061

Award Number: 9250061
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Linda S. Warner                         
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9997761            (Estimated)
Investigator: Nancy C. Mincemoyer   (Principal Investigator former)
              Sylvia Buie  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Sharif Shakrani  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Charles L. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Stephanie Randolph  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : MI Dept of Education
	      P. O. Box 30008
	      Lansing, MI  489097508    517/373-3354

NSF Program : 7360      STATEWIDE SYSTEMIC INITIATIVES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The Michigan Statewide Systemic Initiative in Mathematics                      
              and Science (MSSI) will implement a comprehensive                              
              transformation of science and mathematics education by                         
              coordinating policy initiatives already in place with                          
              curricular, leadership, and partnership initiatives to                         
              support school-based change in science and mathematics                         
              education.  Michigan recently passed Public Act 25 (PA 25)                     
              which provided for the development of a State Core                             
              Curriculum, a process to review and revise policies and                        
              programs that inhibit educational change, and a process to                     
              encourage school-based change through State accreditation.                     
                                                                                             
              To further support school-based change, target disadvantaged                   
              school districts, and transform science and mathematics                        
              education Michigan plans five connected interventions:                         
                                                                                             
              1.   Develop a state vision statement for mathematics and                      
                   science education, circulate it widely, revise it, and                    
                   obtain endorsement from the MSSI Steering Committee,                      
                   the State Board of Education, and a range of                              
                   stakeholder groups.                                                       
                                                                                             
              2.   Design and carry out a systematic review of existing                      
                   legislation and state policies, programs and                              
                   regulations, that strengthen or impede the vision.  The                   
                   review will be widely shared with district, state, and                    
                   association personnel, and a report on the results will                   
                   be submitted to the State Board of Education,                             
                   Governor's office, and key legislators.  The                              
                   recommendations will be reviewed annually to determine                    
                   the extent of implementation.                                             
                                                                                             
              3.   Create Models of Effective Learning in targeted school                    
                   districts.  This initiative will focus on economically                    
                   disadvantaged and extreme rural districts, along with                     
                   other districts interested in reform in mathematics and                   
                   science education.  Twenty-five to fifty community                        
                   coalitions will be formed in participating school                         
                   districts and the MSSI will provide technical                             
                   assistance to them.  The Models will generate new                         
                   knowledge about creating successful community                             
                   coalitions to reform mathematics and science education.                   
                                                                                             
              4.   Reform teacher education programs to bring them into                      
                   line with the state's vision for mathematics and                          
                   science education.  A draft framework that lays out                       
                   this direction will be developed during the project's                     
                   first year.  An incentive plan to implement the                           
                   recommended reforms will be implemented in years 2 - 5.                   
                                                                                             
              5.   Develop and coordinate state-level staff development to                   
                   support mathematics and science education reform                          
                   consistent with the vision statement.  Develop a                          
                   coordinated plan to stimulate and support local                           
                   district efforts in considering, exploring, and                           
                   implementing knowledge employed and generated by this                     
                   project and other state-level reform activities.                          
                                                                                             
              6.   Create an evaluation plan that will determine the                         
                   success of the project's proposed outcomes as well as                     
                   the success of other state-level activities to reform                     
                   mathematics and science education.  A state indicator                     
                   system for mathematics and science education will be                      
                   developed.
