Title       : Consolidation of the Laboratory of Ecological and Evolutionary Genetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1993    
File        : a9313430

Award Number: 9313430
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150949             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Howard dahoward@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael L. Cain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Laura F. Huenneke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Boecklen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard W. Spellenberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                -                                                                             
                         Z     Z Z     Z     Z     Z     Z     h           h     h     h    
              h     r           |   N                                                        
                                                    4                                        
                                                                              9313430  Howard
                 The Department of Biology, at New Mexico State University, established the
              Laboratory of Ecological and Evolutionary Genetics, two years ago to improve
              the department's program in ecology, evolution, and systematics.  The
              laboratory was envisioned as a common departmental resource, where any
              department member, faculty or student, could learn modern molecular genetic
              techniques and apply these techniques to the research problem.  The need for
              the laboratory developed from the rising importance of molecular genetic
              techniques in many of the sub-disciplines of biology, particularly ecology,
              evolution and systematics.   Access to these techniques can prove to be an
              insurmountable problem for some researchers and students due to lack of
              training or funds.  Present conditions in Foster Hall, home of the Biology
              Department, have impeded research activities.  Researchers are forced to travel
              throughout the building to perform different steps of various techniques,
              leading to the duplication of experiments.  This award will provide funding for
              the consolidation of research space that is currently scattered  within Foster
              Hall.  Some of the laboratories that will undergo renovations were not
              originally designed as laboratory space and are inadequate to conduct modern
              research.  Laboratory casework, benches and fume hoods will be replaced, in
              addition to modifying the electrical, plumbing and HVAC systems.  By creating a
              shared facility, the Department will ensure that all of its members have access
              to the equipment, methods, and training essential for the successful
              incoporations of molecular biological techni ques into a research program.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   Fincode Text Only!    G                                                   
                                                         N    Tms Rmn  ` Symbol    Helv   
              Chicago  0 Courier    Cairo    ZapfDingbats    Bookman    Palatino   
              ZapfChancery    AvantGarde    Easy Street    Chicago Ridge    Bar Code 39   
              Chicago LW    I Palatino Italic    B Palatino Bold    BI Palatino BoldItalic   
              Berkshire    Monaco LabelWriter    Clock    Naro    ChiClock    MT Extra  "
