Title       : Multi-scale Analysis of the Biogeography, Ecology, and Genetic Structure of Sand
               Pine in Florida
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  1996  
File        : a9313704

Award Number: 9313704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernard O. Bauer                        
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 15,  1994   
Expires     : June 30,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen C. Parker   (Principal Investigator current)
              Albert J. Parker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9313704  PARKER       Many biogeographers, ecologists, population biologists,
              and  other scientists have recognized that scale is an important  factor to be
              considered in their research.  Hierarchy theory has  highlighted the need to
              evaluate the broader spatial scales  inherent in regional environmental
              histories as a context within  which ecological and genetic interactions occur
              at finer scales  of resolution.  In order to identify how regional processes of
               disturbance and regeneration relate to spatial patterns, age  structures, and
              genetic composition of related species, this  project will examine two types of
              sand pine (Pinus clausa) in  Florida.  Ocala sand pine occurs in peninsular
              Florida, while  Choctawhatchee sand pine is present in the Florida panhandle. 
              Both species exist in both coastal and inland locations, where  they occupy
              similar environments, but their stands are separated  by more than 100 km.  The
              project will be conducted in two  phases.  The first will consist of collection
              of materials and  data on the diameter and tree-ring structure of sample trees
              as  well as soil, foliage, and other environmental data for 18  representative
              sites.  This information will be evaluated through  detailed allozyme analyses
              to determine genetic and ecological  variations between Ocala and
              Choctawhatchee sand pine.  During a  second phase of research, the demographic
              and genetic structure  of four or five representative stands will be mapped in
              detail.  This mapping will permit assessment of the ways that  environmental
              and disturbance histories have affected each kind  of sand pine.  Of particular
              concern to the experienced team of  geographers and population biologists
              undertaking this project is  degree to which the dispersion of different trees
              are related to  differences in the scales of disturbance (such as localized 
              canopy fires vs. wide-spread wind damage from hurricanes).  Attention also
              focuses on the extent to which these differences  are related to finer-scale
              variations in g enetic structures  within populations.       This focused case
              study of variations among two species of  Florida sand pine will provide
              valuable tests of hypotheses  related to a broader range of topics.  In
              addition to providing  new insights regarding the possible impacts of
              Quaternary sea-  level change on the isolation and genetic differentiation of 
              species, the results of this research will shed light on multi-  scale
              relationships among site characteristics, disturbance  ecology, and the genetic
              structure of vegetation.  ***
