Title       : Laser Studies of Equilibrium and Time Dependent Processes at Liquid Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 12,  1995  
File        : a9313778

Award Number: 9313778
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joan M. Frye                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1993  
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $753600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth B. Eisenthal eisenth@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9313778  Eisenthal  In this project of the Physical Chemistry Program of the 
              Chemistry Division, Prof. K.B. Eisenthal of Columbia University  will
              investigate the properties of and processes on liquid  interfaces using
              non-linear optical methods based on second  harmonic and sum frequency
              generation techniques.  The aim of  this work is to obtain a molecular level
              description of  equilibrium and time dependent processes at vapor/liquid, 
              liquid/liquid, and liquid/solid interfaces.  The equilibrium  processes include
              chemical equilibria such as a new method for  measuring acid-base equilibrium
              constants at interfaces,  isomeric equilibria at interfaces of molecules that
              are known  to be sensitive to polarity, and the investigation of charged 
              molecules at liquid interfaces. Ultrafast photochemical and  photophysical
              events such as photoisomerization at air/ liquid,  liquid/liquid, and
              liquid/solid interfaces as well as the  dynamics of solvation initiated by a
              large change in the  molecular dipole moment following photoexcitation of
              interface  molecules and other phenomena will be investigated.  %%%  Interfaces
              are the sharply delineated geometric boundaries that  separate different media
              from one another.  The chemical and  physical processes that occur at
              interfaces differ from those  that take place within either of the media.  A
              common example  is the bending of a light beam as it traverses the boundary 
              between air and water.  While moving along a straight line path  in both media,
              air and water, the beam is bent at the boundary  face.  Other examples are the
              evaporation of a liquid, whereby  individual molecules move across the boundary
              surface from the  liquid to the vapor, and chemical processes on surfaces which
               differ from those that take place in the bulk medium.  While  these and other
              common interfacial processes are reasonably  well understood on the basis of
              macroscopic, phenomenological  theories, it is important to know on a molecular
              level of  description how these come about.   It is the purpose of this 
              research project to investigate interfacial processes in such a  way that they
              can be understood on the basis of interactions  between molecules, and between
              molecules and electromagnetic  radiation. Though this research will concern
              itself with  fundamental, basic questions of the chemistry and physics of 
              interfacial phenomena, it has relevance to major environmental  issues of
              air/water, oil/ water, and soil (silicates)/water  interfaces.  ***
