Title       : Protein-Membrane Organization and Function: Ion Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  1999   
File        : a9313835

Award Number: 9313835
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James F. Hinton jhinton@comp.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    501/575-2000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9183,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9313835  Hinton  The transport of matter through membranes is a basic phenomenon
              of  life.  All organisms are separated from their environment by  special
              membrane barriers which control the exchange of matter with  their surroundings
              and act as an electrical resistor.  In addition,  nearly all life processes are
              intimately involved with membrane  function.  Thus, membrane functions play a
              central role in  communication between and within cells, in the transformation
              of  metabolic energy into osmotic, electrical, and to some extent  mechanical
              work.  In living cells an electrical potential  difference exists between the
              cytoplasma and the extracellular  medium because of the unequal distribution of
              ions on both sides of  the plasma membrane surrounding the cell.  The cell
              membranes are  equipped with special transport mechanisms which accelerate the 
              passage of ions across the lipid barrier.  An understanding of  these transport
              mechanisms is a vital link to the ultimate goal of  the comprehension of some
              types of membrane function.  The transport of monovalent cations, such as Li+,
              Na+, and K+,  through cell membranes plays a key role in many different 
              physiological processes.  These processes involve the maintenance  of
              transmembrane potential, conduction of nerve impulses down the  axon and across
              the neuromuscular junction and the differentiation  and growth of cells.  There
              are relatively few physical techniques  available for the characterization of
              the interaction of monovalent  cations with biological molecules responsible
              for cation transport.   However, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR)
              has proven  to be an exceptionally powerful technique for the study of the 
              transport process and the molecular systems responsible for the  transport. 
              NMR methods may be used to determine the 3-dimensional  structure of the
              channel, to determine the thermodynamic parameters  for the integration of
              transport system into membranes, to  determine the thermodynamic parameters for
              the binding  of the  cations to the channel and for determining the activation
              enthalpy  for the transport process.  %%%  The objectives for the requested
              funding period involve the use of  multinuclei multidimensional NMR
              spectroscopy, structure  determination through the use of NMR determined proton
              distance  restrained molecular dynamics/simulated annealing and peptide 
              synthesis to: (1) study the effect of single amino acid  substitution on
              channel structure, the integration into a membrane  as a channel, cation
              binding and transport in the channel system,  gramicidin.  The objective is to
              determine how the structure is  related to channel formation and selective
              monovalent cation  transport; (2) to obtain the structure of the model membrane
              bound  individual helical components of the pentameric helical bundle that  is
              related to the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor channel.   Monovalent cation
              binding and transport selectivity will also be  investigated.  ***
