Title       : U.S.-GLOBEC: Vertical Distribution of Small Zooplankton During Turbulance
               Profiling on Georges Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9313669

Award Number: 9313669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 15,  1995    
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242318             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lewis S. Incze lincze@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9313671  Beardsley    Present evidence indicates that the recruitment and
              survival of  commercially important fish larvae within the Georges Bank region 
              depends critically on the development of stratification during the  spring and
              summer period.  Predicted climate change scenarios are  likely to significantly
              influence the evolution of stratification  and thus impact larval survival over
              Georges Bank.  As part of U.S.  GLOBEC Georges Bank Study, Dr. Beardsley and
              collaborators will  conduct an intensive field project during January-August,
              1995  aimed at better understanding the development of stratification  over
              Georges Bank and its influence of larval fish survival.   Preliminary studies
              will be initiated in 1994.  The project will  have a moored instrument
              component will involve deploying  meteorological sensors and instruments
              throughout the water column,  with a heavy concentration in the surface and
              bottom boundary  layers.  The data acquired will be used to resolve the 
              stratification field and examine factors controlling its  development.  The
              shipboard measurement component will consist of  five cruises following a
              concentration (patch) of the target  species: cod and haddock larvae and their
              copepod prey, Calanus and  Pseudocalanus.  Using a variety of sampling
              systems,including  drifters, MOCNESS, the Video Plankton Recorder (VPR),
              plankton  pump, and multiple- high-frequency acoustical samplers,  measurements
              will be made of: (1) hydrography, microturbulence, and  currents, (2) the
              vertical and horizontal distributions of the  target species in relation to
              water column stratification, (3)  passive particle motions and the
              tree-dimensional swimming  behaviors of individual zooplankton, and (4) the
              feeding and growth  of larval cod and haddock in relation to water column 
              stratification and prey distribution.  The data will be used  together with
              information from collaborative field and modeling  studies to gain insights
              into the impact of stratification and  turbulent mixing on gro wth and survival
              of zooplankton and fish  populations.
