Title       : Dissertation Research: The Role of School Teachers in Formal Education in a
               Pastoralist Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1993    
File        : a9313825

Award Number: 9313825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1993   
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11745              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lois Beck   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0314000   Rural Development                       
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation research proposal to study the effects of formal education on
              a nomadic pastoralist group in Iran received  enthusiastic reviews.   Reviewer
              Caton mentions  that he knew the student, but he was not a faculty member at
              Washington University during the time the student was there (Caton taught at
              Wash U. for a few years prior to 1988, the student arrived after that date).   
              There is no justification  in the research plan for the domestic travel in the
              US or the video camera, and I can't recommend  their funding.  Otherwise the
              budget is reasonable given the field conditions.    The student has no  other
              support for this research.    I recommend that the proposal be  funded.    
              TIME \@ `MMMM d,  yyyy` September 20, 1993    Beck  9313825    This project
              involves the dissertation research of a  cultural anthropologist from
              Washington University, Missouri.  Using archival study, interviews and 
              participant observation the student will study the effects of state-controlled
              formal education on the  cultural identity of a nomadic pastoral group in
              southern Iran.  This part of the world has a long  history of local-national
              state hostility and struggle over domination.  The researcher, a native 
              speaker of the language, will study how the identity of local school teachers
              influences the cultural  content of the education experience of their students.
               The hypothesis to be tested is that the state  hostility to local cultural
              identity has paradoxically served to strengthen this local `resistance` 
              identity, and the project will study how this m ight have happened.    This
              project is important in  light of the many local wars and struggles of local
              ethnic groups against national states.  Increased  understanding of the
              parameters affecting local resistance and struggle, or local acceptance and 
              cultural blending, will help us understand and perhaps prepare for other
              situations of conflict.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
