Title       : Renovation of the Electron Microscopy and Analysis Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9313457

Award Number: 9313457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1994     
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439219             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Gulick   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathy Comisiak  (Principal Investigator former)
              Arthur R. Smith  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Beneski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              LeeAnn Srogi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas McConatha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : West Chester U of Pennsylv
	      College Ave & High Street
	      West Chester, PA  19383    215/436-1000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Comisiak        In 1980, the Department of Geology & Astronomy and the
              Department of  Biology at West Chester University of Pennsylvania established
              an instrument-  intensive Electron Microscopy and Analysis Center in the
              basement of the  Geology & Astronomy Department . The Center has grown to
              include six  electron microscopes, an electron microprobe, an x-ray
              diffraction/fluorescence  system, ultramicrotomes, and a variety of instruments
              for preparation of  geological and biological samples, some of which were
              acquired through an  NSF Instrumentation and Lab Improvement award. The Center
              is used actively  for faculty research, for joint student/faculty research, for
              undergraduate  research training courses, and by researchers throughout the
              region.  Unfortunately, the use of the Center s instruments is hampered
              significantly by  inadequate environmental controls, outdated plumbing and
              electrical service,  and poorly configured room arrangements. The University
              plans to renovate the  entire basement complex by installing new plumbing,
              electrical, and HVAC  systems, new fume hoods, and by reconfiguring lab spaces
              to eliminate  conflicts among the use of various instruments.        The
              planned renovation of the Electron Microscopy and Analysis Center  will
              increase the efficiency with which samples can be prepared and analyzed  using
              different instruments, and will increase the Center s use for research and 
              research training. The renovation will create a suitable environment for
              current  and future research instruments, and will help to attract students to
              careers in  science.
