Title       : U.S. GLOBEC Phytoplankton and Protozoa in the Diets of Copepods and Larval Cod
               on Georges Bank
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1995    
File        : a9313679

Award Number: 9313679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299911             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Sieracki MSieracki@Bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 1308,1577,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9313679  Sieracki    This project represents one component of a
              multidisciplinary,  multi-investigator program under the aegis of the
              U.S.-GLOBEC  Northwest Atlantic initiative.  The overall program, described in 
              the Prologue to this proposal, proposes to study the life histories  and vital
              physiological rates leading to recruitment of cod,  haddock, and their food
              resources on Georges Bank.  Specifically,  this project seeks to describe
              quantitatively and qualitatively the  nano- and micro- plankton prey fields on
              Georges Bank and to  measure consumption of nano- and microplankton organisms
              (i.e.  plant and animal prey 2-200 um in size) by early life history  stages of
              Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua, and by all copepodid life  history stages of one of
              its major prey species, the calanoid  copepod, Calanus finmarchicus, under
              various conditions of water  column mixing and stratification on Georges Bank. 
              Ingestion rates  of consumers will be measured directly in shipboard
              experiments  using natural prey assemblages.  The proximate influence of 
              omnivorous feeding on the consumers will be interpreted in the  context of the
              in situ prey field and physical regime (mixing  versus stratification). 
              Ultimately, the influence of plant versus  animal prey in consumer diet will be
              addressed collaboratively in  the context of measurements made by other
              investigators of consumer  distribution, condition, life history parameters and
              production.  ***
