Title       : Renovation of Research Laboratories in Biology, Geology, andChemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  1993    
File        : a9313475

Award Number: 9313475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199562             (Estimated)
Investigator: Allen R. Lewis a_lewis@rumac.uprm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary J. Breckon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Glen S. Mattioli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Fernando A. Souto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
	      P O Box 5000 College Station
	      Mayaguez, PR  00709    809/832-4040

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
              42        Geological Sciences                     
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313475  Lewis  The University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez continues to be
              committed  to producing top minority students in science.  The research 
              faculty is not reluctant to having students participate in  research
              activities, thus providing them with excellent research  training
              opportunities.  Nevertheless, the University has had  difficulty in retaining
              highly qualified faculty due to the  deteriorating conditions of research
              laboratories.  Current  conditions also limit the number of students able to
              participate  in research activities. This award will provide funding for the 
              renovations of specific research laboratories in the Departments  of Biology,
              Geology and Chemistry that have negatively affected  the recruitment and
              retention of faculty within the three  departments.    Renovations within the
              Department of Biology will affect five  laboratories:  Molecular Genetics,
              Botany, Cell Culture, Animal  Behavior and Neotropical Systematic and
              Zoogeographic.  Research  activities pursued in these laboratories include: 
              the study of  molecular evolution through DNA sequencing, the population of 
              endangered plant species, development of monoclonal  immunoglobulins,  and the
              biodiversity and behavior of  invertebrates.  The Experimental Geochemistry
              research space will  be modernized to accommodate interdisciplinary studies
              that  address quantitatively the conditions obtained during complex  geological
              processes. Within the Department of Chemistry, the Wet  Chemistry and Small
              Instrumentation laboratories will be  renovated to support research projects
              relating to the  biosynthesis, molecular photophysics, and photochemistry of 
              natural products derived from tropical plants.  Once the  renovations are
              completed, the improved infrastructure will  facilitate recruitment of faculty
              members who are dedicated to  research and research training by helping to
              create an  environment in which competitive research can be undertaken.  ***
