Title       : Renovation of Wood Science and Processing Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  1998  
File        : a9313523

Award Number: 9313523
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Shaler steve@wood.aewc.umaine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert W. Rice  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barry S. Goodell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              18        Materials NEC                           
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313523  Shaler  This award will provide funding for the renovation of the wood 
              science and processing research space at the University of Maine.  Research
              activities pursued in this facility include:  the  elucidation of biochemical
              mechanisms involved in wood  deterioration by fungi, nondestructive evaluation
              of wood-based  composite materials, mechanical properties of structural
              members,  biotechnology and bioprocessing of wood through the use of 
              microorganisms.  These investigations have implications not just  to the field
              of wood science, but to all environmental studies  related to carbon cycling
              and greenhouse gas production.  The  laboratories are used for research and
              research training by the  department  and are shared with others from the
              Departments of  Biochemistry, Microbiology, Plant Biology, and Engineering.   
              The research facility, constructed in 1968, is located in the  south wing of
              Nutting Hall.  Specific areas needing renovation  consist of a continuous suite
              containing processing, sample  preparation, and analytical areas, and a
              physically separate wood  biochemistry and biotechnology facility on the same
              wing.  The  space suffers from a lack of separation between processing,  sample
              preparation and analytical areas, poor ventilation, and  inefficient usage of
              available space.  Inadequate bench space and  the lack of basic utility
              services ranging from electrical  outlets to hoods and chemical storage
              currently limit the work  done in the biotechnology and biochemistry areas. 
              Once the  laboratories are renovated, the improved facilities will enhance  the
              interaction that currently exists with researchers from other  departments and
              will promote in the recruitment of quality  graduate students in this important
              area.  ***
