Title       : Kinetics of Surface Reactions Studied by Laser-Induced Thermal Desorption with
               Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 26,  1993  
File        : a9313169

Award Number: 9313169
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1993   
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Hemminger jchemmin@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9197,ENVI,
Abstract    :
              9313169  Hemminger  In this research project, supported in the Analytical and 
              Surface Chemistry Program, the kinetics of reactions carried  out on well
              characterized solid surfaces will be examined.  The  research supported here
              will concentrate on the detailed  mechanisms and kinetics of hydrocarbon
              reactions on transition  metal surfaces.  These kinetic studies will be carried
              out  using a technique developed by Professor Hemminger known as  laser induced
              thermal desorption Fourier transform mass  spectrometry (LITD/FTMS).  The goal
              of this work is to apply  this LITD/FTMS method to the study of the effect of
              adsorbate  ensemble configurations on reaction rates, and to identify and 
              quantify the effects of hydrogen coadsorption on the mechanisms  and kinetics
              of hydrocarbon reactions.  Additional work will  address the kinetics of
              organometallic adsorbate decomposition  on transition metal surfaces as a
              possible route to the  synthesis of reactive intermediates on these surfaces. 
              %%%  An understanding of the detailed mechanisms and kinetics of  hydrocarbon
              reactions on well characterized tranisition metal  surfaces is important for
              developing an understanding of  heterogeneous catalysis. The research supported
              in this project  will provide the mechanistic and kinetic details needed to
              help  understand issues of reactivity and selectivity in catalytic  systems.  A
              very sensitive instrumental technique, laser  induced thermal desorption
              coupled with Fourier transform mass  spectrometry, will be used to obtain this
              basic information.  An understanding of these transition metal catalyzed
              reactions  will help to design more energy efficient and more  environmentally
              sensitive process chemistry.  ***
