Title       : Dissertation Research: Mukogodo Ethnoarchaeology: Hunter- Gatherer Adaptations
               and Transition to Food Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9313577

Award Number: 9313577
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fiona Marshall fmarshal@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 1391,5928,5976,
Abstract    :
              9313577  Marshall    Under the direction of Dr. Fiona Marshall, Mr. Kennedy
              Mutundu will  collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will interview 
              Mukogodo peoples who live in northern Kenya and will also excavate  two rock
              shelters which were inhabited by them in historic times.  The Mukogodo are,
              from an anthropological perspective, extremely  important because they are one
              of the few African groups which  followed a hunting and gathering way of life
              until recent times.  Within the lifetime of living tribal members, they
              obtained  livestock from herding neighbors and became pastoralists. In the 
              course of their yearly rounds this group also occupied a number of  known rock
              shelters or overhangs and preliminary information  indicates that these contain
              stratified material remains which both  document the earlier way of life and
              the transition to pastoralism.  Mr. Mutundu will excavate two of these and
              collect faunal as well  as other cultural remains. Given excellent historical
              data as well  as detailed information from the final occupants of these sites
              he  will be able to relate subsistence pattern with archaeological  signature. 
                This research is important because it provides an insight into a  process
              which took place over almost all of Africa and much of the  rest of the world
              in prehistoric times. In many regions peoples who  lived by hunting and
              gathering gradually changed their way of  subsistence after contact with
              pastoral populations. This  transition is extremely interesting to
              archaeologists because it  provides a context to study culture change. When
              confronted by a  new subsistence source, what are the processes involved in the
               rejection or the acceptance and incorporation of it? Preliminary  data
              indicates that this process differed in varying regions. The  problem that
              archaeologists face is that it is difficult to  determine what constitutes a
              pastoral "signature" in the  archaeological record since domestic animals per
              se may also be  obtained through trade or theft.  The Mukogodo situation,
              because of  the excellent historical and ethnographic control, provides a 
              controlled case in which to examine this question.    This research is
              important for several reasons. It will yield  archaeological tools which may be
              useful in many parts of the  world. It will capture data which otherwise soon
              would be  irretrievably lost and finally it will contribute to the training  of
              a promising young scientist.  ***
