Title       : Renovation of the California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo,
               Applied Research and Development Facitities and Activities Building (ARDFA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1998  
File        : a9313421

Award Number: 9313421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1787277            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. M. Hockaday   (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank Lebens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Poly St University Fdn
	      
	      San Luis Obispo, CA  93407    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313421  Hockaday       The College of Engineering at the California 
              Polytechnic State University at San Luis Obispo has  undergone dramatic growth
              in the past ten years, and it has  gained wide acclaim for its program of joint
              student-faculty  research projects. Applied research projects in the areas of 
              transportation, aeronautics, computer workstation design,  and other
              engineering disciplines are constrained by their  current facilities.  Research
              and research training are  housed in a metal airplane hangar built in 1946, an
              annex  that has been renovated in stages, and a variety of small  temporary
              buildings in the immediate area.  The University  plans to complete the
              renovation of the annex and  consolidate all other activities in a single new
              facility  next to the annex, replacing the hangar and temporary  buildings. 
              The annex renovations include asbestos  abatement, building modifications that
              will provide access  for persons with disabilities, modernize the heating, 
              ventilating, and cooling systems, and other small  improvements.  The
              construction of a building to replace the  hangar and out-buildings will
              consolidate the research and  research training activities in one site, and
              will provide  an adaptable environment for a diverse array of engineering 
              projects.       The modernization of engineering research facilities at 
              California Polytechnic State University will have a  significant impact by 1)
              creating suitable environments for  research instrumentation, 2) bringing
              together a critical  mass of engineering faculty and students, 3) enabling a
              wide  range of research projects, 4) providing an outstanding  atmosphere for
              research training, and 5) attracting  undergraduate students to careers in
              science and  engineering.  ***
