Title       : NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program: Spatial Models of Forest Insect Outbreak
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1993   
File        : a9313026

Award Number: 9313026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1994    
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Liebhold   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : USDA NE Forest Exp Statio
	      5 Radnor Corporate Center #200
	      Radnor, PA  19087    215/975-4034

NSF Program : 8268      CGP FUND, PROGRAM EXPENSES
Fld Applictn: 0302000   Biological Pest Control                 
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5983,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9313026  Liebhold    This award will support a cooperative research project
              between  Dr. Andrew W. Liebhold, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station,  U.S.
              Department of Agriculture's Forest Service, Morgantown, West  Virginia, and Dr.
              Naoto Kamata, Tohoku Research Center, Forestry  and Forest Products Research
              Institute in Japan.  During a six-  month visit Dr. Liebhold will conduct
              research in the area of  spatial models of forest insect outbreak dynamics. 
              The research  will develop an empirical modeling approach to forecasting forest
               defoliator outbreaks.  It will model spatial as well as temporal  dynamics. 
              The lack of accurate insect outbreak forecasts is  perhaps the major impediment
              to the development of effective  integrated pest management programs.  Models
              will be developed   that use 20 or more years of historical defoliation maps to
               forecast defoliation in the next year.  The technique will be  applied to the
              beech caterpillar, the gypsy moth and the pine  moth in Japan.  Historical
              defoliation data will be used to  quantify dependence among locations separated
              by various  distances and directions in spatial, temporal and spatio-temporal 
              dimensions.    Results of the research will lead to a superior system for 
              forecasting insect outbreaks.  Dr. Liebhold is an accomplished  and recognized
              leader in the field of forest insect population  modeling and computer
              simulation.  Dr. Kamata has substantial  expertise in the area of population
              dynamics of forest insect  defoliators.  The research should improve basic
              understanding of  the spatial dynamics of forest insect populations and will 
              provide the Japanese scientists with the tools for developing  more effective
              forest pest management programs.  In addition, the  collaboration should
              further communications between the  respective countries and will contribute to
              development of  spatially and temporally explicit models to predict defoliator 
              dynamics of concern in both countries.  This project is supported  by the
              NSF-CGP (Center fo r Global Partnership) Science Fellowship  Program.
