Title       : Ab Initio Calculations on Proton Transfers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1994   
File        : a9313657

Award Number: 9313657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Saunders   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313657  Saunders  Proton transfers from acids in which the ionizing proton is  
              attached to carbon will be studied by quantum chemical   methods. The energies
              and other properties of the separated   reactants, the ion-dipole complexes,
              and the transition   state structures for proton transfer will be calculated
              for   a number of carbon acids that yield delocalized anions of   the sort
              widely used in organic synthesis. A study will also   be made of a prototype
              for oxygen acids that yield   delocalized anions, acetaldehyde enol, and a
              comparison will   be made to the carbon-centered acid, acetaldehyde. The aim  
              of the research will be to explore the factors that   influence barriers to
              proton transfer: acidity, heavy-atom   reorganization, charge transfer, and
              polarizability. These   gas-phase calculations will be compared to literature  
              experimental results in both the gas-phase and solution.   Calculations of
              isotope effects will be done on selected   systems, including deprotonation of
              propene by hydroxide ion   and elimination reactions in order to establish what
              level   of calculation is necessary to give reasonable isotope   effects, and
              to compare the results with experimental data   in solution.   %%%  This grant
              from the Organic Dynamics Program supports the   work of Professor William H.
              Saunders at the University of   Rochester. The transfer of a proton from an
              acid is one the   most common and most important reactions in chemistry. This  
              work will study proton transfers reactions by computational   methods and
              compare the results to experimental data. The   individual factors that control
              the energy barrier to proton   transfer will be probed in these calculations.
              Deuterium   substitution, which alters the rate of proton (or deuterium)  
              transfer and is important in determining the mechanism of   proton transfer,
              will be calculated and compared to   experimental results.  ***
