Title       : Universal Conference Information Server for Distributed Synchronous
               Collaboration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9313857

Award Number: 9313857
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Luker                           
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65435              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hussein Abdel-Wahab   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9217,
Abstract    :
              9313857  Abdel-Wahab       Traditionally the Internet has been used for
              asynchronous  collaboration mostly using email, remote login and file transfer.
                Recently we have seen the emergence of computer conferencing as a  new
              Internet application to allow synchronous collaboration among  geographically
              diverse users working together as a team on common  projects.  A process that
              once would have taken days, with  documents being sent back and forth between
              users, now can be  completed in a few minutes which increases the productivity
              and  helps in making decisions quicker.       At this time there is no standard
              protocol and mechanism  that allows computer conferences to register and
              advertise about  themselves.  Therefore users have to depend on personal 
              communications and other indirect methods to find out and locate  ongoing
              conferences so that they can join and participate.         In this project a
              system called Universal Conference  Information Server (UCIS) will be designed
              and implemented to  solve this problem.  This implementation of UCIS will
              stimulate  further research in this area and can be used as a basis for 
              defining and ultimately the adoption of a standard Internet  protocol for 
              computer-based conferencing.       The system has three major components:
              Announcers, Servers,  and Queriers.  Announcers send conference information to
              Servers,  while Queriers retrieve conference information stored at the 
              Servers.  Like most Internet service, UCIS will offer its  services in both TCP
              and UDP forms.  We will define the necessary  protocols used by all three
              components and provide sample  implementation which can be used as a model by
              computer  conference system builders.  The system is designed to be  scalable
              to handle the expected growth in this form of  synchronous collaboration and to
              provide reliable, accurate, and  fast access to any number of users anywhere in
              the Internet.  ***
