Title       : The Development of a Fast-Respone, Lightweight Instrument for In Situ
               Measurements of Reactive Chlorine and Bromine in the Lower Stratosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1996  
File        : a9313412

Award Number: 9313412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1994        
Expires     : April 30,  1997      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darin W. Toohey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ATM-9313412  Toohey         The concentration of ozone in the lower stratosphere
              is  sensitive to interaction of part-per-trillion abundances of radical 
              species in the NOx, HOx, ClOx, and BrOx families.  While NOx and NOx  and HOx
              are predominantly of natural origin, concentrations of the  halogen oxides in
              the stratosphere are thought to be increasing due  to anthropogenic uses of
              organic halides, mainly the  chlorofluorocarbons (CFC's), halons, and methyl
              bromide.  The  inherant non-linear coupling of these radical families
              complicates  interpretations of stratospheric photochemistry that rely either
              on  isolated measurements of a single species in the atmosphere or on 
              measurements using a single detection technique.          This research project
              will focus on the design and deployment  of a new instrument for in situ
              measurements of reactive chlorine  (ClO and Cl2O2) and reactive bromine (BrO),
              one based on the  technique of chemical-conversion resonance fluorescence and
              one  which has flown successfully on aircraft and balloons.  This  instrument
              will be sufficiently lightweight that it could be  deployed easily in
              conjunction with existing balloon- or aircraft-  borne payloads, especially
              those to be flown on a new class of  unmanned aircraft.         Two major
              objectives will direct this project.  First, these  researchers will work
              closely with investigators who measure the  halogen oxides with remote
              techniques from the ground, balloons,  and space to provide a critical
              intercomparison of the available  techniques  and an evaluation of the
              uncertainties of the  measurements over the altitude range from 12 to 35 km. 
              They are  also interested in interactions with those members of the Network 
              for Detection of Stratospheric Change (NDSC) and of the Upper.   Atmospheric
              Research Satellite (UARS).  Second, the project  scientists will seek
              collaborative investigations of the chemical  and dynamical processes that
              determine the abundances of ozone-  destroying radicals in the lower stratos
              phere.  Their main interest  will be the influence of aerosols on the balance
              of NOx, ClOx, and  BrOx chemistries, especially near the tropical tropopause
              and at  mid-latitudes.  This instrument will be sufficiently lightweight  that
              it could be deployed easily in conjunction with existing  balloon- or payloads,
              especially those to be flown on a new class  of unmanned aircraft.
