Title       : Enhanced Monitoring of Polymer Processing Operations via Infrared Pyrometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1996      
File        : a9313318

Award Number: 9313318
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1994       
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim A. Osswald tim@neptune.me.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeroen Rietveld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9313318  Rietveld       The accurate and precise measurement of process stream 
              temperatures during polymer processing operations is generally a  problematic
              procedure.  Current techniques to measure process  stream temperatures during a
              typical manufacturing operation (in  both industrial and academic settings) are
              either ignored, misused,  or highly deficient, and there is a great need to
              advance the  science and technology behind the in situ measurement of an 
              important process stream variable such as the polymer temperature.   In terms
              of the manufacturing process, temperature is the most  important process
              parameter as it directly influences the  processability, properties, and
              performance of the plastic product.   A primary objective of the research work
              is to develop a reliable  methodology for applying infrared pyrometers to the
              measurement of  polymer temperature during the manufacture of plastics resins
              and  plastic articles, whereby such a measurement could then be used to 
              optimize the manufacturing operation.  The methodology will provide  for an
              non-invasive procedure to obtain bulk temperature  information as well as
              detailed temperature information about the  process stream.  Several key
              advantages that IR pyrometers have  over conventional thermometry techniques
              are:  response times on  the order of milliseconds, capacity for in situ
              real-time  measurements, and potential for detecting subsurface temperatures 
              in a non-invasive fashion.  The research plan will utilize  commercially
              available instrumentation installed on an injection  molding machine, an
              extruder, and in a calibration apparatus so  that data will be collected and
              analyzed data from both complex and  controlled temperature environments. 
              Collaborations with  industrial partners will provide a forum for where and how
              the  findings can be applied to the optimization of plastics processing  and
              manufacturing.       The research project may lead to improved control of
              polymer  processes, such as injection molding and  extrusion, which will  allow
              high quality, faster processing and more predictable  properties for the
              products of these processes.
