Title       : I/UCRC Planning of Center for Advanced Control of Energy/ Power Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1993      
File        : a9313826

Award Number: 9313826
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9999               (Estimated)
Investigator: Rahmatallah A. Shoureshi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              0400000   Industry University - Co-op             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A reliable energy source is an essential infrastructure                   
              support component for any type of manufacturing system.                        
              Approximately 30% of the world's fossil fuels and 25% of the world             
              petroleum are consumed by the United States alone.  In order for               
              the United States manufacturers to be competitive in the                       
              international market, the effectiveness of the energy utilization              
              should be improved.  Because of the pollutant emission                         
              considerations, electricity is displacing natural gas as an energy             
              source.  Therefore there is an increased demand for electric power             
              by manufacturing and material processing industry.  An                         
              Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Advanced Control            
              of Energy/Power System at Purdue University could establish a                  
              better mechanism to advance the development and application of                 
              basic research on power and energy system.                                     
                   A planning meeting will study if industry will support an                 
              Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Advanced Control            
              of Power/Energy System to be headquartered the Purdue University.              
              The meeting will assess industry interest and determine if the                 
              Center has sufficient support and merit to meet the                            
              Industry/University Cooperative Research Centers Program criteria.             
              The proposed research projects will address:  1) power generation              
              and transmission; 2) energy distribution and utilization; 3)                   
              optimal dynamic dispatching; 4) monitoring and diagnostics; and 5)             
              instrumentation and control.                                                   
                   The Principal Investigator is recognized as an eminent                    
              researcher and has the resources for the planning meeting.                     
              Currently, the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) and four               
              other companies have committed to support this effort.                         
                   The Program Manager recommends Purdue University be awarded               
              $9,999 for four months for this planning meeting.
