Title       : Optimization Techniques for Problems Arising in Design and Other Engineering
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1995       
File        : a9313286

Award Number: 9313286
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $273331             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andre L. Tits andre@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              21        Mathematics                             
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9146,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9313286  Tits       Generalized use of numerical optimization techniques in
              design  has  been hindered by (i) the difficulty to translate in a faithful 
              manner the actual engineering design problem into any kind of rigid 
              mathematical optimization problem, (ii) the inability of classical 
              optimization tools to efficiently take into account the many  distinctive
              features of optimization problems arising in a design  context, and (iii) the
              unavailability of software tools offering to  the designer a powerful as well
              as congenial environment supporting  such capabilities. Previous research
              developed an interactive  optimization-based design methodology that
              accommodates the  inherent trade-off driven character of most design problems. 
              This  has included the development implementation and testing of the  first
              optimization algorithms that achieve a superlinear rate of  convergence while
              forcing feasibility of all the successive  iterates (a crucial property in
              several engineering contexts) as  well as developed, implemented and tested an
              extension to problems  involving a continuum of constraints such as constraints
              on the  frequency or time response of a control system.  A window-based, 
              distributed computation environment for interactively exploring  tradeoffs
              arising in optimal design applications (Console) was  developed concurrently. 
              The research will concentrate on:  (1) the  development and analysis of new
              schemes to enhance the efficiency  of the feasible iteration algorithms, with
              special attention paid  to problems with large numbers of constraints; (2) the
              production  of a quality implementation of these schemes and extensive testing;
               (3) the further development of the interactive optimization-based  system
              (Console).       Numerical optimization is used in the context of almost every 
              engineering activity.  Available methods and software are often  inadequate or
              techniques are not always relevant to realistic  situations.  The project
              addresses this need.  Special attention  will be p aid to issues such as those
              of efficiently handling  problems with large numbers of inequality constraints,
              or problems  involving functional specifications.  The ongoing research 
              continues to make significant educational and industrial  contributions.  ***
