Title       : Dissertation Research: Differential Resource Access in a Thule Eskimo Whaling
               Community
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  1994   
File        : a9313627

Award Number: 9313627
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1994      
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8281               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Spielmann kate.spielmann@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9313627  Spielmann    Under the direction of Dr. Katherine Spielmann, Mr. Peter 
              Whitridge will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He has  begun and
              will continue archaeological excavations at the site of  PaJs-2 which is
              located in the Central Canadian arctic and was  inhabited by Thule Eskimo
              peoples between ca. 1100 - 1450 A.D.  Preliminary data indicate that the site
              was occupied recurrently  for six to eight months a year by a group of 100 to
              200 people  whose economy centered in intensive harvesting of bowhead whales. 
              Over the course of excavation, Mr. Whitridge will expose seven  domestic
              dwellings, a ceremonial house and surrounding activity  areas and middens.
              Because of permafrost conditions, artifactual  material is well preserved and
              provide detailed insight into the  lives of these prehistoric peoples. Mr.
              Whitridge will focus on  status differentiation and will examine materials to
              gain insight  into the degree of differential access to economic resources. 
              Thus valued foods - as reflected in animal bone - and exotic and  scarce
              commodities will provide a focus for attention.     Archaeologists are
              interested in the origin and causes of social  inequality and Thule Eskimo from
              this perspective are of  particular interest. It is widely believed that hunter
              gatherer  societies are basically egalitarian in nature  and because of the 
              rigors of this way of life, status distinctions between sexes and  between
              families rarely if ever occur. However because groups  such as the Thule
              specialized in whale hunting, food was often  abundant and based on
              ethnographic analogy successful hunters  often were accorded great respect. Mr.
              Whitridge wishes to  examine whether such factors in fact resulted in
              inequalities.    This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide  data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our 
              understanding of the processes which led to the emergence of  complex society
              and assist in the training of a promising young  scientist.  ***
