Title       : Renovation of Agricultural Engineering Laboratory at Oklahoma State University
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1994       
File        : a9313447

Award Number: 9313447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1994       
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn O. Brown   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0603000   Facilities - Combination                
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 0000,9155,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Brown    The Department of Agricultural Engineering, Oklahoma State University,
              is recognized as  one of the nation's leaders in Biosystems Engineering
              research, the application of engineering  principles to biological systems. 
              While agriculture remains an integral aspect of the research  program,
              Biosystems  includes environmental, natural resources and biological
              applications.   To reflect this broader scope, the Department will be renamed
              Biosystems and Agricultural  Engineering.  In addition to the programmatic
              changes, the facilities housing ongoing  research activities will be renovated
              and replaced to complement the new priorities of the  Department as it
              completes its transformation to Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering.   
              Existing facilities were built in an era when agricultural mechanization
              research primarily  involved the construction of heavy mechanisms and soil and
              water research.  These facilities  are inadequate to perform Biosystems
              research that requires high quality labs with special  provisions. This award
              will provide funding for the modernization of laboratory space that  will allow
              for the proper support of programs in machine vision, sensors and controls, 
              intelligent machines and bioenvironmental engineering.  The relocation of the
              shop facility to  the main campus will be adjoined to the research laboratory,
              providing more effective and  efficient shop services for faculty.  Specific
              renovations will include upgrading the HVAC,  electrical, and mechanical
              systems.  The modernization of the research facilities at Oklahoma  State
              University will have maximum impact on the human resources needed for the
              nation's  continued leadership in science and engineering into the twenty-first
              century.
