Title       : Single Electron Charging Effects in Insulating and Semiconducting
               Microstructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 10,  1995     
File        : a9313726

Award Number: 9313726
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Chandrasekhar v-chandrasekhar@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1764,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9313726  Chandrasekhar    This is an experimental research program focused on
              low temperature  electron transport in nanofabricated systems in which strong 
              electrostatic interactions between electrons lead to Coulomb  blockade and
              single electron charging phenomena.  The experiments  are designed to increase
              fundamental understanding of the  microscopic mechanism of electron transport
              in this regime, with  emphasis on modifications introduced by quantum effects. 
              The  structures consist of short insulating wires placed between  metallic
              contact electrodes.  The goal is to understand the origin  of the single
              electron charging effects that have been observed in  this novel system.  With
              an eye to potential device applications,  different methods of increasing the
              temperature range over which  the Coulomb blockade effects can be observed will
              be investigated  by exploiting some unique properties of insulators.  The
              project  involves graduate students in research that is at the cutting edge  of
              nanolithographic fabrication techniques.  %%%  This experimental project deals
              with the motion of individual  electrons among ultrasmall structures that are
              fabricated by  tracing patterns only a few atoms in width using a finely
              focused  electron beam.  The resulting structures show remarkable responses  at
              low temperatures to applied electric and magnetic fields.  The  response arises
              from quantum effects that are only poorly  understood in the structures under
              study.  The ability of detection  motion of a single electron has fundamental
              interest and is  technologically significant as a route to the smallest 
              microelectronics device currently envisioned.  The project will  employ
              insulating nanostructures which have potential for allowing  operation of the
              microdevices at higher temperatures.  ***
