Title       : HVAC Renovation of Riebsomer Wing-Chemistry Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1993    
File        : a9313465

Award Number: 9313465
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 15,  1993 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1293993            (Estimated)
Investigator: Fritz Allen fallen@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 9155      ACADEMIC RESEARCH FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0601000   Facilities - Repair/Renovation          
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9313465  Allen  This award will provide funding for the renovation of the 
              chemistry laboratories at the University of New Mexico.  The  Chemistry
              department,  is located in a building that consist of  two wings,  Clark and
              Riebsomer, constructed in 1953 and 1968  respectively.  The University
              renovated the Clark wing last year,  and requests funds to renovate the
              research space in the  Riebsomer wing.  Riebsomer is primarily a graduate
              research  building that houses research laboratories and the departmental X- 
              ray and NMR facilities.  Research activities conducted in the  facility
              encompasses the four divisions of chemistry: analytical,  inorganic, organic
              and physical, in addition to the  interdisciplinary areas of biorelated
              chemistry and material  science.  Major problems have developed over the years
              in the  safe operation of HVAC, ventilation and cooling systems.  As  currently
              configured, the HVAC and the fume hood systems cannot  handle the makeup and
              exhaust air loads.  Because of the  imbalances in the air flow, the system
              mixes the air in the  building and promotes cross contamination, creating an
              unsafe  environment.  Renovations to the Riebsomer wing will include an 
              extensive replacement of the HVAC mechanicals,  ductwork,  and  the
              installation of new fume hoods and a variable air volume  supply.  Successful
              completion of this project will provide  researchers and students with safe
              conditions to work and will  increase the efficiency of a productive group. 
              ***
