Title       : SGER: Exploratory Research on the Stability and Reactivity of Higher Oxidation
               State Mn and Fe Complexes in Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9313020

Award Number: 9313020
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George W. Luther luther@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Exploratory Research On The Stability And Reactivity Of Higher                 
              Oxidation State Mn and Fe Complexes In Seawater                                
                                                                                             
                   Pyrite oxidation in salt marsh sediments and sulfide oxidation            
              in the waters of the Black Sea and the Chesapeake Bay can occur by             
              anaerobic processes. These processes are chemical at the electron              
              transfer step, but can be mediated by biological processes.                    
                                                                                             
                   In salt marshes where dissolved Fe concentrations reach mM                
              levels, pyrite oxidation can be mediated by Fe (III) organic                   
              complexes because of the rapid cycling of dissolved Fe.  The main              
              reactions of the iron cycle are (1) solubilization of Fe(III) by               
              organic ligands, (2) reduction of soluble Fe(III) to Fe(II) by                 
              these ligands, soluble reduced sulfur or pyrite, (3) the oxidation             
              of the resulting Fe(II) (complexed to organic chelates) by Fe(III)             
              minerals releasing more dissolved Fe(III), and (4) the formation of            
              iron sulfide minerals when dissolved sulfide is in excess. This                
              cycle of iron solubilization will continue as long as bacteria                 
              and/or plants produce organic ligands.  This study will investigate            
              the reaction of sulfide with soluble Fe(III) and Mn(III) complexes             
              and develop a method for the determination of dissolved Mn(III) in             
              anoxic waters.  These complexes should exist even as catalytic                 
              intermediates in organic rich anoxic waters. They are easily                   
              prepared based on methods in the chemical literature. //
