Title       : Geometric Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0204474

Award Number: 0204474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerrold E. Marsden marsden@cds.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0204474 
PI: Jerrold E. Marsden
Institution: California Institute of
              Technology
Title: Geometric Mechanics

ABSTRACT

Work under this NSF grant
              will develop geometric mechanics and reduction theory in the context of several
              problems of interest: integration algorithms and reduction theory for discrete
              mechanics, the symplectic nature of collision algorithms, controlled Lagrangian
              and Hamiltonian systems with  symmetry, reduction in the context of covariant
              field theory (such as electromagnetism and gauge fields) using covariant
              Poisson brackets as well as Lagrangian reduction, and bifurcations in
              mechanical systems with symmetry using the blowing-up technique, including the
              establishment of connections with singular reduction. 

The combination of
              geometric and analytical techniques continues to play an important role in many
              aspects of mechanics.  This includes developments in computational algorithms. 
              For instance, recent advances in variational integration algorithms have
              produced state of the art collision codes, for example, for collisions between
              elastic bodies and elastic shells.  The work in this proposal further develops
              the mathematical framework that led to these algorithms in the first place. 
              This includes proving, in a precise sense, that the algorithms respect the
              special structure of mechanics, such as conservation laws.  In addition,
              studying the effect of symmetry on such algorithms and factoring out this
              symmetry directly on the discrete level is an important aspect of these
              algorithms which is only understood in special cases at the moment; this
              proposal will develop and extend these techniques.  Another area where symmetry
              and geometric techniques are important is that of the control of mechanical
              systems (such as how rotors are used to control spacecraft orientation). 
              Symmetry reduction for the control of such mechanical systems is one of the
              techniques that will be developed under this grant.

