Title       : New Roles for Polarimetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2002      
File        : a0204886

Award Number: 0204886
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264669             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger H. Hildebrand roger@oddjob.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0204886
Hildebrand

Discoveries in the last few decades have shown that
              magnetic fields affect the structure and energy balance of gas in galaxies;
              that they provide substantial vertical support for the gas layer; that they
              transport energy and modify the structure of interstellar shocks; that they
              accelerate and confine cosmic rays; and that they strongly influence the
              collapse of clouds to form stars.  Much of our understanding of these fields
              has been gained by observations of the polarization of starlight due to partial
              absorption in magnetically aligned grains along the line of sight, and by
              observations of polarized emission from magnetically aligned dust grains in
              relatively dense regions.  Although the polarization measurements have advanced
              our understanding of magnetic fields, the interpretation of the results has
              been limited by unknown factors.  The polarization depends on the inclination
              of the mean magnetic field from the line of sight; on the turbulence of the
              field; on the degree of alignment of the dust grains with the local field; and
              on the size, shape, and composition of the dust grains.  This project, directed
              by Dr. Roger Hildebrand at the University of Chicago, addresses opportunities
              to expand the role of polarimetry by investigating each of the factors. 
              

The University of Chicago polarimeter, built by Dr. Hildebrand, has an
              important role in these investigations, but there is increasing reliance on
              complementary observations in other parts of the spectrum.  The work on the
              magnetic field inclination combines submillimeter wavelength polarimetry with
              measurements of line widths for ionic and neutral molecules.  Observations in
              the wavelength range from 850 to 1300 micron will be made with the instrument
              SCUBA at the James Clerk Maxwell telescope on Mauna Kea, Hawaii.  Observations
              of the microwave foregroung will rely on the instruments DASI (at the South
              Pole) and MAP (space mission) which are already deployed for measurements of
              background polarization.  
***



