Title       : Symplectic Topology via Lagrangian Fibrations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0204368

Award Number: 0204368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95034              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret F. Symington msyming@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204368
Margaret F. Symington

The Principal Investigator proposes to use
              singular Lagrangian fibrations to 
gain insight into the topology of
              symplectic manifolds.  The ultimate goal is 
to develop an effective language
              for constructing and analyzing symplectic 
four-manifolds, analogous to Kirby
              calculus for smooth four-manifolds.
This work lies at the intersection of
              toric geometry, integrable systems
and smooth four-manifold topology. 
              Progress on this project will allow the 
presentation of symplectic
              four-manifolds as generalized sums of well-understood 
manifolds.  For
              instance, this approach has allowed the Principal Investigator 
to specialize
              a smooth surgery to the symplectic category and thereby determine 
the
              existence of symplectic structures on an infinite family of four-manifolds
              
with exotic smooth structures.  Further work will include extensions to
              
dimension six where such fibrations arise in the ground-breaking theory of
              
mirror symmetry.

A manifold is the generalization of a surface to other
              dimensions.  For a 
manifold to be symplectic it must have an internal
              structure akin to the space 
of positions and velocities of a mechanical
              system such as a pendulum. 
Symplectic manifolds are ubiquitous in topology,
              geometry and physics.
Recently great progress has been made in understanding
              symplectic manifolds,
especially of dimension four, but many basic questions
              remain unanswered.
For instance, given a manifold there is no general way to
              determine if it 
permits the internal structure required for it to be
              symplectic.  One way to 
attack such a question is to require some additional
              structure on the manifold.
The Principal Investigator proposes to deepen our
              understanding of these 
manifolds by appealing to a higher-dimensional analog
              of topographic maps for 
measuring elevation.  The additional structure could
              be thought of as the analog 
of lines of constant elevation.  In essence, the
              Principal Investigator plans to 
develop two-dimensional maps that yield
              enough information to completely 
determine the terrain (the four-dimensional
              manifold) and a legend that make 
these maps interpretable.


