Title       : Efficient Triangulations of Three-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2003      
File        : a0204707

Award Number: 0204707
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180042             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Jaco jaco@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204707
William H. Jaco

This project involves the development and use of
              efficient
triangulations in the study and understanding of 3--manifolds.
              A
triangulation of a 3-manifold determines a class of surfaces in
              the
3--manifold called normal surfaces. A fundamental observation is that 
in
              most cases when a 3--manifold contains an interesting surface, then for
any
              triangulation of the 3--manifold the same interesting feature is
exhibited by
              a normal surface in the triangulation. This has provided a
powerful method for
              studying 3-manifolds and solving certain decision
problems. Normal surface
              theory has, for example, lead to the theoretical
resolution of determining
              when two 3--manifolds, which contain injective
surfaces, are homeomorphic, to
              the classification of these same manifolds,
and to the determination of
              whether a knot in the three-sphere is the
unknot. However, even with the
              presence of interesting normal surfaces, a
given triangulation may have
              numerous uninteresting normal surfaces, which
make theoretical arguments quite
              tedious and computational attempts nearly
impossible. The guiding principle of
              efficient triangulations is reducing
unnecessary normal surfaces and improving
              the efficiency of computations
for triangulation based algorithms.  They have
              exhibited remarkable
success in doing this. However, more surprisingly,
              efficient
triangulations have exposed interesting relations between one-vertex
              and
ideal triangulations of three-manifolds and new combinatorial
              structures,
which seem to be intimately related to the topology of the
              three-manifold.
This project will explore efficient triangulations with
              particular
emphasis of their application to the Homeomorphism
              Problem/Classification
Problem for three-manifolds and issues of computational
              complexity.

Low-dimensional topology brings together many areas of
              mathematical
research and provides a common ground for interaction and advance
              across
all of mathematics. It provides a natural geometric model of most
              physical
phenomena. Research in this area is making significant contribution
              to
computational geometry and topology and complexity theory. It
              has
consequences in physics, computer visualization and medical and
              biological
modeling.

