Title       : Statistical Problems in Hidden Markov Modeling for Biology and Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0204674

Award Number: 0204674
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jun S. Liu jliu@stat.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shingchang Kou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0204674
PI: Jun S. Liu
Title: Statistical problems in hidden
              Markov modeling for biology and chemistry

Abstract

With the completion of
              genomes of many species and the advances of microarray technologies, biological
              researchers begin to possess a tremendous amount of data --- but these "raw
              products" are still far from usable. One of the most challenging problems of
              this century is to decipher this huge amount of biological information, turning
              the data into knowledge. Simultaneously, there also has been a revolution in
              chemistry research: scientists can now use advanced technology to make
              observations on single-molecule dynamics, which promises to rewrite some
              fundamental laws in physics and chemistry derived from traditional
              ensemble-averaged experiments. As the data concerning molecular movements are
              inherently noisy, the development of advanced statistical tools for handling
              such data is a pressing need. The past decade has witnessed the power of formal
              statistical modeling, especially the use of hidden Markov models, in
              revolutionizing the field of computational biology. 

It is the
              investigators' belief that using proper statistical models to describe the
              underlying chemical processes and to derive efficient inference methods can
              also greatly strengthen the data analysis in single-molecule studies. For the
              biological information analysis, the investigators describe a few problems
              related to the statistical models used for finding motifs, whose solutions can
              deepen the understanding of a few popular Bioinformatics algorithms for
              sequence analysis. The investigators show that these algorithms are based on
              special hidden Markov or semi-Markov models and can be generalized to
              accommodate more detailed biology knowledge. For single-molecule data analysis,
              the investigators outline an efficient likelihood-based approach for inferring
              quantities of special interests in single-molecule studies. The form of the
              observed data naturally calls for a data augmentation framework, which is a
              promising means for solving the computational difficulty. In single-molecule
              studies, besides the problem of model inference, model selection is also an
              important and difficult task, as it is often the case that there are competing
              models describing one chemical reaction, making it necessary to use the
              experimental data to choose the appropriate model. The investigators, using a
              data augmentation approach, propose a few generalized methods for choosing
              among different chemical models.

