Title       : Applications of Data Grouping for Effective Mobility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a0204358

Award Number: 0204358
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell Long darrell@cse.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Applications of Data Grouping for Effective Mobility
Darrell D. E. Long

The
              problem of reducing a mobile computer's communication and power
requirements
              will be investigated. Specifically, this research will address
both issues
              through improved storage management. Based on successes with
automated data
              grouping and predictive power conservation, research will be
conducted into
              improved data hoarding and disk power management techniques.
Effective
              grouping of data will make it possible to improve the automation
of mobile
              file hoarding, and decrease the effects of network latency and
disconnections
              on the mobile user. Similarly, through the grouping and
retrieval of related
              on-disk data, it is possible to improve disk power
management beyond the
              theoretical limits of any previously attempted scheme.
This will be done by
              actively modifying the access sequence to minimize
power requirements. Through
              transformation of data access workloads, this
novel approach reshapes disk
              idle times to effectively increase the amount
of time a disk can be spun down.
              Improving the battery life of mobile
computing devices is critical to their
              usefulness, and such power efficiency
is clearly an environmentally
              responsible goal. This research will establish
the effectiveness of on-line
              data grouping techniques to increase the amount
of data accessed per
              operation, while simultaneously reducing the total
number of disk
              operations.

