Title       : Syntactic Theories: Their Automation and Logical Foundation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0204389

Award Number: 0204389
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zena M. Ariola ariola@cs.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amr A. Sabry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0204389
Zena Ariola
U of Oregon Eugene

The general objective of
              this proposal is to gain a more robust understanding of the semantics
              and
logical foundations of programming languages. The activities will be based
              on the close correspon-dence
between syntactic theories for realistic
              programming languages and sequent calculi for logic.
This correspondence is a
              generalization of the Curry-Howard isomorphism that relates the simply
typed
              calculus and intuitionistic natural-deduction logic, and is at the heart of
              many automated
proof systems for reasoning about programs. The specific
              objectives and their potential impact are:

Algorithms and Tools: Our
              experience has shown that the proposed study of syntactic the-ories
and
              associated logics is tedious and error-prone: it requires many mundane but
              fun-damental
tasks to be repeatedly performed. Such tasks include verifying
              that the syntactic heory is well-formed, that evaluation is a well-defined
              partial function, and that subject re-duction holds. On the logical side, these
              properties are related to the consistency of the logic and the soundness of the
              proof simplication rules. Hence, to enable the study of non-trivial syntactic
              theories and logics, previous work by the investigators included the design and
              im-plementation of algorithms and theorem-proving techniques suitable for the
              automation of
the manipulation of syntactic theories. This effort has led to a
              prototype system (SL) for lightweight description and reasoning about syntactic
              theories. This proposal includes ac-tivities to extend and refine the current
              prototype and to make it available to all interested researchers and students.
