Title       : Dynamics of Production and Supply Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0204543

Award Number: 0204543
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189922             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dieter H. Armbruster dieter@math.la.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Esma S. Gel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christian Ringhofer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # 0204543
PI: Dieter H. Armbruster
Institution: Arizona State
              Univsity
Title: Dynamics and Control in Semiconductor Manufacturing
              Lines

ABSTRACT

It is proposed to apply nonlinear dynamics methods from
              dynamical systems theory and fluid dynamics to three problems in industrial
              mathematics: 1) The organization of production lines with  flexible workers.  A
              dynamical systems model will be derived and analyzed.  The goal is to determine
              whether chaos or other instabilities are present, to find out whether the
              production line is still self-organizing, and to determine the resulting
              throughput.  2) A switched arrival system
for three parallel machines has been
              shown to be chaotic.  Increasingly realistic production scenarios will be added
              to this model, and the resulting dynamics will be determined.  Networks of such
              systems will be studied to determine whether  synchronization or partial
              synchronization can occur.  Such systems are hybrid dynamical systems that
              require new tools to study their dependence on changing parameters.  Such tools
              will be developed as extensions of standard dynamical systems methods.  3) A
              hierarchy of fluid-dynamical models to describe the flow of products through
              factories based on conservation laws will be developed. These models are based
              on the methods of gas dynamics and fluid averaging and promise to allow fast
              and accurate simulations for supply networks.
 
This project is based on an
              ongoing  collaboration between researchers from Mathematics, Industrial
              Engineering, and Intel Corporation.  We expect that our results have a
              significant impact on the understanding of the relationship between policies
              and management decisions and the resulting performance of factories and whole
              business networks.  The three major areas of inquiry will be:  i) The
              management concept of bucket brigades: The organizational principle of bucket
              brigades will be studied for workers with different skill levels along the
              production line as well as changing skill levels due to learning.  ii) There
              are theoretical results stating that certain work allocation rules for parallel
              machines will lead to chaotic behavior.  These results are based on highly
              abstracted models.  We will study more realistic models and larger networks of
              production machines.  iii) Supply chain modeling and simulation: We will derive
              models that allow fast scalable simulations of production flows in a supply
              chain.  The long-term goal is to optimize production across the whole supply
              chain, an intermediate goal is to generate simulation tools that allow to
              explore business questions and to pose "what if" questions on these
              simulations.

