Title       : NGS: A Model-Based Framework for Adaptive Algorithm Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 25,  2002   
File        : a0204046

Award Number: 0204046
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 1,  2002   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Viktor K. Prasanna prasanna@ganges.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cauligi S. Raghavendra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Rapidly increasing performance requirements of applications have spurred the
              next generation of complex, dynamic, heterogeneous, parallel/distributed
              computing system architectures. The emerging computational grid,
              tightly-coupled petaflop grids-in-a-box (GiBs), distributed sensor networks,
              System-on-Chip (SoC) and polymorphous computing (PCA) architectures are
              examples of such systems. To exploit the full potential of this new computing
              architecture, applications, as they execute, must be able to adapt to the
              continuously changing system. 
Although some support for adaptive application
              development is available in the form of programming languages and runtime
              systems, there is a lack of high level system abstractions that model the
              dynamic behavior and runtime adaptivity.
The proposed research will address
              fundamental issues in modeling these dynamic, complex architectures and the
              design and evaluation of adaptive algorithms for such architectures. The focus
              of the proposed research will be on creating a formal framework to reason about
              adaptivity at an abstract level.
A direct educational impact of the proposed
              activity will be the introduction of new curriculum in academia, to impart
              knowledge on algorithm design aspects for dynamic system architectures. This
              will include initiating new course-work along with traditional courses offered
              on analysis of algorithms and architectures. One of the broader impacts we
              foresee is the preparation of future Grid/GiBs/SoC/PCA application
              developers.

