Title       : Geometry and Texture Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0204355

Award Number: 0204355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg Turk turk@cc.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0204355
Greg Turk
GA Tech Res Corp GIT

Methods of data capture
              such as range scanning, still photography, video and motion capture have begun
              to alter the manner in which computer graphics modelling, rendering and
              animation is performed. We propose to widen the applicability of captured data
              for model creation by develop-ing methods for re-use of geometry and images. We
              plan to pursue two related research directions.  The first of these is to
              improve methods of performing texture synthesis. We plan to address a num-ber
              of the shortcomings of current texture synthesis methods, including the loss or
              mis-registration of fine features, the lack of variation in synthetic textures,
              the tuning of the parameters of the algo-rithms and the lack of user control.
              Two of the ideas that we plan to draw upon for this work are image metrics for
              human visual perception and the evaluation of the quality of synthesized
              images.  Surprisingly little attention has been paid to these issues with
              regard to texture synthesis.  Our second goal is the adaptation of texture
              synthesis methods to the creation of 3D geometry.  Specifically, we plan to
              address the problems of creating height fields, displacement maps,
              and
arbitrary 3D volumetric geometry. There are many challenges to extending
              texture synthesis ideas
into 3D, so we plan to approach this increasingly
              difficult list of representations in a methodical
fashion. Of course, our work
              in texture synthesis will inform much of the geometry synthesis work.
Geometry
              re-use should allow a user to create synthetic terrain with the locations of
              mountains,
rivers and hills specified by the user. Natural erosion and other
              characteristic features will come not
from costly simulations, but from
              geometry synthesis from examples. Examples of terrain data are
easily found
              from the USGS, and other digital geometry can be captured through range
              scanning
and merging techniques.
