Title       : RUI: Modelling of Scattered Data on Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0204704

Award Number: 0204704
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114772             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hrushikesh N. Mhaskar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State LA Univ Aux Serv
	      5151 State University Drive
	      Los Angeles, CA  900324221    323/343-4970

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0204704
PI: 			Mhaskar, Hrushikesh
Institution:
              		California State University Los Angeles
Program: 		Applied
              Mathematics
Program Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: RUI: Modelling of
              Scattered Data on Manifolds

The proposer will continue his research on the
              modelling and analysis of scattered data on the sphere and other manifolds. For
              the analysis of data, he will develop frames having small or compact supports, 
              and having dual frames with other desirable properties. The proposer will study
              the optimal representation of functions on the manifolds using finitely many
              bits, rather than real coefficients, and develop algorithms for these
              representations based on scattered data.  An important new mathematical tool in
              this study will be quadrature formulas with positive weights based on data near
              (rather than on) the manifolds, and local quadrature formulas based on data
              near parts of the manifolds. The research is expected to have applications in
              the areas of signal processing, analysis of satellite data, and the study of
              development of tumors.

The problem of approximation of functions on the
              sphere is a very old one; among the early workers in this area was Gauss. It
              arises naturally in geodesic studies, for example, the study of the
              environment, and variations in the gravitational and electromagnetic fields
              around the earth. The data taken from a satellite is most naturally modelled as
              a function on the sphere. Additional applications arise in mathematical
              biology, where the growth of a tumor is modelled by a system of differential
              equations satisfied by functions on a sphere, which need to be approximated
              efficiently and accurately in real time. Many recent applications require a
              study of functions on slight perturbations of the sphere. For example, the data
              from the satellite may be taken not from the surface of the earth itself (which
              is not perfectly spherical either), but from different heights above the
              surface. Similarly, in biological applications, a tumor which may be initially
              assumed spherical, no longer remains so after its evolution. The proposer will
              study the analysis and modelling of data collected at arbitrary sites on a
              nearly spherical manifold, using ideas from wavelet analysis and metric
              entropy.
 
Date: June 18, 2002

