Title       : Stochastic PDEs: Interdependence of Local and Long-term Behaviors, and
               Representation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0204999

Award Number: 0204999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederi G. Viens viens@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0204999
Viens
	The PI's research program on the behavior of parabolic
              stochastic partial differential equations (SPDEs) focuses on four topics: local
              behavior, long-term behavior, particle representation, and fractional Brownian
              motion (fBm). The goals are to exhibit a strong interdependence between local
              and long-term phenomena and to develop an implementable particle
              representation. The PI considers stochastic perturbations of the heat equation,
              with additive or multiplicative noise that depends on time and space. The
              dependence in time is of white-noise type, while the dependence in space can
              span a wide range of behaviors. The differential operator is the standard
              Laplacian on the real line or on the circle (or sometimes in higher
              dimensions), with a small diffusion parameter "kappa" included. In the
              multiplicative noise case, a nonlinearity may be included. The basic point of
              view is simple: an SPDE with a unique solution is an input-output system, and
              as such the solution's behavior must be inherited from the equation's
              coefficients. The local behavior to be considered is the modulus of continuity
              of the solution in the space variable. The long term behavior of interest,
              specific to the linear multiplicative case, is the large-time exponential
              asymptotics of the solution (Lyapunov "exponent" question). The PI
              characterizes both of these behaviors via the spatial modulus of continuity of
              the potential itself, extends some of the results to equations driven by fBm,
              and designs a new numerical method for the solution using a system of
              interacting particles. It is shown that the solution's Lyapunov exponent is of
              the order of kappa to the power of alpha/(1+alpha) where alpha is the
              almost-sure spatial Holder exponent of the solution. It is also shown that the
              solution has spatial Holder exponent alpha if and only if the same holds for
              the potential's antiderivative. An investigation of how these results change
              when one uses fractional noise instead of white noise is also considered. For
              the nonlinear equation, a branching and interacting particle system is
              constructed as the basis for a numerical method for simulating the solution. It
              is proved that the numerical scheme, when properly mollified, converges to the
              solution in the Skorohod space of continuous-function-valued "cadlag"
              processes. The particles interact because, as they branch at evenly spaced
              short intervals, their mean number of offspring is a random variable whose mean
              is calculated relative to a certain "fitness" of all the other particles, and
              depends explicitly on the non-linearity of the potential. 
	The main physical
              meaning of the research is that a complex space-time-dependent system with
              significant random perturbations can exhibit an exponentially strong increase
              of size or energy in the long term, and that the exponential rate of increase
              can be predicted precisely by looking at the short-range spatial variability of
              the physical environment. This has potentially important applications in
              hydrodynamics and turbulence, including a local characterization of the
              so-called "fast dynamo effect." It would say that a magnetic field in a
              magnetic fluid can be enhanced precisely by controlling the fluid's mezoscopic
              level of turbulence. The research has important educational effects. Ph.D.
              students and, under the PI's supervision, undergraduates and MS students,
              conduct computer simulations in connection with the particle methods, with an
              emphasis on designing efficient algorithms. The simulations are being
              integrated as class projects in a new curriculum emphasis in computational
              finance and other applications, preparing the students for the
              technology-dominated job market and workplace. From the purely theoretical
              point of view, the research brings together several areas of great current
              interest in probability theory: infinite dimensional stochastic analysis,
              branching and interacting particle systems and numerical methods, Gaussian
              regularity theory, Lyapunov exponents. 

