Title       : Nonlinear Homogenization and Applications to Porous and Nematic Elastomers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0204617

Award Number: 0204617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Ponte Castaneda ponte@seas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0204617
PI: Pedro Ponte Castaneda
Institution: University of
              Pennsylvania
Title: Nonlinear homogenization and applications to porous and
              nematic elastomers

ABSTRACT

This project proposes to develop and apply
              homogenization techniques for estimating the macroscopic behavior of
              heterogeneous hyperelastic material systems that are characterized by nonconvex
              energy functions.  Two prototypical examples will be analyzed in detail: porous
              elastomers and "polydomain" liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs).  The first is an
              example of a
two-phase composite with one void phase and one elastic phase.
              These materials are used extensively in various industries for their insulation
              and shock absorption properties.  The second is an example of a polycrystalline
              aggregate involving single-crystal grains made of a liquid-crystal elastomeric
              phase. They are materials that exhibit "soft'' modes of deformation, are
              capable of being actuated by temperature and light inputs, and also exhibit the
              remarkable property of becoming optically transparent at sufficiently large
              stretches.  In particular, we
propose to develop simple estimates of the
              Hashin-Shtrikman and self-consistent type for these materials, which have
              already been found to be extremely useful in other contexts.  However, because
              of the finite deformations involved in elastomeric systems, it will be
              necessary to also
characterize the evolution of the microstructure (e.g.,
              porosity, texture, void or grain shape and orientation) in these systems and
              its implications on the overall behavior. Because of the non-convexity of the
              relevant energy functions, the possible development of instabilities must also
              be
taken into account, especially because such unstable modes may be useful in
              the design of devices. This program of research will involve an exciting
              combination of several tools in mathematical analysis, including calculus of
              variations, convex analysis, differential equations, and optimization, and is
              likely to impact our understanding of constitutive theory of complex
materials
              in general.

This proposal is concerned with heterogeneous material systems
              that can undergo large elastic (recoverable) deformations.  Examples of these
              material systems include, among others, carbon-black-filled elastomers,
              polymeric foams, liquid crystalline elastomers, block copolymers and skeletal
              muscle tissue.  Two essential features characterize their mechanical response:
              1) they can undergo large elastic  (recoverable) deformations; and 2) they
              exhibit non-unique behavior (micro-buckling and other instabilities).  In
              addition, most importantly from the applications point of view, the behavior of
              many of these material systems can be controlled by external fields
              (temperature, electric, magnetic, chemical inputs).  Because of their
              remarkable properties, these materials, usually appearing in the form of
              composites or polycrystalline aggregates, will continue to provide the vehicles
              for many technological innovations, ranging from rubber tires, more than a
              century ago, to light-activated switches and artificial muscles, today. 
              Because of their highly nonlinear properties, the characterization of these
              material systems is also mathematically challenging. In particular, even though
              much progress has been made in recent years in  developing rigorous
              homogenization frameworks for these material systems, much work remains to be
              done in terms of developing "constructive" mathematical tools to estimate the
              constitutive behavior of specific systems within this class.


