Title       : Statistical Models of Biopolymer Sequence and Folding
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204690

Award Number: 0204690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott C. Schmidler schmidler@stat.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: 0204690
PI: Scott Schmidler
Title: Statistical models of
              biopolymer sequence and folding

Abstract:

This research involves
              development of new probabilistic and Bayesian statistical models for the
              analysis of biopolymer sequences.  Emphasis is on predictive modeling of
              proteins and RNA.  Models for sequences of random variables with complex short-
              and long-range interaction structure are developed and explored.  Particular
              focus is placed unifying statistical models estimated from data with
              statistical mechanical models of polymer folding estimated via experimental
              parameter measurement.  Targeted applications include protein structure
              prediction, protein folding kinetics, and protein-RNA binding. Statistical
              methodology development focuses on connecting statistical models for sequence
              analysis and change-point problems, including graphical Markov models and
              random fields, to statistical mechanical models of polymer folding, especially
              on biopolymers (proteins and RNA), to develop predictive theories.  An
              additional core component of this research program concerns development of
              computational methodology for probabilistic inference in these models,
              including novel Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms for multi-modal
              distributions and rough energy landscapes.

Modern research in the molecular
              biosciences and biomedicine relies increasingly on both computational modeling
              and analysis of large collections of experimental data.  This research concerns
              development of novel and unified methods for combining these areas.  This work
              leverages physical models to develop improved methods for statistical data
              analysis, and uses statistical methodology for improving predictive accuracy of
              physical models.  The focus is on analysis of protein and nucleic acid
              sequences and structures being generated by high-throughput whole-genome
              analyses.  These advances will provide important new statistical methodology
              for computational biology, as well as provide domain scientists with improved
              tools for data analysis and predictive modeling.

