Title       : An Analytical and Numerical Study of Dynamic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204673

Award Number: 0204673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Konstantin A. Lurie klurie@wpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Suzanne L. Weekes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Worcester Polytech Inst
	      100 Institute Road
	      Worcester, MA  016092247    508/831-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on the development and study of dynamic materials, i.e.,
              material composites assembled on a microscale in space and time.  Both analytic
              and computational means will be used to analyze the effective properties of
              such materials in many spatial dimensions and time.  Analytically, by applying
              homogenization to the relevant hyperbolic systems with spatio-temporally
              varying senior coefficients, attainable bounds will be specified for the
              effective parameters of the binary mixtures of isotropic dielectrics in the
              framework of Maxwell's theory.  Computationally, a direct numerical simulation
              of the original equations will be used to better understand the physics of wave
              propagation through heterogeneous media with complex microstructure.  Together,
              both approaches will lead to a correct formulation and analysis of optimal
              material design in space time in response to a dynamic environment.

By
              allowing spatio-temporal variability in the material properties, it is possible
              to create effects that are unachievable through purely spatial design.  For
              example, by appropriately controlling the design factors of an elastic
              construction, i.e., its mass and stiffness, it is possible to selectively
              screen major parts of it from the invasion of destructive dynamic disturbances
              caused by impacts
or other dynamic factors.  Disturbances can be purposefully
              guided into regions where their effect is less pernicious.  Another example is
              related to electromagnetic or acoustic waveguides.  To function properly, a
              conventional waveguide must have a certain minimum diameter relative to the
              wavelength of the signal.  If the waveguide is too narrow or the frequency of
              the waves is too low, then propagation will not be possible.  However, by
              allowing the material properties of the filling of the waveguide to vary both
              in space and in time, it will become possible to transmit waves of all
              frequencies.

