Title       : Poisson geometry, riemannian geometry, and applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0204100

Award Number: 0204100
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $640594             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan D. Weinstein alanw@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204100
Alan Weinstein

Recently, for reasons arising from mathematical
              physics (string and
membrane theory) as well as from deformation theory,
              increased
attention is being paid to nonassociative algebraic structures
              and,
along with them, bracket operations which do not satisfy the
              Jacobi
identity.  Weinstein applies his previously developed theory
              of
Courant algebroids and Dirac structures to investigate geometric
models
              for some of these nonassociative structures, generalizing
Poisson structures. 
              A second part of the research concerns
convexity theorems for momentum
              mappings of hamiltonian symmetry
groups and related questions about the
              linearization of proper Lie
groupoids.  The search for the ``optimal''
              convexity theorem in
Poisson geometry is related to the problem of describing
              the local
structure of proper groupoids in terms of group actions.  The
              analysis
of proper groupoids leads in turn to the problem of averaging
              families
of submanifolds in riemannian geometry.  Previous results on
              this
problem are being  extended and improved, with one goal being
              an
understanding of the metric geometry of infinite dimensional spaces
              of
unparametrized submanifolds.  Finally, applications to mechanics are
be
              investigated: groupoids applied to discretized lagrangian systems,
and
              generalized Poisson structures applied to nonholonomic systems.

Weinstein's
              research concerns symmetry in geometry, with applications
to physics. 
              Traditionally, symmetry has been described mathematically
in terms of the
              operation of groups, and the corresponding
infinitesimal operation of Lie
              algebras.  Recently, for reasons
arising from mathematical physics (string and
              membrane theory) as well
as from deformation theory in mathematics, increased
              attention is
being paid to more general notions of symmetry, involving
              algebraic
structures lacking the associativity of a group operation and,
              along
with them, bracket operations which do not satisfy the Jacobi
              identity
essential to the notion of Lie algebra.  The study of these (and
              more
traditional) symmetries also involves the use of ``groupoids,''
              where
different groups are operating on different parts of a space
              with
symmetry.  Weinstein's study of these symmetries involves a
combination
              of algebra and differential geometry, as well as some very
concrete geometric
              questions, a simple form of which is ``what is the
average of two nearby
              unparametrized curves in space?'' This question
is easy to pose and may have
              applications in computer
graphics, but it is surprisingly difficult to solve. 
              Finally, 
Weinstein is using groupoids in the analysis of discrete
              lagrangian
systems used to create numerical algorithms.

