Title       : Collaborative Research: Self-Consistency and Wavelet Regressions with Irregular
               Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204552

Award Number: 0204552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188568             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Li Meng meng@stat.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal IDs: DMS - 0204552 and DMS - 0203901
PIs: Xiao-Li Meng and Thomas Chun
              Man Lee
Title: COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: SELF-CONSISTENCY AND WAVELET
              REGRESSIONS WITH IRREGULAR DESIGNS

Abstract

This award is for a
              comprehensive research project for a joint investigation, to be conducted by PI
              Meng of Harvard University (the lead institution) and PI Lee of Colorado State
              University, on the use of the self-consistency principle for wavelet
              regressions with irregular designs. Wavelet estimators enjoy excellent
              theoretical properties and they are capable of adapting to very complex spatial
              and frequency inhomogeneities. In addition, their computation is very fast when
              the regression design points are regular.  However, when the design points are
              not regular, as is typical in statistical applications, standard wavelet
              methods are no longer applicable. This collaborative research proposes to
              attack this problem from a missing-data perspective by viewing an
              irregular-design problem as a regular-design one but with missing data. This
              new perspective allows the investigators to apply well-established missing-data
              methods, guided by the self-consistency principle, to construct efficient
              irregular-design wavelet estimators, as well as fast algorithms to compute such
              estimators.

Wavelet regression is a powerful curve and surface fitting
              method that has attracted enormous attention from researchers across different
              fields, in particular applied mathematicians, computer scientists, engineers,
              and statisticians. Self-consistency is a fundamental statistical principle for
              constructing the most efficient statistical estimators in many incomplete data
              problems. This collaborate research effort combines these two powerful methods
              with the aim to make wavelet methods much more applicable to real-life
              problems, varying from medical imaging to fishery economy to global warming,
              where irregularities are rules rather than exceptions.

