Title       : NGS: An Application Development Environment for Complex Heterogeneous
               Distributed Real-Time Embedded Computing Platforms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0204028

Award Number: 0204028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexandru Nicolau anicolau@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nikil D. Dutt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajesh K. Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sandeep K. Shukla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0204028 Alexandru Nicolau University of California-Irvine An Application
              Development Environment for Complex Heterogeneous Distributed Real-Time
              Embedded Computing Platforms

This proposal, describes a number of
              coordinated strategies that will develop to ensure robust and automatic
              composition of ( DRE) distributed real-time and embedded systems, based on
              advances in architectural and resource descriptions that enable concurrent
              exploration.  The DRE applications to be explored in this work are
              representative of a range of real world distributed computing scenarios form
              Grids to microelectronic systems-on-chip (SOCs).  SOC-based computing resources
              incorporating diverse sensing and substantial processing capabilities are
              useful in many DRE application domains, such as avionics, biomedical computing
              resources and tele-medicine, remote sensing, space exploration, and command and
              control systems.  Examples of domains that could benefit from these advances
              include: automated transportation systems distance learning, tele-medicine,
              analysis for combat situations, video conferencing, virtual reality simulation,
              and weather forecasting and analyses.

The core of our proposal focuses on
              coordinated compile-time and runtime strategies that enable simultaneous and
              integrated optimization of (1) DRE application and middleware software and (2)
              the underlying hardware platform consisting of distributed high-performance
              processing elements and customized memory systems.

