Title       : Spectral Geometry of Infinite Volume Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0204985

Award Number: 0204985
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84614              (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Borthwick davidb@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  DMS - 0204985   PI: Borthwick

The principal investigator will study
              spectral geometry in three basic contexts.  
For smooth infinite-volume
              hyperbolic manifolds (without cusps), he will study 
the question of
              finiteness of classes of surfaces with the same resonance set,
refine
              techniques involving determinants that he and his co-authors 
have already
              developed, and study resonances as functions of the deformation
space of a
              hyperbolic structure.  For the more general class of asymptotically
hyperbolic
              manifolds, the main goal is to analyze the determinants and
              relative
determinants and use them to derive geometric constraints from
              resonance data.
The techniques developed  will be applied to define
              determinants and obtain
constraints for exterior domains in two and three
              dimensions as well.
A final goal is to understand the basic spectral theory of
              a broader 
class of negatively curved surfaces.  Here the objectives are to
              determine 
the essential spectrum and prove a limiting absorption principle
              which will 
characterize the essential spectrum and lead towards the
              establishment of a 
scattering theory.

Geometric spectral theory lies at
              the interface of the fields of differential 
geometry and mathematical
              physics.  In physical theories such as quantum 
mechanics or wave propagation,
              one can draw a natural distinction
between geometric properties of a system,
              meaning the underlying structure,
and analytic properties, which reflect how
              the physics of the system behaves.
Analytic properties, of which the spectrum
              is a prime example,
are generally the aspects of a system most readily
              determined
by experiment (for example, component colors of light emitted by
              stars, or
frequency spikes in a radar scan).   In many physical applications,
              
the basic goal is to derive information about the geometric structure from
              the 
spectral data.  The PI will pursue this goal in settings for which one
              already 
has good sources of conjectures and mathematical tools. 
              
Understanding the spectral theory of these cases
will provide new geometric
              invariants of interest in differential geometry,
while developing intuition
              for problems of a more applied nature.

