Title       : Pottery Production and Ballcourt Ceremonialism: Remarkably Sophisticated
               Economics Among the Hohokam
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2002       
File        : a0204330

Award Number: 0204330
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149895             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Abbott abbottd@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. David R. Abbott and his colleagues
              will conduct 21 months of archaeological research focused on the unusually
              complex economy and the regional ceremonial network of the ancient Hohokam
              people. The Hohokam were desert farmers and craftsmen who inhabited hundreds of
              villages with populations of 200 residents or more through out southern and
              central Arizona from ca. A.D. 300 until A.D. 1450. During previous NSF-funded
              research, it was shown that nearly all ceramic containers used during the
              Sedentary period (ca. A.D. 900-1100) were made by few hands and were widely
              distributed to households across a large territory. An efficient and dependable
              mechanism for supply was clearly extant at that time, but by the succeeding
              Classic period (ca. A.D. 1100-1375) ceramic production had reverted to local
              manufacturing for local consumption. Those results evoke questions about how
              far back into Hohokam prehistory large-scale pottery production was practiced
              and how so many pots were so widely distributed. One hypothesis explains the
              Sedentary period ceramic distributions with possible periodic marketplaces
              associated ritual ball games played in more than 225 ballcourts spread
              throughout the region. These ball games drew crowds from surrounding and
              probably distant villages and may have served as venues where specialist-made
              pots and other domestic necessities were regularly bartered beyond the limits
              of kinship networks. This idea implies far more sophisticated economic
              arrangements than any previously supposed for the Hohokam. To further
              investigate this idea, the vessel forms and production sources of ceramic
              assemblages from the Colonial (ca. A.D. 775-900), late Pioneer (ca. A.D.
              700-775), and early Pioneer (pre-A.D. 700) periods will be analyzed to
              determine how ceramic production and distribution were organized during each
              time period and determine for how long the sophisticated division of labor for
              ceramic production was extant among the Hohokam. Did it precede, parallel, or
              succeed the development of the ballcourt network, which began during the late
              Pioneer period and greatly expanded during the Colonial and Sedentary periods?
              The new research will also use recent chronological refinements to determine if
              the shift to localized ceramic production was coeval with the collapse of the
              ballcourt ceremonialism near the end of the Sedentary period. 

This research
              is important because it contributes to building cultural evolutionary theory
              and highlights the remarkable accomplishments of ancient Native American
              peoples in the Southwest. Sophisticated economics without centrally controlled
              and hierarchical political institutions make the Hohokam a fascinating
              exception to evolutionary suppositions that link organizational complexity with
              hierarchical structures. As such, reconstructing how their large and intricate
              networks developed and worked may be pivotal for improving synthetic theories
              of culture change.


