Title       : Simulations and Models for Sedimentation at Small Reynolds Numbers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204309

Award Number: 0204309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Mucha mucha@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award supports simultaneous mathematical and numerical study of
various
              low Reynolds number sedimentation flows.  These systems are
complicated by the
              long range nature of the fluid flows generated by
individual solid particles
              as they fall, requiring efficient
algorithms for particle simulations,
              introducing variable nonlinear
coefficients of different dependencies into
              model continuum partial
differential equations, and leading to nontrivial
              distributions in the
statistical mechanics of the interacting particles.  In
              this work,
efficient algorithms specialized to dilute wall-bounded
              sedimentation,
previously developed to investigate the scaling of
              velocity
fluctuations in monodisperse sedimentation, will be used to
              provide
quantitative data for comparison with existing and
              newly-developed
kinetic and fluid models.  The simulations will be generalized
              to
include effects due to inclined channels, polydispersity,
non-spherical
              particles, and small non-zero Reynolds numbers.

Interactions between solid
              particles sedimenting in a fluid are
important in many natural and industrial
              processes, including the
settling motions of silt in rivers and dust in the
              air, and in
applications which use centrifugal or gravitational separation
              such as
those for proteins, minerals, waste water, and recyclable
              plastics.
While the mathematics describing the interactions between
              individual
particles and the suspending fluid are well known, simulations
              of
large scale flows based on these rules are computationally
prohibitive. 
              It would be far preferable to use macroscopic models
which are less costly to
              solve because they neglect the detailed
motion of individual particles. 
              Unfortunately, existing macroscopic
models for sedimentation have very limited
              ranges of validity.  This
work will consider restricted classes of
              sedimentation systems in
which efficient computation of the interactions
              between large numbers
of particles remains possible because of simplified
              geometries and
limits for the mathematical rules describing particle motion. 
              Results
will be used to help identify improved macroscopic models to
              describe
both these restricted classes and more general sedimentation
              flows.
Ultimately, this work will lead to improved equations for
              modeling
sedimentation flows in nature and for better design of
              separation
processes based on sedimentation.

