Title       : Some Studies on Non-Uniformly Hyperbolic Attractors and The N-Body Problem
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0204725

Award Number: 0204725
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78072              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiu-Dong Wang dwang@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0204725.  PI: Qiu-Dong Wang

This research proposal is mainly
              on the subject of non-uniformly
hyperbolic strange attractors. We propose to
              apply an abstract  
setting we previously formulated and studied to rigorously
              prove
the existence of non-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors
in certain
              systems of ordinary differential equations, including a modified
system of van
              der Pol and certain periodically excited systems experiencing
Hopf
              bifurcations. We also propose to analytically establish the fact
              that
non-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors naturally arise when
an
              asymptotically stable periodic solution of a given system
of ordinary
              differential equations is periodically excited by generic
external forcing.
              These non-uniformly hyperbolic strange attractors have 
properties that
              include most of standard mathematical notions associated
with chaos: positive
              Liapunov exponents, positive entropy, SRB measure,
exponential decay of
              correlation, nice symbolic coding of orbits etc.
We also propose to study the
              geometric structure of the integral manifold
of the spatial four-body
              problem.


This research proposal is mainly on the subject of non-uniformly
              hyperbolic 
strange attractors. In general an attractor is a state to which a
              system will 
eventually evolve. One of the most important way of studying
              systems in nature 
is to first model then study them as solutions of certain
              differential 
equations. We propose to apply a theory we previously developed 
              
to prove the existence of a class of strange attractors in some systems of 
              
differential equations arisen from various scientific disciplines including
              
in the studies of turbulence, fluid mechanics and plasma mechanics. The
              
attracting states we propose to study have very complicated dynamical
              
properties and sophisticated geometric structures. They were observed
              in
many numerical and laboratory experiments but their existence were rarely
              
established mathematically in the past. We also propose to study the
              geometric
structure of the integral manifold of the spatial four-body problem.
              This is a 
long standing mathematical problem with potential applications on
              orbit design
for artificial celestial objects. 


