Title       : Ultra High Performance Digital Circuit Design and Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0204010

Award Number: 0204010
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl M. Sechen sechen@ee.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Larry McMurchie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The focus of this proposal is on extremely high performance (very high speed,
              but also energy efficient) digital IC design. The proposed research has three
              tasks: 1) high performance digital logic techniques, 2) CAD tool development to
              aid rapid deployment of the high performance logic techniques, and 3)
              applications of the high performance logic techniques; in particular, the
              design of circuit blocks that demonstrate unprecedented speed, while still
              having reasonable energy efficiency

Task 1: Research on High Performance
              Digital Logic Techniques: 
Focus is on maximizing the performance of the
              output prediction logic (OPL) technique, and developing yet faster and/or more
              energy efficient logic techniques.

Task 2: CAD for Rapid Implementation of
              High Performance Digital Logic:
Techniques
Two CAD tools will be developed to
              ease design and verification of OPL circuits under this proposal: 1) A static
              timing analysis tool for OPL circuits, and 2) an automatic transistor/gate
              sizing tool for OPL circuits that minimizes energy consumption subject to delay
              goals. 

Also a powerful convex-optimization-based tool for automatic
              transistor and gate sizing for OPL circuits is being investigated. The tool
              will minimize energy consumption while achieving a specified delay
              target.

Task 3: Research on Applications of High Performance Digital
              Logic
Techniques:
Applications include: 1) a new 64b adder architecture
              having a simulated worst-case
delay (under severe process, voltage and
              temperature variations) of 3.3
fanout-of-four inverter delays. 2) a very fast
              floating-point divider with the possibility of a latency of 6ns for a
              0.20-micron TSMC process. This divider will run at a frequency of at least 3
              GHz in this 0.20-micron process, enabling the use of division for the very
              first time in signal processing and communications circuits. 3) a new FPGA
              architecture, called OPL-FPGA, which suggests an FPGA could approach the
              circuit speeds obtained by standard cell ASICs. Mapping common datapath
              circuits to this architecture further suggests that speedups of at least 3.3X
              over state-of-the-art commercial FPGAs are attainable. 


