Title       : Developing Synergy Between Experiment and Theory: Applications of EPR
               Spectroscopy to Transition Metal Catalysts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0204847

Award Number: 0204847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : April 30,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286985             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sarah C. Larsen sarah-larsen@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

CHE-0204847
PI: Larsen, Sarah C.

In this project, funded by the
              Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Larsen will
              conduct an experimental and computational investigation on electron
              paramagnetic resonance (EPR) of paramagnetic transition metal complexes.
              Density functional theory will be used to augment the experimental work in
              computing the electronic g-tensor and the hyperfine coupling tensor A, for
              transition metal complexes. CW and pulsed EPR will be used to study the local
              environment of transition metal catalysts. The experimental and computational
              techniques are synergistically linked in this project.

This research deals
              with properties of certain metals that act as efficient catalysts to facilitate
              chemical reactions. These metals, known as transition metals due to their
              position in the periodic table, have magnetic properties that are probed by the
              technique of electron paramagnetic resonance. In conjunction with the
              experimental work, theoretical tools are used to elucidate the paramagnetic
              properties of these metal catalysts. Among the goals of this research is a
              better understanding of the catalytic process, which may ultimately lead to
              their improved technical use. Students and external collaborators participate
              in this research.

