Title       : Fault Detection and Diagnosis for Mixed-Signal Circuits Using Wavelet Based
               Transient Current Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0204356

Award Number: 0204356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kaushik Roy kaushik@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              As intrinsic leakage in transistor increases with technology scaling the
              effectiveness of quiescent current (IDDQ) testing reduces significantly.
              Transient current (IDD) based testing has been often cited and investigated as
              an alternative and/or supplement to IDDQ testing in Digital CMOS circuits.
              While the potential of IDD testing for fault detection has been established for
              digital and analog circuits, there is no known efficient method for fault
              diagnosis using IDD analysis. We propose a novel integrated method for fault
              detection and diagnosis in digital CMOS circuits using IDD waveform analysis
              using wavelet transform. We use wavelet transform to decompose the IDD waveform
              in both time and frequency domain. The time-frequency resolution of the IDD
              signal helps us detect as well as localize faults. Initial experimental results
              on an 8-bit ALU show that wavelet based IDD analysis has the potential to
              efficiently detect and localize faults considering practical issues like effect
              of process variation and measurement noise.  

Transient current (IDD)
              analysis can also be effective for defect oriented testing of analog circuits.
              We observe that wavelet transform renders an efficient way for analyzing IDD
              for fault detection in analog circuits. The property of wavelet for resolving
              events in both time and frequency domain simultaneously and the property of
              better sub-banding than Fourier analysis, makes it a effective tool for IDD
              analysis. Moreover wavelet transform can be easily adapted to current waveforms
              from different circuits. We have observed that for equivalent number of
              spectral components, sensitivity of wavelet based fault detection in analog
              circuits is much higher than fourier or time-domain analysis for both
              catastrophic and parametric faults.  Initial experimental results on a
              benchmark circuit show that wavelet based method is on average 25 times more
              sensitive than DFT for parametric faults and can be considered as a promising
              alternative for analog fault detection amidst measurement hardware noise and
              process variation. In the proposed research we will develop an integrated fault
              detection and diagnosis methodology using wavelet based transient current
              analysis for mixed-signal circuits.

We will present the results of our
              research in domestic and international conferences. International conferences
              include (International Conference on CAD and CG in Macau, December 2003, and
              International Conference on CAD and CG 2005; IEEE Design and Test in
              Europe).


