Title       : Collaborative Research: Star Formation Processes in Dwarf Galaxies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0204922

Award Number: 0204922
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deidre A. Hunter Deidre.Hunter@lowell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lowell Observatory
	      1400 W. Mars Hill Road
	      Flagstaff, AZ  86001    928/774-3358

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0204922
Hunter

Dwarf irregulars are the most common type of galaxy in
              the Universe. They evolve relatively slowly over time and chemically resemble
              the outer parts of present-day spirals and young galaxies seen at high
              redshift. They have no density waves and little shear. Some are very close to
              us, permitting the resolution of clusters and star-forming regions. As a
              result, dwarf irregulars are ideal laboratories for studies of star formation
              in a pristine environment. They are also useful for comparisons with spirals,
              leading to a better understanding of both.

The goals of this project are to
              determine what regulates star formation in dwarf galaxies on a wide range of
              scales, and then to apply this knowledge to other galaxies. Why do star
              formation rates in normal dwarf galaxies span a factor of over 104, and why are
              young stars always limited to the inner galaxy regions, far inside the radial
              extent of other stars and gas? What governs how and where dense molecular
              clouds form? To address these questions, Dr. Deidre Hunter, at Lowell
              Observatory, and Dr. Bruce Elmegreen, at IBM,  have observed 139 reasonably
              normal, non-interacting, nearby galaxies without spiral arms. The data include
              optical and near-infrared images
that allow the star formation to be
              determined over the lifetimes of these galaxies, atomic HI maps that show the
              raw cloud material and environment for cloud formation, and observations of the
              warm and cold molecular clouds that give birth to the stars themselves.
              Although a previous grant emphasized data collection and processing, these
              investigators have already analyzed the properties of the HII regions in the
              sample, including their sizes, pressures, luminosities, and locations. They
              studied the neutral interstellar structure in the LMC and combined all their
              data for a comprehensive study of NGC 2366. The results have led to a revision
              in the theoretical framework for star formation: global instabilities and
              threshold column densities for star formation are less important than local
              processes and conditions; the thermal equilibrium properties of the
              interstellar medium are as important as self-gravity; turbulence and phase
              changes generally structure the gas into 
cloud and intercloud media, yet
              global disturbances such as bars and interactions change this, producing
              anomalously massive bound clusters. The results have also enhanced our
              
perspective on star formation processes in normal spiral galaxies by
              illustrating how the expansion of shells and the condensation of clouds becomes
              more severe at low shear.  With this new award, the investigators will
              capitalize on their large, multi-wavelength survey to finish the project by
              addressing the "big-picture" questions posed above. They will find how star
              formation evolves over space and time in a dwarf galaxy; consider the special
              effects at galaxy edges; show how the star formation history relates to the gas
              structure and other conditions for cloud formation; determine the formation
              requirements for star forming regions of different sizes and densities;
              determine the porosity of the interstellar medium and its role in possible
              feedback; and determine the overall structure of the dwarfs. Many of these
              results will have applications to other galaxy types and to other epochs in the
              Universe. 
***



