Title       : Geometry and Topology of Knots and Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0204386

Award Number: 0204386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149644             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Ruberman ruberman@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerome P. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kiyoshi Igusa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204386
Daniel Ruberman, Jerome Levine, and Kiyoshi Igusa	

The topology
              group at Brandeis University proposes research on knot 
theory and
              3-manifolds, gauge-theory and 4-manifolds, and on higher 
Reidemeister torsion
              of families of manifolds.  Jerome Levine plans 
to continue his study of
              finite type invariants of 3-manifolds. In 
particular, he plans to investigate
              a graphical interpretation of a 
new surgery-theoretic theory proposed in a
              recent paper. He also will 
investigate various questions concerning boundary
              link invariants 
such as the signature-type invariant and the relationship
              between the 
Farber invariant and non-commutative Reidemeister torsion.  
              Daniel 
Ruberman's research uses gauge theory to investigate the geometry and
              
topology of 4-dimensional manifolds.  He will extend his program of 
using
              Seiberg-Witten theory and Yang-Mills theory to explore families 
of
              diffeomorphisms of 4-manifolds and  positive scalar curvature 
metrics on a
              4-manifold.  Further work explores whether finiteness 
theorems of Riemannian
              geometry hold in dimension 4.  Seiberg-Witten 
and Donaldson theory will also
              be used to investigate a simple but 
important class of non-simply-connected
              4-manifolds.  Kiyoshi Igusa's 
work extends his study of higher
              Franz-Reidemeister torsion to the 
complex case and to various new spaces of
              graphs.   He will use this 
to interpret the Miller-Morita-Mumford classes in
              terms of the higher 
Franz-Reidemeister (FR) torsion.

Our research
              encompasses a number of themes in geometry and topology. 
One of these is the
              interplay between topology and algebra, and 
another is the interplay between
              topology and theoretical physics. 
To study spaces or other topological
              objects such as knots, we encode 
some aspects of the space into familiar
              algebraic objects such as 
matrices or polynomials.   Some of the algebra used
              to study 
3-dimensional objects is connected with ideas developed by
              physicists 
to understand quantum field theory, especially the Feynmann
              integral. 
Investigating this interplay contributes to our understanding of
              the 
3-dimensional world in which we live.   Part of our work is concerned
              
with the evolution of spaces--the study of the way in which they 
change as
              some parameter is varied.  Some of the research in this 
direction develops
              algebraic tools which apply in the case when there 
are many independent
              parameters.   Another component studies the 
evolution of 4-dimensional spaces
              and geometries, using techniques 
arising in gauge theory, a fundamental
              geometrical tool in 
theoretical physics.


