Title       : Stochastic Differential Systems Driven by Fractional Brownian Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204613

Award Number: 0204613
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93283              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yaozhong Hu hu@math.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Ctr for Res In
	      2385 Irving Hill Drive
	      Lawrence, KS  660457563    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0204613
Hu
	It is well-known that the fractional Brownian motions are not
              semimartingales. The powerful stochastic calculus for semimartingales are not
              applicable to them. Motivated by the urgent need from applications the
              principal investigator and his collaborators have developed a new stochastic
              calculus of Ito type based on the Wick product. He proposes to continue this
              research topic and to study the stochastic differential systems driven by
              fractional Brownian motions. First he shall study the existence, uniqueness and
              approximation of global solutions to stochastic differential systems driven by
              fractional Brownian motions. Many researchers have attempted to obtain result
              on these aspects with little success. The principal investigator has discovered
              a relationship between stochastic differential systems driven by fractional
              Brownian motions and quasilinear hyperbolic equations (of infinitely many
              variables). It is well-known that the latter equations are also difficult to
              solve. However, there are a number of results which are useful. This connection
              will lead to a better understanding of stochastic differential systems and the
              PI plans to explore this relation. Secondly, in application of the stochastic
              systems driven by fractional Brownian motions, one also needs to identify the
              coefficients and the Hurst parameter. The PI proposes to study one such
              identification problem and apply it to the investigation of the stochastic
              volatility model in financial market. 
	To obtain the maximum benefit from a
              physical or social system, one needs to understand the system in the most
              precise way possible. This requires building a mathematical model for the
              dynamic evolution of the system. When the system is under the influence of some
              uncertain factors, the system should be modeled by a random process. Up to now
              one of the random processes which has received the most attention and has been
              studied the most is stochastic differential equations based on the so-called
              Brownian motion. Brownian motion has some nice properties such as Markovian:
              Its future state depends only on the present state and does not depend on the
              past. This simplicity makes the mathematics for it easy and very profound
              results have been achieved. In fact there have been enormous work on it over
              the past century. However, this elegant property also limits the applicability
              of such a random process, since it cannot be used to describe those systems
              whose future depend not only the present but also on past history! Fractional
              Brownian motions are random processes having this long range dependence and may
              be used to describe such systems. This proposal aims to construct mathematical
              tools for the fractional Brownian motions which have already found applications
              in hydrology, climatology, network traffic analysis, and finance. This research
              will have impact on these areas as well as in life science. 

