Title       : Topology and Geometry of 3-Dimensional Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  2002       
File        : a0204142

Award Number: 0204142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $334420             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter B. Shalen shalen@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Agol  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Marc E. Culler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Culler and Shalen are continuing to investigate consequences of their
work on
              the character variety of a knot group. This involves studying
the relationship
              between the boundary slopes of a knot and the
topological properties of
              essential surfaces that realize the
slopes. It also includes their ongoing
              project with Dunfield and Jaco
about smallish knots in non-Haken manifolds,
              which is part of a
program to prove the Poincare Conjecture. A joint project
              by Agol,
Culler and Shalen, concerning the construction of covering spaces of
              a
triangulated 3-manifold by an inductive process, is also relevant to
this
              program. Agol is also continuing his work on geometric finiteness
of
              geometrically defined subgroups of knot groups, volume estimates
for
              non-fibered Haken manifolds and hyperbolic orbifolds, and the
complexity of
              algorithms in 3-manifold theory.

A fundamental problem in many areas of
              mathematics is to classify all
examples of a certain type of mathematical
              object.  The objects of
study in this proposal are 3-manifolds, which are
              mathematical models
of 3-dimensional spaces.  Since our universe is a
              3-dimensional space,
the classification of 3-manifolds is directly related to
              our
understanding of nature itself.  The classification problem
              for
3-manifolds is far from solved, but the work of many mathematicians
over
              the last 25 years has at least produced a conjectural
answer. Remarkably, the
              conjectures, if true, will provide a
unification of the most classical, rigid
              kind of geometry---both the
Euclidean version first studied by the ancient
              Greeks and the
non-Euclidean kind that constituted an exciting discovery in
              the 19th
century---and topology, a subject devoted to studying much
              more
flexible geometric structures, which until recently had developed
quite
              independently of the more classical theories.  The work
supported by this
              grant forms part of the effort to verify the
conjectured geometric
              classification of 3-manifolds.

