Title       : Incremental Placement and Routing Algorithms for FPGA and VLSI Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2002   
File        : a0204097

Award Number: 0204097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert B. Grafton                       
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : October 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $298213             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shantanu S. Dutt dutt@ece.uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the creation of efficient algorithms for incrementally
              re-placing and re-routing small portions of a VLSI circuit to correct problems
              such as signal integrity, speed and high heat density that have been discovered
              therein via simulation.  The challenge is to quickly re-layout only the
              affected portion of the circuit, while minimizing any layout changes of the
              much larger unaffected part of the circuit in order to capitalize on the
              enormous resources and time already spent on the physical design of the chip,
              to retain the already optimized features of the design, and to meet
              time-to-market requirements.

Algorithms for both regular VLSI chips and
              field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) are being addressed in this project. 
              For the incremental placement problem, a min-cost network-flow based algorithm
              is being investigated using both deterministic and probabilistic edge costs. 
              In the incremental routing realm, the following areas are being researched:  
              (a) Algorithms for constraint-driven "bump-and-refit" (this allows exploration
              of solution spaces with different sets of constraints like upper bounds on the
              increase in net lengths and/or delays, on the number of vias, and on crosstalk
              coupling). (2) Performing incremental global and detailed routing in one
              consolidated framework in order to obtain better optimized routings.  (3)
              Incremental Satisfiability (SAT) methods and their application to incremental
              routing.  (4) Various additional issues and solution techniques needed for
              incremental routing of VLSI circuits.

