Title       : New Directions in Dimension Reduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0204662

Award Number: 0204662
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178543             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bing Li bing@stat.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DMS-0204662
PI: Bing Li

This research will develop methods in
              dimension reduction, which aim at increased accuracy and a wider spectrum of
              applications. Specifically, the work will proceed in three main directions. (1)
              The classical formulation makes the conditional density in regression the
              target for dimension reduction. This does not take into consideration that in
              many applications the primary interest centers in the conditional mean.
              Moreover, the classical formulation requires homoskedasticity among predictors,
              which can be too restrictive for some problems. To address these issues the
              investigator proposes to reformulate the problem as reducing the dimensions of
              the predictors as they appear in the conditional mean. This will allow further
              dimension reduction, it will improve accuracy and remove the requirement for
              homoskedasticity. (2) Within the classical formulation one cannot handle
              categorical predictors, which occur frequently in practice. This research will
              broaden the proposed formulation so that it can handle such cases. (3) It is
              then possible and natural to combine these two new elements to further develop
              a more focused, and less restricted dimension reduction method for conditional
              means for regressions involving categorical predictors. 

The methods of
              dimension reduction were introduced originally to provide a comprehensive
              graphical tool for exploratory data analysis. Recently, active developments are
              under way due to the rapid growth of computing power; this has dramatically
              increased the scope and dimensions of the collected data sets. Besides its
              important role as a graphic method, dimension reduction is particularly useful
              in problems where interest lies in identifying connections among the variables,
              such as classification and clustering. It is also useful when the dimension of
              a data point exceeds the total number of data points, which is typically the
              case for many scientific data sets, such as gene expression data. But the
              available dimension reduction methods have several limitations, such as
              assuming homogeneity between predictors and not be able to handle categorical
              predictors. This research will tackle these limitations of the current
              methodology. 


