Title       : Collaborative Research: Homological Methods in Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0204823

Award Number: 0204823
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57718              (Estimated)
Investigator: Benji Fisher benji@member.AMS.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:				DMS-0204823,  DMS-0204845
Principal Investigators:	Benji Fisher, 
              David Rabson

			A B S T R A C T

Fisher and Rabson are classifying the
              symmetry types of quasicrystals
in two and three dimensions and studying the
              physical consequences of
these symmetries.  The classification generalizes the
              work begun in
the nineteenth century on space groups of crystals.  The
              investigators
follow the Fourier-space approach to crystallography, which has
              the
advantage of avoiding space groups in higher dimensions.  Thus
              the
classification starts from the known list of finite subgroups of
              the
orthogonal groups O(2) and O(3).  They introduce techniques of
              group
cohomology, some of which have long been used in "direct space," to
the
              Fourier-space formulation.  These techniques lead to both
theoretical
              simplifications and efficient computational methods.  One
important
              application of these ideas is the description of certain
gauge invariants in
              terms of group homology.  The two simplest types
of homology class are
              connected with known physical phenomena:
systematic extinctions in diffraction
              patterns and crossing of
electronic bands ("band sticking").  The next
              simplest type first
occurs in a rank-five tetragonal modulated crystal and
              should be
connected with some similar phenomenon.  Tiling models are
              produced,
and the ideas are also extended to magnetic and color
              groups.

Crystallography underlies and informs much of physics, chemistry,
              and
geology. The present research has applications to recent experiments
in
              liquid crystals (related to the popular LCD displays on
wristwatches and other
              electronic equipment), plasmas, and modulated
crystals, highly symmetric
              systems that cannot be described by the
classical theory of crystals.  Ever
              since 1784, when the French abbot
Rene Just Hauy deduced the microscopic
              structure of crystals, it had
been believed impossible for a crystal to have
              the symmetries of an
icosahedron (or a soccer ball).  Precisely 200 years
              later, such
materials, called "quasicrystals," were discovered, and much
              research
has ensued into their properties.  Quasicrystals possess
              strange
electronic and physical properties and have already found
              application
as high-quality, non-stick coatings on electrosurgical blades. 
              The
present research aims to classify the symmetry types of crystals and
to
              study physical properties associated with these symmetries.

This project is
              being funded jointly by the Division of Mathematical Sciences
and the Division
              of Materials Research.

