Title       : Mathematical Structure of Blowup Solutions in Inviscid, Incompressible Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0204268

Award Number: 0204268
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123761             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman J. Zabusky nzabusky@caip.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard B. Pelz  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns the question of whether some solutions of the equations
              of incompressible, inviscid fluid flow develop spontaneous singularities in
              finite time. The objective is to uncover the mathematical structure of possible
              blowup flows suggested by the PI previous investigations. Two projects are
              planned. The first will be to use advanced computational techniques to reveal
              the asymptotic behavior associated with collapse and blowup. Previous work
              indicates that there exists an inner Leray-type self-similar solution which
              exhibits a finite-time singularity, a regular  outer solution and a matching
              region of poloidal vorticity. The other project expands upon the observation
              that all candidate blowup flows found by all investigators have one or more
              discrete symmetries and can be associated with the finite number of point and
              space groups. All fluid field variables can be associated with irreducible
              representations. How the characteristics of the discrete point groups, such as
              degeneracy, commutivity, associated lattices and space groups effect flow
              solutions will be explored. 

The equations that govern the motion of an
              incompressible fluid, such as water, are routinely used by engineers and
              scientists for design and research. The most fundamental question about these
              equations, however, has been open for more than 250 years and reflects directly
              on the validity of using these equations as a model of fluid flow: whether
              solutions remain smooth or blowup in finite time. Finding an answer to this
              question for frictionless flow is addressed in this work. It is a very
              challenging problem computationally and will be a severe test on modern
              numerical  techniques. Because of its importance, the related viscous problem
              has been selected as one of seven Clay Millennium prize problems regarded as
              the Hilbert problems for this century.  

