Title       : Modeling of Multiscale Inhomogeneous Materials with Periodic and Random
               Microstructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2002      
File        : a0204637

Award Number: 0204637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Berlyand berlyand@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0204637
PI: Leonid Berlyand
Institution: Penn State
              University
Title: Modeling of Multiscale Inhomogeneous Materials with Periodic
              and Random Microstructure

ABSRACT

The scientific core of this proposal is
              centered around four areas.  Homogenization is the common theme of all four
              areas, and it is expected that the proposed work will result in the development
              of new homogenization techniques and tools.  The first area concerns the
              discrete network approximation for highly packed high-contrast composites.  The
              main objective is to characterize the dependence of the effective transport
              properties of composites on the shapes and random locations of the filling
              particles in a rigorous mathematical framework with a controlled error
              estimate.  Our objective in the second area is to obtain analytical formulas
              for the effective properties of composites.  Such formulas reveal the explicit
              dependence of the effective properties on geometrical and physical parameters
              and provide a valuable physical insight, which can be used to test numerical
              algorithms developed for generic situations.  The important practical issue of
              polydispersity will be addressed from different perspectives in the first as
              well as the second area, and the results will be compared. The third area
              concerns the rheology of complex fluids such as polymeric composites,
              suspensions and micellar fluids.  The main features here are: (i) the
              interaction between micellar tubes or balls, which leads to a drastic change in
              the effective constitutive equations as compared with the constitutive law of
              the phases, (ii) the laminarization of the flow and drag reduction in
              viscoelastic flows (reduction in pressure).  The fourth area is the exploration
              of novel features of homogenization for some nonlinear problems with
              nonstandard boundary conditions arising in modeling of superconductors and
              liquid crystals.  The main objective is to characterize the dependence of the
              homogenization limit on the domain size and to explore the ramification of this
              size effect in physical problems.

Composite materials are of critical
              technological importance.  The modeling and design of these materials raises
              fundamental questions of physics, materials science, and mathematics.  Many of
              these questions are not yet answered, and mathematics has much to contribute. 
              This project will advance our understanding of composite materials through a
              theoretical effort of the principal investigator, his collaborators and
              advisees coordinated with experimental studies by materials scientists.  The
              long-term goal is to enhance the contribution from mathematics to very
              contemporary technological problems.  This will be done with an emphasis on
              fostering interdisciplinary connections across neighboring disciplines, as well
              as between academia, laboratories and industries.  The results of this research
              will be used in developing new materials with superior properties for various
              industrial needs.  The main applications include the design of thermal
              protection packages for electronic industries, which will address the need for
              further miniaturization of modern electronic devices (e.g., cell phones); the
              use of fluids with polymer and micellar additives for cooling of various
              devices (e.g., reactors) and more efficient transport of oil; and the
              optimization of transport properties of polydispersed suspensions.


