Title       : Second-order Automated Deduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0204362

Award Number: 0204362
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188137             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Beeson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Jose State Univ Fdn
	      Post Office Box 720130
	      San Jose, CA  951720130    408/924-1400

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0204362
Beeson, Michael
San Jose State Univ Fdn

This award will
              enhance the theorem-prover Otter to cope better with second-order logic. It
              will use this enhanced version of Otter to formalize a small amount of
              elementary number theory, a small amount of set theory, and theorems about the
              cardinality of finite sets, as required to proceed to theorems in group theory
              as usually presented in an undergraduate course in algebra, up to and perhaps
              (but not necessarily) including the Sylow theorems.   It will also enhance
              Otter by adding a capability for polynomial simplification,  which in turn will
              enable it to proceed further in number theory.  Although first-order group
              theory has been a source of many test problems for automated deduction, the
              material in an undergraduate course typically begins with theorems about
              subgroups and homomorphisms, and uses the concept of a prime number,  so
              second-order logic (or set theory) and induction are essential ingredients to
              even sophomore-level mathematics. It is high time that theorem-provers be made
              able to cope with these fundamental areas of mathematics, which are naturally
              multi-sorted (elements, numbers, functions, and sets) and second-order
              (elements, cosets, subgroups).


The long-term aim of automated deduction is
              to make the computer useful as a "mathematician's assistant".   The goal is
              that the computer could check proofs,  filling in any missing details, and
              verify their correctness.  Perhaps the computer could carry out some of the
              simpler parts of the mathematics mechanically.  Maybe (in the distant future)
              the computer might even prove interesting new theorems on a regular basis.   At
              present computers can be used for some kinds of calculations,  but their use
              for helping with proofs is in its infancy, in spite of half a century of
              research.   Part of the problem is the richness of mathematical language;  part
              of the problem is the complicated relationship between calculations and proofs;
              and part of the problem is the "needle-in-the-haystack" difficulty of finding a
              proof or disproof of an unsolved conjecture.    Otter  is a theorem-proving
              program developed at Argonne National Laboratories. This research will provide
              some enhancements to Otter that should help it deal with the "richness of
              language" problem and the "calculations within proofs"  problem.   To test the
              effectiveness of our efforts, the PI will try to "computerize" some theorems in
              mathematics that are usually taught in the sophomore or junior year to
              mathematics majors.   These are theorems in an area of mathematics called
              "group theory", which usually comes after calculus and is widely used in many
              branches of mathematics and physics.  Many of the theorems found in the first
              course in this subject have so far resisted attempts to get computers to prove
              them.  

