Title       : Group proposal in topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0204615

Award Number: 0204615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $530514             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Peter May may@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ib Madsen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John Greenlees  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shmuel Weinberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204615
J. Peter May

This project deals with research in a wide range of
              topics 
in topology, geometry, and related areas of mathematics. 
May studies
              a variety of categorical and homotopical 
structures in stable homotopy
              theory, equivariant 
algebraic topology, and other fields. Although his
              current 
work is primarily foundational, his students and collaborators,
              
among others, make extensive  calculational applications of it. 
He and his
              collaborators have recently unified the foundations 
of stable homotopy theory
              by proving that all of the 
new highly structured categories of spectra are
              Quillen 
equivalent model categories, via structure-preserving functors. 
The
              analogous, and deeper, unification of the foundations of equivariant stable
              homotopy has also been carried out. Within 
algebraic topology, May has been
              working on various other 
projects in equivariant and non-equivariant homotopy
              theory. 
He has also been working on various topics that have roots in
              
algebraic topology but are of a more general nature. 
In particular, he has
              recently obtained a new definition 
of enriched weak $n$-categories and has
              spearheaded a very 
large scale unification project in higher category theory.
              
Weinberger studies various areas of geometric topology and 
differential
              geometry. He has a longstanding interest 
in transformation groups, especially
              surgery theory on 
manifolds with group actions. In particular, he studies
              
problems concerned with removing the ``gap hypothesis'' 
that obstructs the
              direct generalization of the 
nonequivariant theory. Weinberger also has a
              longstanding 
interest in the Novikov, Borel, and Baum-Connes conjectures,
              
and he has made recent progress on them. In a new direction, 
Weinberger has
              been engaged in a large scale collaboration
with Nabutovsky that concerns
              applications of logic to 
Riemannian variational problems and to the large
              scale 
geometry of moduli spaces. Some of his recent results defy 
easy
              characterization. For one example, he has applied an 
old theorem of Browder
              about finite H-spaces to obtain a 
theorem about the "social choice problem".
              For another, 
in recent work with Farb he has shown that "hidden
              symmetries"
on a locally symmetric manifold force it to be
              arithmetic.

Besides May, the algebraic topology group at Chicago 
includes
              four nontenured faculty and eight graduate 
students. The geometry group
              includes Weinberger and 
four other tenured faculty, six nontenured faculty,
              and 
fifteen graduate students. There is considerable interaction
between
              these groups, and between them and other groups 
at Chicago, such as the
              geometric Langlands group and 
the algebraic geometry group. The research
              funded by this 
grant is part of a web of research projects in progress at
              
the University of Chicago.

