Title       : Invariants of Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  2002      
File        : a0204311

Award Number: 0204311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108182             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Robert Meyerhoff robert.meyerhoff@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204311
G. Robert Meyerhoff

The monumental work of W. Thurston has shown
              the fundamental 
importance of hyperbolic 3-manifolds within the study of
              3-
manifolds.  The proposer plans to work on a hard open problem in 
the
              theory of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and to attempt to strengthen 
connections
              between number theory and the study of invariants of 
hyperbolic 3-manifolds. 
              The hard open question is the problem of 
finding the closed hyperbolic
              3-manifold of minimum volume.  The 
proposer, working jointly with D. Gabai
              and P. Milley, and in 
consultation with N. Thurston, has a computer-based
              scheme to 
attack this problem.  The computational aspects of the approach are
              
interesting in their own right.  The connection between number
              
theory/algebraic K-theory and invariants of hyperbolic 3-manifolds 
is
              well-known, but a new approach to understanding it is proposed. 
              
Specifically, a new method for computing the Chern-Simons invariant 
of a
              hyperbolic 3-manifold might lead to interesting properties of the 
dilogarithm
              function.

Almost 200 years ago, J. Bolyai, C. Gauss, and N. Lobachevsky
              
revolutionized mathematics by claiming that a legitimate geometry 
could be
              constructed by taking the five classical postulates of Euclid 
and negating
              the fifth postulate (the parallel postulate).   Further,
they theorized that
              this new and mysterious non-Euclidean geometry 
(now called "hyperbolic
              geometry") would have important applications.  
Their theorizing has been
              borne out:  hyperbolic geometry is vitally
important in the modern study of
              geometry.  For example, hyperbolic
geometry turns out to be much more
              important than Euclidean geometry
in the study of "3-dimensional manifolds"
              (our 3-dimensional
Universe is an example of a 3-dimensional manifold).  As
              another
example, it is quite possible that our Universe adheres to the
              laws
of non-Euclidean geometry rather than the laws of Euclidean
              geometry.
The proposer, working jointly with D. Gabai and P. Milley, and in
              
consultation with N. Thurston, plans to work on a computer-based 
approach
              to solving one of the hardest and most fundamental problems 
about hyperbolic
              3-manifolds: finding the smallest one.  In addition, the
proposer will try to
              strengthen the already existing connection between 
hyperbolic 3-manifolds and
              number theory.  The history of mathematics
has borne out the importance of
              finding strong connections between
(supposedly) disparate areas of
              mathematics.



