Title       : Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological Informatics for FY 2002
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 20,  2003  
File        : a0204210

Award Number: 0204210
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Carter Kimsey                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lydia P. Olander lolander@globalecology.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : L, Olander
	      Dept. of Biological Sciences
	      Stanford, CA  943055020    650/725-3959

NSF Program : 1398      BIO INFOR POSTDOCT RSCH FELLOW
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Biological
              Informatics for FY2002.  The fellowship supports research and training at the
              postdoctoral level at the intersection of biology and the informational,
              computational, mathematical, and statistical sciences. The goal of the
              fellowship is to provide training to a young scientist in preparation for a
              career in biological informatics in which research and education will be
              integrated. There is an increasing need for training in biological informatics
              at all occupational levels, and it is expected that Fellows trained through
              these fellowships will play important roles in training the future
              workforce.

The research and training plan for this fellowship is entitled
              "Predicting the effects of land use change on nutrient limitation to ecosystem
              productivity and carbon storage in the humid tropics."  Where land-use alters
              nutrient dynamics, nutrient impoverishment may alter recovery rates, maximum
              recoverable productivity, carbon storage, and water and energy fluxes.  Current
              biogeochemical models have insufficient representation of phosphorus and other
              rock-derived nutrients often critical in tropical systems, and are unable to
              deal with rapid shifts typical of land-use change.  This study develops
              mechanistic nutrient models at various spatial/temporal scales incorporating
              improvements into general biogeochemical models (Century/Terraflux) and testing
              predictions under various land-use scenarios.  

