Title       : Lunar Laser Ranging at the University of Texas at Austin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0204127

Award Number: 0204127
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $598055             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter J. Shelus pjs@astro.as.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0204127
Shelus

The Lunar Laser Ranging (LLR) experiment accurately
              measures the round-trip travel time for a 
laser pulse that is emitted from an
              observing station on the Earth and returns after bouncing off 
of a
              retroreflector  array on the surface of the  Moon.  Such observations have been
              made at 
McDonald Observatory for more than 30 years.  The data provide for
              varied, multi-disciplinary 
and inter-disciplinary science results in areas of
              solid Earth sciences, geodesy and geodynamics, 
solar system ephemerides,
              terrestrial and celestial reference frames, lunar physics, general 
relativity
              and gravitational physics.  Standing alone or combined with data from other
              observing 
techniques, LLR expands the understanding of the precession of the
              Earth.s spin axis, the lunar 
nutation, Earth orientatation, the Earth.s
              obliquity to the ecliptic, the intersection of the celestial 
equator and the
              ecliptic, lunar and solar solid body tides, lunar tidal deceleration, lunar
              physical 
and free librations, the structure of the moon and energy
              dissipation in the lunar interior.  LLR 
provides input into lunar surface
              cartography and surveying and helps determine Earth station 
and lunar surface
              retroreflector locations and motions, mass of the Earth-Moon system, lunar and
              
terrestrial  gravity harmonics and  Love numbers, relativistic  geodesic
              precession, and the 
equivalence principle of general relativity.  Due to the
              passive nature of the reflectors  and the 
improvement  of  observing 
              equipment  and  data  analysis  capabilities  with  time,  LLR  data  will
              
continue to provide for improved results.  Gains are steady and, as the data
              base expands, we are 
striving to learn even more by applying more clever
              observation strategies. 
 
Under this proposal, we continue the LLR
              observational effort at the McDonald Laser Ranging 
Station (MLRS).  With
              routine single-person operation and a 24 hour/day, 7 day/week schedule, 
lunar
              coverage will be substantial in the years to come, as we share the use of the
              MLRS with 
artificial satellite laser ranging (SLR) efforts.  We are
              cooperating with other observing efforts 
around the world, especially the
              French LLR/SLR station in the south of France.  In addition to 
the
              observations, an analysis effort with world-wide communication, cooperation,
              and 
coordination will be ongoing here at the University of Texas at Austin.
              We cooperate with 
analysis efforts at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, the
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the 
Paris Observatory, and the BKG in
              Frankfurt and Munich. 
 
Also,  the  University  of  Texas McDonald 
              Observatory,  since  the  inception  of  the  International 
Laser Ranging
              Service (ILRS) in 1998, houses the ILRS LLR Operations and Analysis Center. 
              
The small size of the LLR observing network, and the relatively small number
              of LLR analysis 
centers, dictate the unique nature and operational procedures
              of this LLR Operations/Analysis 
Center. The responsibility of the LLR
              Operations Center has evolved to be one that assures the 
smooth flow of data
              through the LLR network, in a form and format that is useful for obtaining
              
scientific results.  The center also coordinates the observations and their
              scheduling in a manner 
to maximum the scientific gains.  Predicts are
              coordinated on-site at each LLR station and the 
data are automatically
              transferred from all observing sites to the  ILRS data centers.  LLR data
              
analysts  can secure their data directly from the data centers as needed.  
              Feed-back  from these 
analysts often goes directly back to the individual
              observing stations. 
 
Under the auspices of  this National Science
              Foundation Grant, we are looking forward to 
additional  years  of  successful
              LLR  observation  and  analysis,  resulting  in  the  steady  and  rapid
              expansion of scientific results. 
***
