Title       : Degradation Modeling, Reliability Analysis, and Quality Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204247

Award Number: 0204247
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259477             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vijayan N. Nair vnn@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9147,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0204247
PI: Vijayan Nair
Title: Degradation Modeling,
              Reliability Analysis, and Quality Improvement

Abstract

Degradation data
              are a very rich source of reliability information and offer many advantages
              over the analysis of time-to-failure data. This project will develop a flexible
              class of models for analyzing degradation data and related reliability
              inference. These results will be used to obtain efficient methods for the
              design and analysis of accelerated tests and reliability improvement
              experiments. In this work, time-to-failure is defined as the level crossing
              (first-passage time) of a specified degradation threshold. The first part of
              the project will consider models based on diffusion processes for analyzing
              degradation data with continuous sample paths. These models can accommodate a
              variety of degradation rates and shapes. They also lead naturally to a wide
              class of time-to-failure distributions. The inverse Gaussian distribution plays
              a central role, similar to the exponential distribution with constant hazard
              rates. The second part will study a class of degradation-based models for
              repairable systems data that is quite analogous to non-homogeneous Poisson
              processes with failure data. Multi-state degradation models will also be
              considered. This work is an interesting generalization of the formulation in
              traditional statistical process control. Degradation data allow for more
              informative accelerated tests and reliability improvement studies. Several
              research topics on design of accelerated degradation tests, analysis of data
              from reliability improvement experiments, and robust design studies will be
              pursued.

There has been tremendous emphasis on quality and reliability
              improvement in industry, driven by global competition and increasing customer
              expectations. There is also continued pressure to reduce product development
              costs and cycle times. Design, development, and manufacturing of
              highly-reliable products in this environment raise many challenges. The focus
              within the reliability area has traditionally been on the collection and
              analysis of time-to-failure data. High reliability implies few failures, so
              reliability estimation and improvement for product and process design can be
              extremely difficult. Fortunately, recent advances in sensing and measurement
              technologies are making it feasible to collect extensive amounts of data on
              degradation and other performance measures associated with components, systems,
              and manufacturing processes. However, the lack of flexible models and methods
              inference has been a major deterrent to the widespread use of degradation data
              for reliability analysis. This project will develop new models and methods for
              analyzing reliability data and use them for quality improvement.

