Title       : Degenerate Microlocal Methods and Geometric Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0204730

Award Number: 0204730
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $238500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rafe R. Mazzeo mazzeo@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
NSF Proposal DMS - 0204730: Rafe Mazzeo

The proposed work in this project
              involves the continuing
development of analytic tools to study a variety of
              problems
in geometric analysis. These include the global theory of
the moduli
              space of constant mean curvature surfaces in Euclidean
space, the application
              of new gluing techniques to construct
new types of Einstein metrics, a more
              detailed study of the
analytic and geometric behaviour of conformally compact
              Einstein
metrics and the deformation theory of such metrics, with
              special
attention to self-dual conformally compact Einstein metrics in
four
              dimensions. The proposed techniques here include further
extensions of Cauchy
              data matching, as developed by the PI and
Pacard, as well as refinements of
              the PI's `edge calculus'.Abstract for 
Other parts of the proposal involve use
              of the pseudodifferential
calculus of fibred boundary operators, as developed
              by the PI and
Melrose, to the study of gravitational instantons,
              particularly
their L2 cohomology. Finally, the PI and Vasy propose
              to
investigate the connections between geometric scattering theory
on
              symmetric spaces of rank greater than one, as well as a
class of spaces
              asymptotically modelled on these, and the
microlocal theory of quantum N-body
              scattering. For the human
resources component, the PI proposes to continue his
              directorship
of the Stanford University Math Camp, a residential
              summer
program for talented high school students, and also to continue
his
              other outreach efforts to disseminate mathematics appreciation
to the general
              public.

From a more general point of view, the PI's research
              concerns
problems arising in geometry and analysis involving what are
known
              as curvature equations (the theory of Einstein metrics in
general relativity
              being the best-known case) as well as scattering
theory on spaces which
              possess high degrees of symmetry `at infinity'.
A central concern throughout
              is the application of somewhat novel
techniques from harmonic and microlocal
              analysis to these problems. The
theme is that one should develop analytic
              techniques which are
specifically adapted to each geometric problem, and these
              geometric
settings in turn should suggest new developments in the
              analytic
technology. This approach has proved very successful in the
              PI's
previous research. The problems considered here are inspired by
              main
trends in various aspects of mathematical physics, most specifically
the
              two somewhat separate fields of quantum scattering and some parts
of string
              theory. Some of the current and proposed work has already
stimulated interest
              on the part of some communities of physicists,
and their intuitions provide an
              interesting guide for further mathematical
directions in this work. Beyond
              these motivations, the PI regards this
particular interplay between geometry
              and analysis as an important one,
particularly because the types of geometric
              objects studied here are
becoming increasingly important in many other places
              in mathematics.
The PI has also undertaken extensive human resources
              development,
including the above-mentioned summer program, and is active
              in
mentoring a number of young researchers.

