Title       : Geometric Analysis with Applications in Low Dimensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2002       
File        : a0204496

Award Number: 0204496
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Wentworth wentworth@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Grant DMS-0204496
Title: Geometric Analysis with Applications in Low
              Dimensions
Principal Investigator: Richard A. Wentworth (Johns Hopkins
              University)


The PI proposes three research projects in the area of
              geometric analysis.
This work will produce new results on rigidity problems in
              low dimensional
topology, a better understanding of certain geometric
              structures on
3-manifolds arising from complex analysis, and a new approach to
              regularity
issues for a type of minimizing subvariety. The first project deals
              with
homomorphisms from fundamental groups of Riemannian manifolds to the
              mapping
class group of a compact oriented surface.  Examples arise as
              monodromy
representations of surface bundles.  Building on previous work in
              this area,
the PI will use harmonic map theory to give a new proof of the
              finiteness
theorem of Farb-Kaimanovich-Masur for lattices in higher rank Lie
              groups.
New results for lattices in rank one groups will be obtained from
              these
techniques.  Symplectic Lefschetz pencils also provide
              especially
interesting examples to which this method may be applied. The
              second project
studies spherical CR structures on 3-manifolds.  The PI will
              consider three
aspects of the subject: uniformizability, rigidity, and
              compactness.  The
research will develop a new approach to these problems based
              on subelliptic
analogs of harmonic map equations.  A goal of the work will be
              to prove a
compactness theorem which will have implications for new
              3-manifold
invariants. The third part of the proposal seeks to extend the
              method of
Taubes to prove regularity results for certain calibrated
              rectifiable
currents.  This will provide a clarifying framework for a variety
              of
geometric constructions that are of current interest.  In addition to
              these
new projects the PI will complete previous work on a conjecture of
              Bando-Siu
concerning the Yang-Mills flow on higher dimensional Kaehler
              manifolds.


One of the most fascinating subjects in contemporary
              mathematics is the
study of spaces of dimensions three and four.  These are
              also the most
important from a physical point of view, since we live in three
              dimensional
space, and dynamical behavior takes place in four dimensional
              space-time.
The use of analytic techniques to understand the geometry and
              topology of
low dimensional spaces continues to be a fruitful avenue of
              research, but
there is much work still to be done.  The focus of the PI's
              research in the
area of the geometry of low dimensions and mathematical
              applications of new
ideas in physics.  
.

