Title       : Robust Statistics for Correlated Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204297

Award Number: 0204297
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $179186             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc G. Genton genton@stat.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              D. D. Boos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard A. Stefanski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DMS-0204297
PI: M. Genton

Title: Robust Statistics For
              Correlated Data

This research focuses on two main new ideas. First, the
              concept of breakdown point is generalized to correlated observations by
              defining the critical region of the badness measure implicitly rather than
              explicitly, thus covering situations with both uncorrelated and correlated
              observations. Secondly, a new method to robustify likelihoods is introduced
              that can be applied in any situation where a parametric likelihood is
              available. This new approach is intimately connected to measurement error
              models and reduces to well-known contaminated normal likelihoods in
              location-scale independent, identically distributed settings. This new approach
              will be used to robustify many of the commonly used methods in spatial data
              settings.

The applications of this research include real data sources from
              environmental sciences, namely ozone concentrations and fine particulate matter
              in the U.S. This work will have impact on both, theoretical statisticians and
              practitioners of spatio-temporal statistics, and hence will foster
              collaboration between academia and industry. It aims to provide more reliable
              analyses of spatio-temporal data sets, and thus contribute to a better
              understanding of physical processes governing atmospherically-transported
              pollutants. In particular, it will provide more reliable evaluations of the
              effectiveness of the legislated emission reductions mandated in the Clean Air
              Act Amendments of 1990. Moreover, this project will support the teaching and
              promotion of robust statistics and spatio-temporal statistics at North Carolina
              State University.

