Title       : Topics in Predictive and Descriptive Data Mining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0204029

Award Number: 0204029
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2011       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerome Friedman jhf@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PI: Jerry Friedman
DMS-0204029


This proposal seeks support for
              research in predictive and descriptive data mining (DM). Decision tree methods
              are the most popular predictive DM tools. Research under this grant will
              investigate ways to overcome their most serious limitation: severe over fitting
              in the presence of categorical (factorial) predictor variables with very large
              numbers of values (factors). Cluster analysis is often used as a tool in
              descriptive DM. In most DM applications a large number of variables are
              measured on each observation. Usually clustering, if it exists, occurs only
              within (often small) unknown subsets of all the measured variables. Moreover,
              individual clusters may represent groupings on (possibly overlapping) variable
              subsets. The goal is to identify the clustered groups as well as the particular
              variable subsets on which each one preferentially clusters. Traditional
              clustering algorithms are not well suited for this task. Research under this
              grant will investigate new approaches for solving this problem, especially in
              situations where there are a very large number of measured variables.

Data
              mining is used to discover patterns and relationships in data, with an emphasis
              on very large data bases. It has had a major impact in business, industry,
              science, medicine, and most recently homeland security. Data mining activities
              divide into two types: predictive and descriptive. Predictive DM involves using
              past observational data from a system to build a mathematical model of that
              system. The model is used to predict some future unknown property (attribute or
              variable) of the system, given other properties that will be known in the
              future. Descriptive DM seeks to construct compact, interpretable summaries of
              the data in order to understand patterns and relationships, without focusing on
              the prediction of particular attributes. This research will investigate new
              methodologies for increasing the power of both descriptive and predictive DM in
              problems for which they have been traditionally weak. 

