Title       : Symbolic Representation Based Partial Order Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0204159

Award Number: 0204159
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. P. Iyer purush@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Symbolic Representation Based Partial Order Methods
S. Purushothaman Iyer


              Symbolic representations are used in analysis of finite and infinite
state
              concurrent system.  However, they could be subjected to
constraint explosion
              much like state explosion in analysis of finite
state designs of concurrent
              systems.  The reason for both of these explosions
is the consideration of all
              interleavings, of a concurrent system, during their
analysis.

Partial-order
              techniques depend upon the notion of independence among
actions to avoid
              considering all possible interleavings.  The  proposed
research will
              investigate the notion of unfolding, which aids both in
discovery of
              independent actions and in succinctly representing the state
space of systems.
               In particular, the proposed research will address the 
following topics:


              o How to build unfoldings for real-time automata as available, for 
     
              instance, in the tool-set UPPAAL.

 o Implementation of an unfolding-based
              partial order method for UPPAAL.

 o A comparative (theoretical)
              investigation of unfoldings and current partial
      order methods, with a
              view to generalizing unfoldings to other infinite
      state systems.  
 

              o Empirical evaluation of the proposed implementation against current
     
              practices.

The proposed research will aid in faster, and more complete,
              analysis of
infinite state concurrent systems than is currently possible.

