Title       : Gaussian Methods and Probability Estimates of Rare Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0204513

Award Number: 0204513
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113374             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenbo Li wli@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0204513
Li
	This research centers on developing Gaussian methods for the study
              of rare events, mainly depending on small values of a positive random quantity.
              The major objectives are to extend the understanding of related topics and
              build a general theory based on systematic study of various techniques and
              applications. The recent completion of the connection between small ball
              probabilities and metric entropy problems allows applications of tools and
              results from functional analysis to provide the most powerful method available
              at this time for estimating the lower bound for Gaussian processes. In turn, it
              suggests many further questions connected to applications in probability theory
              and geometric functional analysis. Similar relationships will be studied for
              other random processes such as stable processes and Gaussian chaos. The
              overview on rare events depending on small values unifies many problems from
              diverse areas in mathematics. The very successful applications of Gaussian
              methods to lower tail probabilities, the Brownian pursuit models and the first
              exit times will be expanded to a detailed study of zeros of random polynomials,
              balancing vectors, and Hadamard matrices. 
	The primary focus of this research
              is a better understanding of rare random phenomena related to Gaussian
              processes and others which serve as models in many applications. These types of
              problems often arise in estimating the chances for rare events to occur in
              areas where such events are of fundamental importance, such as weather,
              economic indices, epidemics, etc. This research should improve our
              understanding of rare random events and provide basic tools for the study of
              our random environment. 

