Title       : Algebraic and Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0204169

Award Number: 0204169
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence R. Taylor Laurence.R.Taylor.2@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Dwyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward B. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204169
Laurence R. Taylor
William G. Dwyer
E. Bruce Williams

This is
              a proposal in algebraic topology, and deals primarily 
with questions in
              stable and unstable homotopy theory. The 
stable side has to do with the study
              of ring spectra. One goal 
is to study duality in stable homotopy theory and
              relate it to
classical types of duality for commutative rings; a possible
              
outcome is a clearer understanding of Gross-Hopkins duality. 
Another goal
              is to study spaces of associative ring structures 
from a general deformation
              theory point of view. On the unstable 
side, the proposal envisages a
              conceptual classification of 
p-compact groups (especially at the prime 2), a
              comprehensive
theory of spaces of natural transformations between various
              
familiar functors, and a study of the homology of homotopy 
limits. There
              are also geometric topology components involving smoothings of four-space,
              L-group calculations, and questions 
related to Riemann-Roch theorems for
              Waldhausen K-theory.

In a general sense, the proposal deals with the problem
              of
understanding geometric shapes, especially shapes with more 
than three
              dimensions. These shapes (called spaces) can arise, 
for instance, as the
              collection of all states of a physical 
system, or the collection of all
              configurations of a 
complicated mechanical device. The basic goal is to
              develop 
a method for describing spaces in terms of numbers and other
              
algebraic objects, in the expectation that this will make it
possible to
              quantify the subtle geometric characteristics of 
spaces, and allow for the
              study of relationships betweens 
spaces of various types. Some spaces, called
              manifolds, are
particularly symmetrical, and among other things the proposal
              
involves studying the associated symmetry properties of their 
algebraic
              invariants.

