Title       : Collaborative Research: Mathematical Studies of Certain Geophysical Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204794

Award Number: 0204794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edriss S. Titi etiti@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Computer predictions of phenomena on large or global scales, for
              example
weather or climate forecasts, need to compromise between accuracy of
              the 
predictions and available computing resources. It is therefore a
              grand
scientific challenge to derive global climate  models which are reliable
              
and trustworthy. Exploiting certain geophysical balances, such as
              
geostrophic balance (due to earth rotation) or hydrostatic balance 
(due to
              the shallowness of the ocean and atmosphere) geophysicists derive
 reasonable,
              yet less complex, balanced models. It is therefore essential to 
justify
              rigorously the  validity of these models, for the relevant spatial
and time
              scales. The focus  of the proposed project is on the analytical,
statistical
              and numerical properties of solutions to nonlinear ocean 
dynamics models and
              turbulent sub-grid models. The first aspect of this 
project is to: show
              existence, uniqueness and continuous dependence on 
initial data, to some of
              these reduced geophysical models. In particular, 
a two-layer zonal jet model,
              a planetary geostrophic ``thermocline'' model, 
the lake equations with
              degenerate varying bottom topography and the 
two-dimensional primitive
              equations. This is the first and the most essential 
step in validating the
              derivation of these  models. In order to justify the 
long-time behavior of
              fluid dynamical models, one has to compare the statistical 
properties of
              their attracting invariant sets, rather than compare individual
solutions. To
              do so, it is necessary to focus on models which include some 
mechanism of
              dissipation. This project addresses questions related to the asymptotic
              
derivation of these models and the effect of numerical dissipation on their
              
solutions, which include boundary layer analysis. The second aspect of
              this
project is to: derive new large-eddy simulation models, the so-called
              alpha-models, 
in the context  of the  two-layers geostrophic zonal jet
              models. The alpha-models 
are asserted to reproduce the right energy spectrum
              for a wide range  of large 
scales. It is proposed to investigate  this claim
              using rigorous analytical tools. 
It is also proposed to perform computational
              tests on the newly derived two-layers 
geostrophic zonal jet alpha-model to
              verify the above assertion. Furthermore, 
it is proposed to explore the
              implementation of the alpha-models approach as 
sub-grid models. 

The grand
              challenge in climate prediction is that the mathematical equations 
governing
              the ocean and atmosphere dynamics, are too difficult to study 
analytically,
              and still prohibitively expensive computationally. Indeed, 
it is well
              established, based on physical grounds and collected experimental 
data, that
              atmospheric and oceanic turbulent flows involve a broad spectrum 
of spatial
              and time scales. This in turn  makes them inaccessible  to the most 
powerful 
              and state-of-the-art computers. However, due to the rotation of the 
earth and
              other geophysical situations, such as the shallowness of the oceans 
and the
              atmosphere - in the sense that they are much wider than they are deep -
              
geophysicists take advantage of certain geophysical balances to derive
              simplified
balanced models. The first theme of this project is to: establish
              existence 
and regularity of solutions to some of these nonlinear reduced
              models. This is
a crucial step  in justifying the derivation  of these models
              and their
consistency with the physical observations for the relevant length 
              and time 
scales. Furthermore, in global climate prediction one is interested
              in the 
long-time statistical features of the climate. The second theme of
              this project 
is to develop a systematic approach for deriving and studying 
              new averaged 
models, in the context of ocean and atmosphere dynamics, which
              are reliable in 
reproducing the correct long-term statistics. 
