Title       : Stochastic Differential Equations and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204332

Award Number: 0204332
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125201             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jin Ma majin@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0204332 
Ma
	The principal investigator proposes to study various issues
              involving stochastic differential equations (hereafter SDEs), stochastic
              partial differential equations (SPDEs), and their relations with partial
              differential equations (PDEs). A new "functional" form of nonlinear Feynman-Kac
              formula is sought, via a study of the general theory of backward stochastic
              differential equations (BSDEs) with non-Lipschitz coefficients. The path
              regularity of the solutions to reflected backward SDEs (RBSDEs) will be
              studied, with an eye on its application to the numerical method for such
              equations. The study will also lead to the regularity of solutions to a class
              of obstacle problems in PDEs, via some new probabilistic representation
              formulae for the derivatives of such solutions. The PI proposes to continue his
              research on the new notion of stochastic viscosity solution for nonlinear
              SPDEs, including the stability and uniqueness results in the fully nonlinear
              case. Some stochastic control/stochastic finance problems, inspired by a risk
              reserve model involving investment, will receive strong attention. One example
              is the optimal retention/investment problem for an insurance company that uses
              the ruin probability as its stability criterion. 
	The Feynman-Kac Formula is
              a powerful tool that links probability theory to analysis, especially to the
              theory of partial differential equations. The nonlinear form of this formula is
              useful for studying many nonlinear parabolic partial differential equations
              such as reaction diffusion equations, derived from expansion of advantaged
              genes in biology, combustion theory, as well as chemical kinetics. The
              celebrated Black-Scholes formula in modern stochastic finance theory and the
              Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation in stochastic control theory are also, in
              essence, examples of the formula. The main part of the proposed research is to
              discover the possibility of advancing such formulae to a higher level, either
              by considering the "functional form", or by considering the "stochastic form"
              (viscosity solution of fully nonlinear SPDEs). Some stochastic control problems
              arising from finance, insurance, and many other fields are naturally considered
              as applications of the theory. 

