Title       : Mathematical Tools for Imaging Reconstruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0204682

Award Number: 0204682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284038             (Estimated)
Investigator: F. Alberto Grunbaum grunbaum@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research program has a two-pronged approach aimed at identifying important
              areas in imaging that are ripe for enhanced mathematical treatment.  The PI's
              main goal is to apply newly developed mathematical tools to such imaging
              problems as well as to consider new imaging situations that suggest the need to
              develop or adapt new mathematical techniques.  The classical theory of scalar
              valued spherical functions unifies a number of classical approximation methods.
               These include Jacobi polynomials, Bessel functions, Laguerre polynomials,
              Hermite polynomials, and Legendre functions.  The PI has extended this theory
              to matrix valued situations.  This will be the main tool in solving the imaging
              problems.  Natural candidates involve areas where polarization or anisotropy
              (as in optical tomography) play important roles.  

These imaging methods
              will be applied in biomedical areas, including X-ray, magnetic resonance, X-ray
              crystallography, and optical tomography.  The National Research Council rported
              that there was a potential for great progress in the emerging field of optical
              or diffuse tomography, where one aims at obtaining images with the use of very
              low energy probes, like infrared lasers.  From the beginning there was a need
              to deal both with attenuation and scattering.  The techniques developed in this
              research should improve the ability to reconstruct images using these
              techniques.  Other applications envisaged are repeated mammographies and
              certain brain blood flow studies (measuring oxygen content) in neonatal
              clinics.  The PI will work closely with those who are developing the
              instrumation hardware.  
