Title       : Shape-Restricted Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0204572

Award Number: 0204572
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68367              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Meyer mmeyer@stat.uga.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DMS-0204572
PI: Mary Meyer

Title: Shape-Restricted
              Inference

Consider the problem of estimating a function given observations
              with some random component. The function may be a regression function, a
              density, or a probability density function such as in bioassay models.
              Shape-restricted methods allow the practitioner to impose only qualitative
              restrictions on the class of functions, such as increasing, concave, or
              sigmoidal. Estimates may be obtained using maximum-likelihood ideas; there are
              many problems in inference to be solved. Goals for this proposal include
              developing confidence bounds for regression functions using shape restrictions,
              developing tests for an ANCOVA type of model with a shape-restricted covariate,
              time-series analysis with shape-restricted trend function, smooth
              shape-restricted function estimation, and developing a robust regression
              estimator using a shape-restricted error density.

Traditional statistical
              methods for regression, density estimation and bioassay problems include: 1)
              estimating a function, 2) estimating the quality of fit, perhaps using
              confidence bounds, and 3) testing hypotheses about the function. The
              investigator wishes to develop these methods nonparametrically, that is,
              without imposing a parametric form for the function. Shape-restricted methods
              in statistics approach these estimation and inference problems with a minimum
              of assumptions about the functional form. For example, a growth curve may be
              assumed to be increasing and concave, or a probability curve might be
              sigmoidal- a more general assumption than the usual logistic model. A density
              function might be assumed to be symmetric and unimodal, in a situation where
              stronger assumptions like normality might not be justified. A fit to a function
              using fewer assumptions will have more fidelity to the data. Perhaps more
              importantly, these shape-restricted fits may be used to test the validity of
              the parametric models, or to select from several candidate parametric models. 
              

