Title       : Stochastic Spatial Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0204422

Award Number: 0204422
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123032             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Theodore Cox jtcox@mailbox.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	This research involves several topics in the theory and application of
              interacting particle systems. These processes are stochastic models for large
              systems of interacting components. Among the phenomena these systems model are:
              competition of species, epidemics, spread of genetic traits, catalytic chemical
              reactions, and more. The investigator will pursue research on several specific
              problems. The first project involves the mutually catalytic branching process,
              which models the evolution of two populations whose growth rates depend on one
              another. The second project concerns the relationship between low density
              interacting particle systems and measure-valued diffusions, especially the
              convergence of rescaled versions of the former to super-Brownian motion. The
              third project treats some questions from mathematical genetics, especially
              limiting results for the stepping stone model on the two dimensional integer
              lattice. In the fourth project a class of generalized branching random walks is
              considered. The key to resolving the main question of local extinction versus
              stability for this class appears to be the analysis of a particular case with a
              certain minimal branching rate which takes a form not previously
              considered.
	This research involves several topics in the theory and
              application of interacting particle systems or stochastic spatial processes.
              The goal of this research is to obtain a better qualitative understanding of
              various complex phenomena that interacting particle systems model well. These
              are large systems made up of many interacting components, usually with a
              stochastic or random element. For example, a simple model for the evolution of
              a genetic trait through a spatially distributed population fits into this
              framework. It incorporates the movement of individuals across spatially
              distributed colonies, and mutation at a small rate. The investigator hopes to
              show that this type of model can give more accurate results than the
              traditional, simpler non-spatial models widely used. Part of the proposed
              research concerns very specific models and questions such as this one, and part
              of the proposed research will aim at developing general mathematical techniques
              for handling models of this type.
