Title       : RUI: Spatial and Temporal Variation in Smoldering Combustion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0204747

Award Number: 0204747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31095              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Schult dschult@colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9229,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0204747
PI: 			Schult, Daniel
Institution:
              		Colgate University
Program: 		Applied Mathematics
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: RUI: Spatial and Temporal Variation in
              Smoldering Combustion

Models of smoldering combustion require a description
              of porous fluid flow as well as a description of the reaction process.  The
              resulting partial differential equations are highly nonlinear, making
              description of the solutions difficult.  Numerical simulations involving
              adaptive methods which change resolution as the process evolves are necessary
              to resolve these solutions.  Asymptotic methods have also been successful in
              describing steady and slowly varying approximate solutions to these models. 
              The proposed project involves extending both asymptotic and numerical methods
              in order to study non-steady and spatially varying smolder combustion.  These
              techniques will then be used to describe the details of the dynamics and
              transitions of these solutions.  The techniques developed will likely be
              applicable in other areas of combustion and problems of flow in porous media. 
              This project should be of interest to scientists using asymptotic methods,
              using adaptive numerical methods for high-performance computing, interested in
              issues of stability of solutions with many time scales, or interested in the
              development of chaotic solutions.  The results should be of particular interest
              to fire safety experts and combustion control engineers who wish to understand
              dynamics of smoldering near extinction limits, transitions from smoldering to
              flaming and patterns such as fingering of smolder waves as they move through
              materials.

Smoldering combustion refers to fire in a porous medium in which
              the oxygen supply to the reaction site is limited, for example when it must
              flow through the porous substance to reach the fuel.  Smolder is often a
              precursor to airborne flames and is particularly dangerous because of the
              amount of smoke produced and the difficulty of ensuring extinction.  When
              controlled, smolder also has important applications to material synthesis (high
              temperature synthesis) and to the design of timing devices (fuses).  A better
              understanding of the processes controlling smolder combustion will enhance fire
              safety as well as allow better control for engineering uses of smoldering
              combustion.  This Research in Undergraduate Institutions project includes a
              training program and participation of several undergraduate students, mentored
              by the principal investigator. 


Date: May 7, 2002

