Title       : ITR: Multiscale Analysis, Modeling, and Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0204932

Award Number: 0204932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2007  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3150000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerrold E. Marsden marsden@cds.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Y. Hou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1687,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ITR: Multi-scale Analysis, Modeling, and Simulation
This proposal will operate
              in the context of the Caltech Center for Integrative Multi-scale Modeling and
              Simulation (CIMMS) whose purpose is to develop, and foster multi-scale
              innovations in a wide range of areas spanning the physical, mathematical,
              information, and computational sciences. It provides the infrastructure that
              allows for the mix of domain experts from fluids, materials and geophysics with
              specialists in mathematical and computational analysis. 
This proposal aims
              to:
1.	Develop fundamental insights into multi-scale interactions, especially
              the coarse graining of dynamics and how they affect the accuracy of naive
              coarse-scale simulations; 
2.	Assemble existing ideas about multi-scale
              interactions scattered across a wide range of disciplines into a coherent
              whole, ready for broad dissemination;
3.	Codify and develop systematic
              techniques to accurately model and simulate across space and time
              scales;
4.	To test them systematically in a wide range of important scientific
              settings;
5.	Develop and distribute software and associated infrastructure
              supporting the rapid and thorough diffusion of these techniques;
6.	Raise
              consciousness among scientists, engineers, educators, and society in general
              about the importance of accurate physical modeling, the fundamental role of the
              multi-scale hierarchy as an obstacle to naive modeling and the existence of
              powerful ideas and convenient tools available to scale the
              hierarchy.
Overarching Research Themes. Two key themes cut across and unifying
              the scientific research: modeling across scales, and multi-scale algorithms.
              They reflect two groups of researchers: those developing modeling techniques to
              get the physics and computations right across scales and those who develop the
              computational and information technology infrastructure, including algorithms
              and other mathematical tools, such as ridgelets and curvelets. The first years
              will concentrate on macromolecules and crystalline materials, and imaging and
              data analysis. In future years, other areas may be included, such as
              geophysics, space sciences and additional topics in biology, all of which
              present challenging multi-scale problems.



