Title       : Algorithms for the Multiple Gamma and Related Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  2003     
File        : a0204003

Award Number: 0204003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175580             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Adamchik adamchik@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Adamchik, Victor
0204003
Carnegie Mellon U

Great progress has
              been made in recent years in the construction of software for numeric and
              symbolic computation of transcendental functions. The algorithms have been
              implemented in the most widely used symbolic algebra systems such as Maple and
              Mathemat-ica.  Recently, the National Institute of Standards and Technology
              started a project of creating the Digital Library of Mathematical Functions
              (http://dlmf.nist.gov/). The goal of the project is to collect all recent
              scientific results regarding theory and computational algorithms of the
              well-known special functions and make them available to the public in
              electronic form. How-ever, enormous gaps remain for "new" transcendental
              functions. One of such functions is the multiple gamma (also called Barnes)
              Gn-function. The Gn function, defined by a recurrence-functional
equation as a
              generalization of the Euler gamma function, was originally intro-duced (but in
              different forms) by Kinkelin, Glaisher, and Barnes around 1900. Today, due to
              the pioneer work of Peter Sarnak of Princeton University, the interest to the
              Barnes function is revived. Sarnak has been pushing the idea that zeros of
              certain "zeta functions" (L-functions) can be understood in terms of the
              distribution of eigenvalues from classes of random matrices.  It has been
              conjectured that the limiting distribution of the non-trivial zeros of the
              Riemann zeta function is the same as that of the eigenphases of matrices in the
              CUE (the circulat uni-tary
ensemble) It has been shown in works by Mehta,
              Sarnak, Conrey, Keating, Snaith that the Barnes function naturally appeares
              there as a closed representation for statistical averages over CUE of N x N
              unitary matrices (as well as some other classical compact groups), when 
