Title       : Bayesian, Empirical Likelihood and Counting Process Methods for Semiparametric
               Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0204688

Award Number: 0204688
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian W. McKeague mckeague@stat.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DMS-0204688
PI: Ian McKeague

This project aims to enhance the
              scope of semiparametric models for use in weather prediction, ocean circulation
              and biomedical applications. A synthesis of Bayesian, empirical likelihood,
              counting process and Monte Carlo methods is used to advance statistical
              methodology in these areas. Five specific topics are investigated: Bayesian
              single-index models, Bayesian inversion of ocean circulation data, empirical
              likelihood methods for treatment comparisons, tests for mark-specific hazards
              and cumulative incidence functions, and covariate selection for semiparametric
              hazard function regression models. 

The initial phase of the project is
              motivated by a weather prediction problem and introduces Bayesian methodology
              for single-index models, incorporating some frequentist methods, as well as
              useful prior information, into the inference machinery. Next, a Bayesian
              inversion approach for the ocean circulation inverse problem is developed,
              motivated by the success and popularity of this approach in other ill-posed
              inverse problems. With a view towards biomedical applications, empirical
              likelihood based methods for comparing two or more treatments are studied. A
              new approach for comparing mark-specific hazard functions, which is useful for
              the analysis of HIV genetic data collected in AIDS clinical trials and the
              assessment of HIV vaccine efficacy, is introduced. Finally, a model selection
              procedure for finding the best subset of covariates in a flexible new class of
              semiparametric hazard function regression model is developed. 

