Title       : Multi-Frequency Oscillations and Related Perturbation Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0204119

Award Number: 0204119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yingfei Yi yi@math.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #0204119
PI: Yingfei Yi
Institution: Georgia Tech
Title:
              Multi-frequency oscillations and related perturbation
              problems

ABSTRACT

This project concerns the study of multi-frequency
              oscillations, including quasi-periodic, almost-periodic and almost-automorphic
              oscillations, in physical systems that are either regularly or singularly
              perturbed.  Quasi-periodic oscillations will be studied mainly for Hamiltonian
              and generalized Hamiltonian systems originating in fluid mechanics, solid state
              physics and biology.  Almost-periodic and almost-automorphic oscillations will
              be studied for quasi-periodically forced oscillatory systems and weakly coupled
              networks of quasi-periodic oscillators.  The goal is to better understand the
              complicated dynamics resulting from the interaction of several frequencies and
              the intermittency phenomena that occur especially when the frequencies are
              close to resonance.  For singularly perturbed oscillatory systems, the study of
              multi-frequency oscillations will focus on those of either relaxation or fast
              type, with particular attention to ecological, bio-medical and communication
              systems. The results of this project will have significant applications to the
              analysis, computation and design of certain biological, electrical and
              mechanical oscillators.

This project is concerned with mathematical models
              of dynamics arising in biological, electrical and mechanical systems that
              present multi-phase oscillations.  Multi-phase oscillations are universal
              phenomena in physical systems that involve a large number of degrees of
              freedom, multi-parameters, and many oscillating frequencies.  Their study is of
              great importance for the understanding of complicated phenomena in nature, such
              as turbulence in fluids, noisy signals in telecommunication, transport of DNA
              chains, and transmission dynamics of infectious diseases.  The results of this
              project will also have a large impact on practical engineering designs of
              mechanical and electrical systems and devices, in particular the identification
              of useful design parameters and the prediction of singular oscillatory
              behavior.  



