Title       : Animating Viscoplastic Materials with Dynamically Changing Meshes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0204377

Award Number: 0204377
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $510001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan R. Shewchuk jrs@cs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James F. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0204377
Shewchuk, Jonathan
U of Calif Berkeley

We intend to
              develop fast, versatile, and visually accurate computational models for
              viscoplas-tic
materials ranging from stiff, non-compliant solids to low
              viscosity fluids. We are designing
these models for applications where visual
              realism, computation speed, and robustness are the
predominant requirements
              (with numerical accuracy being subordinate). Examples of such
applications
              include real-time interactive training simulations (e.g. surgical simulation or
              haz-ardous
duty simulations) and off-line generation of visualizations (e.g.
              cinematic effects or
accident reenactment).
To achieve this goal, we must
              develop fast, guaranteed-quality methods for generating and
              in-crementally
updating unstructured (irregular) triangular and tetrahedral
              meshes. Dynamically changing meshes are a necessity to model the complete range
              of viscoplastic materials, espe-cially where large deformations and mixing may
              occur. Thus, the actions of the numerical simulation and the remeshing
              algorithms must be tightly integrated, especially if we wish to minimize errors
              due to interpolation and reinterpolation. To ensure that our dynamic meshing
              algorithms and implementations are useful for other applications as well, we
              will develop a general methodology for communicating information between the
              numerical simulation and
the mesh generator.
