Title       : Automorphic Forms, Moduli Spaces, and Quantization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2002        
File        : a0204154

Award Number: 0204154
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79595              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tatyana Foth foth@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0204154.  PI: Tatyana Foth
                   
I will study
              holomorphic automorphic forms on bounded symmetric domains and 
related
              problems of quantization. Let X be a quotient of a bounded symmetric 
domain
              by a lattice. The space of holomorphic automorphic forms can be 
identified
              with  the space of holomorphic sections of a tensor power of the 
canonical
              line bundle on X. In the context of geometric quantization this 
is the
              quantizing line bundle, X is the classical phase space, and 
automorphic forms
              are quantum states, i.e. wave functions of a particle.
I shall investigate
              properties of Poincare series and relative Poincare series 
associated to real
              submanifolds of X. From the point of view of quantization 
they are components
              of the delta-function. Explicit construction of relative 
Poincare series
              associated to closed geodesics in finite volume smooth ball 
quotients and the
              spanning result can be used to obtain rational structures 
on the spaces of
              cusp forms for arithmetic subgroups of SU(n,1). Another 
problem I shall
              address is the computation of curvature of a natural connection
in the vector
              bundle over a space of compatible complex structures on
a symplectic manifold
              X, whose fiber over J is the space of J-holomorphic 
sections of k-th tensor
              power of the quantizing line bundle. To begin with,
I will compute the symbol
              of the curvature in the semiclassical limit for
certain types of X. The first
              interesting example would be the case when X is 
a hyperbolic Riemann surface,
              where an explicit basis in the space of
automorphic forms can be used as a
              moving frame.



The main object of my research is automorphic forms on
              bounded symmetric 
domains. They are functions with very special properties on
              spaces which have 
interesting geometry and many symmetries. In addition to
              being an important 
and intensively studied subject by itself it has a very
              close relation to 
geometric quantization  which is a part of mathematics
              whose development was 
strongly motivated by physics and by general desire to
              understand better the 
nature of the world and to describe it in terms of
              suitable mathematical 
formalism. The main goal of geometric quantization is
              to find a rigorous 
mathematical way to pass from classical mechanics to
              quantum mechanics in 
a space which may have a very complicated geometry. More
              precisely, the 
question is how one can establish a suitable correspondence
              between 
classical observables and quantum observables. The space of wave
              functions 
is, clearly, a fundamental and very important object. It turns out
              that for 
certain classical phase spaces automorphic forms are wave functions
              of 
a particle. Properties of automorphic forms are strongly related to the
              
complex structure. One of the questions I shall address is to what extent
              
the procedure of geometric quantization depends on the complex structure.
              
That leads to discussion of connections in vector bundles on certain moduli
              
spaces which are of great interest and significance for both mathematicians
              
and physisists.  

