Title       : Taylor Expansion Diagrams: A Compact Canonical Representation for RTL
               Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0204146

Award Number: 0204146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maciej Ciesielski ciesiel@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this work is to develop a new canonical representation and an
              efficient verification infrastructure to support the RTL verification of large
              designs. The proposed graph-based representation, called Taylor Expansion
              Diagram, is based on a different decomposition principle than used by
              decision
diagrams such as BDDs and BMDs. It is obtained by treating the
              symbolic expression of the design as a continuous, differentiable function and
              applying Taylor series expansion with respect to its word-level variables.
              

The resulting Taylor Expansion Diagram (TED) is canonical for a fixed
              ordering of variables. TEDs can be used to represent functions containing  both
              algebraic and Boolean expressions, facilitating the representation of complex
              designs with arithmetic operators and Boolean logic, typically encountered in
              
RTL specifications. 

We are building an RTL verification infrastructure
              centered around TED that can be used to verify functional equivalence of RTL
              designs.  We are developing systematic, algorithmic techniques for constructing
              and manipulating TED representations of HDL designs, based on the new
              theory.
We are also investigating how to exploit TEDs for implementation
              verification, that is checking functional equivalence between an RTL
              specification and its logic, gate-level implementation.  By carrying out
              extensive experiments, the applicability of TEDs to realistic designs with
              arithmetic circuits and Boolean logic must be evaluated, and the performance of
              TEDs compared against that of BDDs and *BMDs.

This project has also an
              important educational role of teaching students about modern design
              representations from decision diagrams to more abstract, word-level data
              structures in the context of design synthesis and verification.
			  
