Title       : Geometry and Topology of Riemannian Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  2002     
File        : a0204671

Award Number: 0204671
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $422002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karsten Grove kng@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0204671.

The principal investigator plans to continue his work
              on global problems 
in differential geometry and related areas. Special
              emphasis will be devoted 
to the pursuit of global Riemannian geometry via
              additional structures. 
This includes but is not limited to structures arising
              from the presence 
of symmetries, and to structures arising from taking
              external or internal limits. 
Our efforts concerning investigations of
              relations between curvature, 
symmetry and topology is guided by the program
              set forth by the aim: 
``Classify or describe the structure of manifolds with
              positive or 
nonnegative curvature and large isometry groups". This area is
              currently 
experiencing significant advances in various directions. The
              project will 
also include investigations of structures arising from the
              collapse 
of manifolds under a lower curvature bound, and of metric invariants
              
coming from investigations of the structure of various spaces of finite
              metric spaces.


The significance of the main part of the proposal is
              twofold. On the one 
hand there are many geometric situations where no
              symmetries are present 
from the outset, but where symmetries emerge
              non-trivially from the geometry. 
Among such situations are rigidity problems
              and collapsing problems under 
bounded curvature.  General  results achieved
              through the work proposed can 
then be invoked and help solve the original
              problem, where no symmetries 
were present. This method has already been used
              successfully. 
On the other hand, the proposed work provides a systematic
              approach for 
finding new examples of spaces with positive or nonnegative
              curvature, 
arguably one the most central and difficult issues facing global
              
Riemannian geometry today.

