Title       : Bilinear Controllability of Semilinear Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0204037

Award Number: 0204037
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $103192             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Khapalov khapala@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0204037
Khapalov 

In the modeling of controlled distributed parameter
              systems "additive" 
boundary and internal locally distributed controls are
              typically used. 
(Examples of such controls can be a source in a
              heat/mass-transfer process 
or a piezoceramic actuator placed on a beam.) In
              terms of applications it 
appears that such controls can adequately model only
              those controlled 
processes that do not change their principal physical
              characteristics due to 
the control actions. They rather describe the effect
              of various externally 
added "alien" sources and/or forces on the process at
              hand. This 
limitation, however, excludes a vast array of new and not quite
              new 
technologies, such as, for example, "smart materials" and numerous
              
biomedical, chemical and nuclear chain reactions, which are able to 
change
              their principal parameters under certain purposefully induced 
conditions
              ("catalysts").

The intent of this proposal is to address the just-outlined
              issues in the 
context of global controllability of semilinear partial
              differential equations 
(PDEs) through the introduction and study of
              multiplicative (or "bilinear") 
controls. These controls enter the system
              equations as coefficients. 
Accordingly they can change at least some of the
              principal parameters of 
the process at hand, such as, for example, the
              natural frequency response 
of a beam or the rate of a chemical reaction. (In
              the former case this can be 
caused, e.g., by the embedded "smart" alloys and,
              in the latter case, by 
various catalysts and/or by the speed at which the
              reaction ingredients are 
mechanically mixed.) The focus of this proposal is
              on the development of 
a new methodology for the study of global
              controllability of the semilinear 
reaction-diffusion-convection equation and
              of the wave and beam 
equations in the framework of bilinear controls. We are
              particularly 
interested in the effect such multiplicative controls may have
              on the issue 
of controllability of highly nonlinear PDEs, in which case the
              classical 
additive controls often appear to be inadequate. 

