Title       : Symbolic Techniques for Evaluating Complex Custom Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0204151

Award Number: 0204151
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159690             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth I. Bahar iris@lems.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research focuses on the development of symbolic formulations for timing and
              reliability analysis that can handle a wide range of custom-designed, complex
              circuits in an efficient, cost-effective manner. This symbolic approach enables
              handling of any arbitrary circuit structure and allows for an efficient means
              of incorporating information on the functional operation of the circuit into
              the analysis.

Two areas are being explored: (1) Symbolic algorithms are
              being developed to analyze electrical noise problems due to such things as
              leakage currents and charge sharing.  To improve accuracy, the analysis is
              constrained by timing and input conditions.  Based on the results of this
              analysis, circuits may be flagged for design violations or automatically
              re-designed to improve electrical reliability.  (2) Symbolic formulations to
              calculate the delay through a channel-connected region (CCR) of CMOS devices
              are be developed. These formulations will handle nearly all commonly-used
              digital circuit families, as well as handle multiple inputs transitioning and
              accept arbitrary input-exclusivity constraints.  The goal of this work is to
              develop an efficient means to identify problem circuits for further analysis
              while avoiding the need to verify many non-realizable worst-case conditions
              with other more costly simulation techniques.



