Title       : Rigorous Results for Self-Organizing Complex Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0204018

Award Number: 0204018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Griffeath griffeat@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0204018
Griffeath
	Griffeath will continue his ongoing research program,
              focusing initially on theorems for the Traffic Cellular Automaton (TCA), and on
              rigorous derivation of asymptotic densities for von Koch two-dimensional
              solidification rules. Foundations of the traffic project are described in a
              recent paper, joint with Lawrence Gray of the University of Minnesota, in the
              Journal of Statistical Physics. Motivated by empirical work of Kai Nagel and
              others, the authors give convincing evidence that the TCA exhibits several
              phase transitions as the density of cars increases, and for a certain range of
              densities clusters into a mixture of two self-organized extreme ergodic states
              called free flow and synchronized jam. The research program will further
              analyze this model, intended to establish the new phenomenon of conservative
              clustering, and also to shed light on the underlying mechanism. In a separate
              project, Griffeath will study Von Koch crystals, very simple deterministic
              nearest-neighbor Cellular Automaton growth rules on the two-dimensional integer
              lattice, many of which are exactly solvable but aperiodic. A novel
              computational machinery will be developed in order to rigorously describe the
              self-organized, often fractal structure of these crystals by means of a
              generalized formal language, interactive visualization, nonlinear recursion,
              and computer-aided proof.
	The research of David Griffeath combines
              mathematical analysis and computer visualization in the study of complex
              spatial systems. Over his career, the investigator has exploited this interplay
              for the theoretical and empirical study of a wide variety of dynamics which
              serve as prototypes for phenomena across the sciences: spiral formation in
              excitable media, crystal growth, and various other nonlinear processes such as
              nucleation, flocking, host-parasite interactions, dendritic growth, phase
              separation by surface tension, ecological competition, and growth of biofilms.
              Griffeath is currently launching a major study of "Traffic Cellular Automata"
              models which emulate the emergence of traffic jams. Most of the initial effort
              on this project has been simulation-based. Now that effective software tools
              have been developed for visualization and quantitative measurement of these
              subtle, self-organizing systems, Griffeath intends to derive a mathematically
              rigorous theory of the observed 

