Title       : Numerical Investigations of Three and Two Dimensional Free Boundary Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204808

Award Number: 0204808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69882              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean-Marc Vanden-Broeck h010@uea.ac.uk  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The work is concerned with the theory of free surface flows.  Here a
              free
surface refers to an interface between two fluids.  The position of such
              a surface is not
known a priori and has to be found as part of the solution.
              This leads
to a highly nonlinear mathematical problem, for which the PI 
              will
develop new numerical and analytical approaches. 
The  objective is to
              develop numerically and analytically  theories for
three-dimensional nonlinear
              free surface flows and for two-dimensional
interfacial flows.
              Specifically:
(A) Derive efficient and accurate numerical approaches for
              
three-dimensional nonlinear free surface flows. 
(B) Use these new schemes
              together with analytical techniques to further
the understanding of
              three-dimensional free surface flows. This
includes extending linear and
              weakly nonlinear theories to the
fully nonlinear regime and discovering the
              limiting configurations
of these flows.
(C) Check the validity of existing
              approximations in ship 
hydrodynamics and improve them.
(D) Investigate the
              existence of new types of waves propagating
at the interface between two
              fluids of constant densities. These waves should
have properties intermediate
              between  those of ``generalized solitary waves"
and those of ``classical
              fronts". Therefore it is appropriate to
describe them as ``generalized
              fronts". 
Their existence is strongly suggested by previous work but
              they
have not been calculated explicitly.
(E) Calculate the generalized
              fronts and perform a numerical study of
their stability.

Free surface flows
              are common in many aspects of science and everyday life.
Examples are waves on
              a beach, bubbles rising in a glass of champagne,
melting ice, pouring flows
              from a container and sails blowing in the wind.
In these examples the free
              surface is the surface of the sea, the interface
between the gas and the
              champagne, the surface of the ice, the boundary
of the pouring flow and the
              surface of the sail. The PI will concentrate
on applications arising from
              fluid mechanics. However the methods developed are
general and have
              applications outside fluid mechanics and the PI proposes to
investigate them
              as well.  The research will  benefit applied mathematicians interested in
              nonlinear
free surface flows and applied scientists in need of accurate
              schemes
to solve three-dimensional free surface flows. The proposed
              application
to the nonlinear wave pattern generated by a ship is relevant
              to
ship hydrodynamics. The study of waves on sharp  interfaces  has 
              
applications in oceanography. Such sharp interfaces form in oceans,
              lakes
and the atmosphere between adjacent masses of different density
              associated with
differences in temperature, salinity or amount of suspension.
              One of the
reasons for studying such sharp boundaries is that they appear at
              the surface as
frontal lines where  dust, foam, timber and others
              accumulate.
Many  of the problems proposed can be done in
collaboration with 
              graduate students.



