Title       : Multivariate Nonparametric Methodology Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204723

Award Number: 0204723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265148             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Scott scottdw@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis D. Cox  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0204723
PI: David Scott
Title: Multivariate nonparametric
              methodology studies

The investigators will study new nonparametric
              methodology focusing on the mid-range and high-range dimensions to better
              understand data modeling, the curse of dimensionality, and problems associated
              with massive data sets in multivariate regression and density estimation as
              well as closely related problems in clustering, mixtures, pattern recognition,
              and dimension reduction. A new data-based parametric estimation algorithm,
              based upon integrated squared error, will be investigated for its flexibility
              and robustness. By applying the criterion to the fitting of local polynomials,
              a new robust nonparametric regression algorithm can be proposed, which will be
              applied to automatic detection of hundreds of overlapping tracks in subatomic
              detector experiments. This project will examine semiparametric models for
              density estimation that can work better than ordinary nonparametric algorithms,
              extending feasibility by several extra dimensions. Of special interest, this
              algorithm can be used to fit subsets of a full mixture model. Applications
              include regression, image processing, clustering, outlier detection, density
              estimation, and visualization. The project will extend work on spatial modeling
              and the combination of multiple data surveys into useful data modeling and maps
              of conditional estimators of factors and their covariates.  Currently,
              simultaneous mapping of variables is difficult to interpret, due to the
              availability of data only in discrete spatial areas (e.g. census tracts) and
              cross-tabulation of the two variables of interest.  By constructing a smooth
              map of one variable as a second variable varies, a more faithful and accurate
              understanding of the spatial relationship may be obtained.

Nonparametric
              methodology is widely used in one and two dimensions, but less so in higher
              dimensions. This research focuses on the mid-range and high-range dimensions
              and provides a deeper understanding of the implications to data modeling of the
              curse of dimensionality and problems associated with massive data sets.
              Particular emphasis will be given to multivariate regression and density
              estimation problems, and closely related applications such as clustering,
              mixture estimation, pattern recognition, and dimension reduction. This proposal
              examines new points of view, especially related to locally adaptive and spatial
              estimation, as well as some recent extensions of nonparametric criteria to
              parametric problems. The new parametric approach has potential for new
              nonparametric formulations and applications. At a recent National Research
              Council workshop, numerous scientists identified critical statistical needs in
              their work with massive data sets:  alternatives to principal components,
              specialized visualization tools for exploring massive data, better clustering
              algorithms, and techniques for handling nonstationary data. Results from this
              research directly impact three of these four critical opportunities. This
              program represents a comprehensive and long-term attack on a host of important
              data analytic problems in multivariate estimation. The results will be of
              long-term theoretical interest and will provide near-term solutions to
              real-world problems.

