Title       : Metal-Containing Molecules as Probes of Interstellar/Circumstellar Gas: From
               Chemistry to Nucleosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0204913

Award Number: 0204913
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Philip A. Ianna                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262519             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lucy M. Ziurys lziurys@as.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1215      STELLAR ASTRONOMY & ASTROPHYSC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1205,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST-0204913

PI Ziurys

During the past thirty years since the initial
              discovery of interstellar molecules at radio wavelengths, much has been learned
              about the chemistry of such species, and their subsequent use as tracers of the
              physical conditions in dense gas has proved extremely valuable. Despite the
              obvious success of molecular astrophysics, there are still many unanswered
              questions pertaining to interstellar molecules, one of which concerns the
              chemistry and abundances of species containing the metallic elements. 

This
              project will continue the investigation of the chemistry of the metallic
              elements in the interstellar medium through a joint
              laboratory/observational/chemical modeling program. The observations will
              identify the major molecular carriers of the metallic elements
              in
circumstellar envelopes of evolved stars and in dense clouds through
              measurements in the millimeter/sub-mm wavelength region. This data will lead to
              the establishment of likely synthetic pathways, be it gas-phase radiative
              association reactions, dust-grain processes or formation in shock waves. The
              laboratory work will supply the necessary millimeter and sub-mm rotational
              spectra from which rest frequencies for the astronomical searches are obtained.
               Finally, chemical modeling of metal chemistry in circumstellar envelopes will
              be performed in conjunction with new nucleosynthesis calculations. A complete
              picture will thus be constructed of metal-containing molecules, their
              abundances, formation mechanisms, and significance for understanding mass loss
              of the heavier elements from circumstellar envelopes to the interstellar
              medium.
***

