Title       : Osiris Wavelets and Quantum Entanglement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0204663

Award Number: 0204663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy A. Battle battle@math.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator proposes to analyze the critical behavior of lattice
              models in classical equilibrium statistical mechanics by using renormalization
              group methods based on Osiris wavelets. Various types of wavelets have been
              successfully applied to problems in signal analysis and image reconstruction. 
              Since critical phenomena in statistical mechanics are intimately related to
              scaling, one expects wavelet analysis to be very useful in the study of
              statistical-mechanical models as  well.  Osiris wavelets appear to be
              particularly well-suited for this purpose. One of the goals is to obtain
              cleaner hierarchical models by which renormalization group calculations of
              critical exponents can be determined. 

The lattice models in classical
              equilibrium statistical mechanics are designed for the study of condensed
              matter physics, which deals with the critical behavior of solid materials with
              respect to changes in pressure, temperature, magnetic field intensity, etc. For
              example, the low temperatures at which supercomputers need to be maintained is
              a consequence of the fact that certain materials become super-conducters below
              a critical temperature.  Other examples of critical behavior would include the
              agnetization of a bar of iron, which can be induced at room temperature, but
              not above a certain temperature.  There are countless examples in nature.
              Wavelets are mathematical functions that are especially effective in recovering
              structures from compressed data. As such, they should be suited to the
              multiscale resolution of of these types of problems. This project aims to
              exploit the properties of a special class of wavelets, Osiris wavelets, to
              obtain better models in statistical mechanics.
