Title       : The Structure of Smooth 4-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0204041

Award Number: 0204041
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $218951             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Stern rstern@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204041
Ronald Stern

For the last 25 years it has been the goal of
              exciting and deep 
mathematics to classify smooth 4-dimensional manifolds. An
              arsenal of 
techniques has been thrown at this problem; it is the focus of
              dozens of 
research groups. The most successful attempts have associated to
              each 
4-dimensional manifold the solution space to complex systems of
              
equations that arise in particle physics: the Yang-Mills equations and 
the
              monopole equations of Seiberg and Witten. These solution spaces are 
useful in
              distinguishing cunningly constructed 4-dimensional manifolds. 
The result of
              this assault is that 4-dimensional manifolds are more 
complicated than we
              ever expected.  As a result, it is impossible to 
predict a classification
              scheme. It is the goal of this project to more 
systematically approach the
              existence and uniqueness framework for a 
classification scheme. The first
              goal is to understand why smooth 
structures on 4-manifolds are sensitive to
              local topological change. 
This project describes the underpinnings of how the
              smooth structures 
change in the known constructions. Log transformations on
              
null-homologous tori are shown to play a significant role. The first 
step
              is to determine if two smooth structures on a fixed homeomorphism 
type of
              simply-connected smooth 4-manifold are related by a sequence of 
log
              transformations on null-homologous tori. The second step is to 
determine the
              characteristic numbers of irreducible smooth 4-manifolds 
and to determine how
              these topological invariants affect their 
Seiberg-Witten invariants. A notion
              of general-type smooth 4-manifolds 
is given and a conjectured restriction on
              their Seiberg-Witten 
invariants is proposed. This project outlines new
              constructions that 
show that there are general-type manifolds that fill out
              the regions 
determined by these restrictions. Careful investigation of these
              
constructions should indicate why they are best possible. Other 
questions
              related to potential restrictions on the characteristic 
classes of
              irreducible simply-connected smooth 4-manifolds will be
              
investigated.

Excitement has been generated by the idea that the puniest
              of all 
forces, gravity, may in fact be a strong as nature's other three
              
fundamental forces: the strong force which binds protons and neutrons
              
together in atomic nuclei; the weak force which governs radioactive 
decay;
              and the forces that govern electricity and magnetism. The 
perceived mismatch
              between these three forces and gravity creates a 
theoretical nightmare; it's
              the principle reason we have yet to find a 
grand unified theory. However, it
              has recently been hypothesized that 
this weakness is a mirage; the force of
              gravity only appears weak 
because its force is diluted in our own universe
              and most of gravity's 
force radiates out into extra dimensions. All other
              forces remain 
trapped in our 3-dimensional world, while gravity is free to
              roam other 
dimensions. With this hypothesis, there could be other worlds that
              are 
parallel to our own; they all neatly stack up, each oblivious of the
              
other, with gravity the only force that moves between them. This would 
also
              account for the missing dark matter of our universe; it actually 
resides in
              other parallel universes. New mathematics will be generated 
in this project
              to further explore these ideas. Much of the relevant 
mathematics has already
              exposed the special nature of dimensions three 
and four. These parallel
              universes may be explained by the theory of 
(singular) foliations. The
              proposed study of singular foliations may 
structure the way in which we view
              our own universe -how we stack up 
with possible parallel universes. These
              singular foliations will also 
provide new insight into the classification of
              4- dimensional 
manifolds.  At bottom, the goal of this project is to develop
              more 
systematic constructions of smooth 4-dimensional manifolds with the hope
              
that a general picture begins to emerge that will at least suggest a
              
classification scheme.

