Title       : Estimating the Structural Dimension of Regressions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204563

Award Number: 0204563
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89845              (Estimated)
Investigator: Efstathia Bura ebura@gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract (DMS-0204563)
PI: E. Bura

Title: ESTIMATING THE STRUCTURAL
              DIMENSION OF REGRESSIONS

Traditional approaches to reducing dimension in a
              regression context focus on modeling: a sequence of models are fitted and
              associated diagnostic tools that may lead to a reduction of the dimension of
              the predictors a posteriori are used in order to select the most reliable yet
              simplest model. A different approach is taken in this proposal where the goal
              is to investigate and develop methods of reducing the dimension of the
              regressor vector at the outset of the analysis without applying any a priori
              fitting or model selection procedures. The methods proposed in this project use
              inverse regression as a tool to estimate the structural dimension of a
              regression, which is defined to be the dimension of the subspace generated by a
              sufficient number of linear projections of the regressor vector. Furthermore,
              the case of intrinsically nonlinear relationship between response and
              regressors will be considered. A "translation" of the nonlinear manifold of the
              regressors to an equivalent linear subspace (equivalent in the sense that all
              information on the response is retained) is proposed. The research should make
              a significant contribution to the available inferential tools and software for
              analyzing high-dimensional data. The goals of the proposed research are (a) to
              extend and generalize existing parametric-based dimension reduction methodology
              to nonparametric techniques, (b) to apply the developed methods and devise new
              ones in order to fully estimate the structural dimension of a regression and
              not only a lower bound on the full dimension, (c) to generalize the methods so
              that they apply to nonlinear manifolds of the regressor vector, (d) to develop
              state-of-the-art implementation computer code, which will be freely available
              to the research community, and (e) to compare the proposed dimension reduction
              techniques to the existing ones using simulated and real world data
              sets.


High-dimensional data have become increasingly common in practically
              all scientific and business related fields. Modeling such data is challenging,
              mostly because of our inability to visualize them. Consequently, it is
              practically imperative to reduce the dimension of the input data prior to any
              attempts at modeling. Dimension reduction is especially relevant and appealing
              in the era of cheap and easily available computing power and technology, where
              huge multivariate data sets are collected or continuously generated and
              accumulated. The proposed research will extend existing and develop new
              technology for reducing the complexity of the input data at the outset of the
              modeling process.



