Title       : ITWF: WOMEN AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY: A Comparative Study of Young Women from
               Middle Grades through High School and into College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2002      
File        : a0204222

Award Number: 0204222
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Caroline E. Wardle                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500027             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mladen A. Vouk vouk@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan Michael  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sarah B. Berenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0204222
Vouk, Mladen A., Berenson, Sarah B., Michael, Joan
North Carolina
              State University

Title:   Women and Information Technology:  A Comparative
              Study of Young Women from Middle Grades through High School, and into
              College

This ITWF award to North Carolina State University will support the
              development and testing of a model of the factors associated with young women's
              decisions to persist in advanced mathematics and computer science courses so as
              to prepare themselves for, and decide to make Information Technology (IT),
              their career.  IT careers are defined as those requiring an electrical
              engineering, computer science, or Computer engineering bachelor's degree. 
              Success factors rather than failure factors will be examined in order to make a
              significant contribution to the research on gender and IT.  The project's
              objectives are to:

a) Identify school, social, and personal factors
              associated with young women's decisions to pursue undergraduate study in IT
              fields.
b) Create and test a model using the above factors to predict young
              women's decisions to pursue (enroll into) IT undergraduate study.
c)
              Disseminate the results of this study in professional publications,
              professional meetings, advisory board meetings, and in an electronic monograph
              to scholars, teachers, policy makers, parents, and young women.
d) Propose
              appropriate interventions to increase young women's interest in IT careers
              based on this research model. To identify the factors, the investigators will
              implement the inquiry from a grounded theory perspective.  Subjects will be
              young women, already identified as talented in mathematics in middle school,
              who participated in the NSF Gender Equity project, Girls on Track (GoT),
              beginning in the Summer of 1999.

