Title       : Isotropic Stable Random Fields and Infinite Dimensional Stochastic Integrals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204992

Award Number: 0204992
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan Rosinski rosinski@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0204992
Rosinski
	A novel approach, based on infinite dimensional group
              representations, is proposed for the analysis of isotropic and isotropic
              homogeneous stable random fields. There are many analogies between problems
              considered in this project and representation theory in quantum physics, in
              particular, Mackey's theory. This project is intended to build on these
              analogies to establish spectral representation of isotropic stable random
              fields in possibly the most explicit form that could be used for analysis,
              modeling and computer simulation of such random fields. The second part of this
              proposal is concerned with infinite dimensional stochastic integrals. Various
              sample path properties of stochastic processes, such as continuity and
              boundedness, can often be described in terms of the existence of such infinite
              dimensional stochastic integrals. It is proposed to simplify and unify the
              present approach to infinite dimensional stochastic integrals of deterministic
              functions and then to extend these results to nonanticipating integrands using
              decoupling techniques, among others. This is an outgrowth of the present
              research of the PI with Professor Michael B. Marcus. Development of stochastic
              integrals with respect to cylindrical semimartingales in Hilbert spaces is also
              proposed. This development will follow a recent progress of the PI and his
              collaborators on the radonification of cylindrical semimartingales.
              
	Isotropic random fields play an important role in the statistical theory of
              turbulence and other areas of natural sciences and engineering. They can be
              used to model 3-dimensional turbulent velocity, velocity and pressure, etc. The
              classical theory of isotropic random fields is not suitable for modeling random
              phenomena with long range dependence and high variability, that are often
              observed. Therefore, the PI proposes to investigate isotropic random fields
              with heavy tailed stable distributions. Puzzling connections with certain
              methods of quantum physics are found under this approach; they will be further
              investigated and exploited. The second part of this proposal is concerned with
              the theory and applications of infinite dimensional stochastic integrals. The
              importance and need for the study of such integrals comes from the theory of
              random systems characterized by very large or continuous set of parameters.
              Infinite dimensional approach makes such systems simpler and mathematically
              tractable. 

