Title       : New Directions in Scattered Data Analysis via Radial and Related Basis Functions
               with Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204449

Award Number: 0204449
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208184             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph D. Ward   (Principal Investigator current)
              Francis J. Narcowich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Error estimates for both interpolation and approximation are central in
              developing rigorous algorithms or numerical methods in any application. A major
              difficulty in scattered-data problems has been that the class of
              data-generating functions for which the methods are known to converge is much
              smaller than what one encounters in practice. This is problematic in
              numerically solving partial differential equations via Radial Basis Function
              collocation, since target functions need to be smoother than the basis
              functions, which is a major restriction in hyperbolic problems. One of the
              goals of this project is to obtain error estimates for a greatly expanded class
              of target functions. In our very recent work on interpolation via a restricted
              class of Spherical Basis Functions on the sphere, such estimates were obtained.
              This provides hope that the broader goal is attainable. Another important goal
              is to develop and implement rigorous, computationally efficient algorithms for 
              numerical partial differential equation problems, neural networks, and problems
              from the geosciences requiring scattered-data surface fitting on the
              sphere.

The investigation of scattered-data modeling is of great potential
              importance for the understanding of earth based phenomena of every kind.
              Fitting surfaces to meteorological or geophysical data collected via satellites
              or ground stations is a good example of such an application. Spherical basis
              functions (SBFs) have been used in such problems. Radial and periodic basis
              functions have been extensively employed in a variety of neural networks,
              including architectures used for direction-finding via phased-array radar. 
              Very recently, they have been employed in grid-free numerical methods for
              solving partial differential equations, and to do computer graphics and
              computer aided design problems. Calculations assocaited with these are time
              consuming. Recent advances have ameliorated these difficulties and the work
              under this project will continue to improve efficiency.

