Title       : Covalidation of Timing Faults in Hardware-Software Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0204134

Award Number: 0204134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Harris harris@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the detection of functional errors caused by timing
              faults in hardware-software systems. A hardware-software system can be defined
              as one in which hardware and software must be designed together, and must
              interact to properly implement system functionality. The widespread use of
              these systems in cost-critical and life-critical applications motivates the
              need for a systematic approach to verify functionality. The complexity of the
              verification problem for large, heterogeneous hardware-software systems
              necessitates the development of simulation-based covalidation approaches, which
              uniformly validate hardware, software, and their interaction.
              

Hardware-software systems are typically composed of several behaviors, or
              processes, which may be mapped to different hardware and software components.
              The correctness of process interactions depends on the synchronization between
              the executions of communicating processes. Correct synchronization depends on
              the adherence of the system to numerous timing relationships between
              inter-process communication events. Verifying these timing relationships is
              central to the hardware-software covalidation problem, and is the focus of this
              project.

The goal of this research effort is to provide hardware-software
              system designers with a set of CAD tools that partially automate the timing
              covalidation process. The CAD tools are being developed to support a generic
              codesign/covalidation flow. At different intermediate steps of the codesign
              process, cosimulation is performed using a functional test sequence. Designers
              need the ability to evaluate the completeness of an existing functional test
              sequence, and the ability to automatically generate a functional test sequence.
              To support this codesign flow, we explore the following specific research
              objectives:

1. Develop a design fault model to describe design errors in
              hardware-software systems, specifically targeting errors in the timing of
              inter-process communication events.

2. Develop a fault simulation approach
              for the design fault model which evaluates the degree to which a given test
              sequence detects all design errors.

3. Develop techniques for automatic test
              pattern generation (ATPG) for a hardware-software description. The ATPG tool
              developed must target the proposed design fault model in order to ensure the
              detection of design errors.

