Title       : Discrete Solitons: Methods, Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204585

Award Number: 0204585
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126007             (Estimated)
Investigator: Panayotis Kevrekidis kevrekid@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The aim of this proposal is to use a number of mathematical tools and
              techniques (Hamiltonian normal forms, variational analysis, exponential
              asymptotics, integrability methods, multiscale techniques, homogenization and
              Evans function methods among others), in conjunction with numerical methods
              (continuation and bifurcation theory tools, Newton type methods together with
              numerical linear stability analysis and direct time integration) to
              systematically explore nonlinear waves in discrete systems. In particular, we
              plan to address the following aspects of the behavior, dynamics and stability
              of the waves in lattice settings:  (1)  The role of spatial dimensionality on 
              nonlinear waves. Most of the earlier studies had been conducted in 1+1 (1
              space, 1 time) dimension.  We can now go even in 3+1 dimensions and examine
              physically realistic settings.  (2)  The interplay between disorder,
              nonlinearity and discreteness.  It is well known that disorder can induce
              localization.  Understanding the interplay of this mechanism with nonlinearity,
              especially in realistic discrete settings is then crucial, as defects are
              ubiquitous in physical systems.  (3)  Travelling waves in discrete systems are
              also of paramount importance. Intrinsic Localized Modes (ILM's) have the
              intriguing property of bottlenecking the energy.  But could they carry it over
              (even more so in a targeted way) from one molecule to another (from one lattice
              site to another)?  If so, they would be natural candidates for many
              bioenergetics processes, such as photosynthesis.  (4)  The study of
              instabilities of such waves. We believe that we are now close to a general
              classification of the possible instabilities and to a connection of these with
              the underlying symmetries of the physical problem.  (5)  Finally, the
              comprehension of progressively more complex physical models is also of
              interest.  The latter involve additional physical perturbations such as, for
              example, long range interactions, boundary conditions, the interaction of
              multiple waves between them and with defects. 

Intrinsic Localized Modes
              (ILM's) have been a topic of increasing focus over the past decade as their
              role in energy localization and transport has been appreciated in a variety of
              contexts.  Their applications span nonlinear optics and telecommunications
              (optical fibers and waveguides),  atomic physics (BEC, an issue of fundamental
              relevance as highlighted by the Physics Nobel Prize in 2001 awarded for its
              experimental observation), condensed matter physics (superconductivity and
              charge density waves), biophysics (the local breaking of DNA  and 
              conformational changes in proteins), and environmental science (nucleation of
              liquid droplets in the atmosphere).  The areas of interest are diverse and
              broad, the impact of the understanding of the fundamental physics is
              potentially very deep, but the underlying mathematical principles are simple
              and unifying.  These models share a common structure of nonlinear complex
              behavior, the spatio-temporal variation of which we wish to explore. 
              Understanding this behavior and the role of (nonlinear) waves in it is of
              fundamental interest in all these fields.  The nonlinear waves represent the
              electric field of light in optics, the quantum-mechanical Bose particle
              wavefunction in BEC, the DNA base-pair distance or the liquid-vapor interface
              of a nucleating droplet in the atmosphere.  The properties of these waves,
              their stability, dynamical evolution and internal structure are therefore at
              the heart of a wealth of physical effects.  The goal of our research is to
              explore these features using a combination of analytical and computational
              mathematical techniques and physical intuition.  Our project addresses, in
              particular, lattice dynamical systems, where space is discrete, as is the case
              in many fundamental applications, such as optical waveguides, DNA, and arrays
              of superconducting Josephson junctions.

