Title       : Nonlinear Problems of Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0204505

Award Number: 0204505
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $368160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart S. Antman ssa@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal:  DMS-0204505
PI: Stuart S. Antman
Institution: University of
              Maryland College Park
Title: Nonlinear Problems of Solid
              Mechanics

ABSTRACT

S. S. Antman proposes to treat a variety of dynamical
              and steady-state nonlinear problems for rods, shells, and three-dimensional
              solid bodies.  The bodies are composed of nonlinearly elastic, viscoelastic,
              plastic, viscoplastic, or magnetoelastic materials.  In each case, properly
              invariant, geometrically exact theories encompassing general nonlinear
              constitutive equations are to be used.  (Such correctly formulated nonlinear
              problems of solid mechanics can seldom be directly subsumed under available
              mathematical theories.)  The goals of these studies are to discover new
              nonlinear effects, determine thresholds in constitutive equations separating
              qualitatively different responses, determine general classes of constitutive
              equations that are both physically and mathematically natural, examine
              important kinds of instabilities, determine how existence, regularity, and
              well-posedness depend on material behavior, contribute to the theory of shocks
              and dissipative mechanisms in solids, and develop new methods of nonlinear
              analysis and of effective computation for problems of solid mechanics.  Among
              the specific areas to be studied are (i) eversion of nonlinearly elastic
              shells, (ii) nonlinear stability of structures subject to nonconservative
              loads, (iii) dynamic stability of inelastic bodies subject to stick-slip
              friction, (iv) global multiparameter Hopf bifurcation, (v) fluid-solid
              interactions, (vi) parametric resonance, (vi) attractors for problems with
              forcing, (vii) dynamics of incompressible elastic and viscoelastic
              rods,
(viii) quasilinear hyperbolic problems from nonlinear elasticity, (ix)
              asymptotics of small inertia, (x) dissipative mechanisms, (xi) hysteresis, and
              (xii) control.

S. S. Antman proposes to treat a variety of dynamical and
              steady-state nonlinear problems for a variety of solid bodies composed of a
              variety of materials.  The governing theories, needed to describe accurately
              the behavior of bodies suffering large and rapid deformations, possibly
              under
extremes of temperature and loading, present severe mathematical
              challenges and have seldom been analyzed.  The research is to encompass (a) the
              development of physical theory, (b) the development of mathematical theory
              capable of handling the governing equations, (c) contribution to the
              development of numerical methods, and (d) the treatment of specific problems
              and classes of problems.  Examples of the latter include: (i) Large buckling
              (collapse) of shells under high
pressure. (ii) Dynamic instability of
              deformable structures under nonconservative loads.  (Such loads may be induced
              by rotations, by contact with moving fluids, or feedback.)  (iii) Stability of
              structures subject to periodic forcing.  (iv)  Fluid-structure interactions,
              e.g., like that of a propeller or panel of a ship or a helicopter in contact
              with a moving fluid and undergoing large and possibly destructive oscillations.
              (v) Fluid-solid interactions in physiology, such as blood flowing in an artery.
               (vi) Large motions of rigid bodies joined by deformable bodies (like space
              vehicles joined by a tether).  (vi) The analysis of problems of electromagnetic
              solid mechanics with applications to the use of smart materials to control the
              response of vibrating solids, e.g., to bring a vibrating part of a submarine or
              space vehicle to rest in a short time.

