Title       : Next Generation Software: Scalable Real-Time Simulation of Embedded Systems and
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2002      
File        : a0204050

Award Number: 0204050
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frederica Darema                        
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $623000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kane Kim khkim@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas C. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip Chen-Y Sheu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 2884      NEXT GENERATION SOFTWARE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 5914,5942,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                          Scalable Distributed
              Real-Time Simulation of
                                                      
                       Embedded Systems and Environments

                                 
                                                                   Kane Kim
                
                                                                  University of California
              -Irvine
                                                                      
                                0204050


     Major improvements in the validation
              technology for embedded systems are under increasing demands from industry. 
              Not only description but also simulation of non-computer parts and application
              environments of embedded systems is needed in validating many embedded system
              software designs and implementations.  Here the desired types of simulators are
              real-time (RT) simulators which exhibit the timing behavior that are the same
              as or sufficiently close to the timing behavior of the simulation targets. 
              Such simulators can enable highly cost-effective testing of the embedded system
              software and such testing can be a lot cheaper that the testing performed in
              actual application environments while being much more effective than the
              testing based on non-RT simulators of environments.

     In this research,
              the joint university-industry research team intends to establish the scientific
              foundation for the DTS scheme in a sound form, thereby realizing fundamental
              advances in the state of the art in RT simulation.  Development of support
              middleware and other tool prototypes is planned.  Successful accomplishment of
              these will mean that the validation technology for embedded systems will be
              advanced in fundamental ways.  Case studies for evaluating the improvements in
              simulation performance and validation effectiveness realized by use of the DTS
              scheme in practical contexts will be conducted with the assistance of industry
              partners.  Advanced instrumentation and performance measurement technologies
              and graphic interface technologies developed by international collaborations
              partners will also be incorporated and integrated with the DTS scheme.  More
              specifically, the proposing team intends to establish:
(1) Scientific
              foundation for DTS, including that related to consistency among distributed
              simulator nodes and maximization of concurrency, (2) Middleware and application
              programming interfaces that support DTS and simulator programming, (3) A
              methodology for validation of RT object-structured distributed software for
              embedded systems, which is centered around the use of RT simulators of the
              non-computer parts and environments and additionally uses performance
              measurement and graphic visualization tools, and (4) Case studies involving an
              RT simulation of immune buildings designed to protect inhabitants against
              bio-weapon attacks and that of miliary command-control environments.



