Title       : Spectral Invarinats of Deformed Dirac Operators on Open G-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a0204421

Award Number: 0204421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96128              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maxim Braverman maxim@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT: DMS 0204421.

In this project we will continue to study the deformed
              equivariant Dirac
operators on open manifolds. We will use the nice spectral
              properties of these
operators to construct new invariants of manifolds. In
              particular, we introduce
the regularized cohomology of equivariant holomorphic
              vector bundles over open
Kaehler manifolds. One of the goals of the project is
              to extend the vanishing
theorems and the semi-continuity theorem to
              non-compact setting. The
applications will include the non-compact versions of
              Witten's holomorphic
Morse inequalities and of the formula for the cohomology
              of the Mumford
quotient, as well as new proofs of these results in the compact
              case. We also
introduce an analogue of the Quillen metric on the determinant
              of the
regularized cohomology and are planning to study this metric. This will
              shed a
new light on the properties of the Quillen metric on compact manifolds.
              In
particular, in a joint project with A. Abanov we suggest a
              mathematically
rigorous description of the non-linear sigma-model describing
              the
superconductivity. Jointly with P.-E. Paradan we a planning to use the
              deformed
Dirac operator in the study of discrete series representations of Lie
              groups.


The elliptic operators on compact manifolds have very nice
              properties. In this
project we introduce a class of operators on non-compact
              manifolds with similar
properties. The study of these operators not only leads
              to a generalization of
many theorems from compact manifolds to non-compact
              ones, but also provides new
results and methods in the theory of compact
              manifolds. The applications of
these results and methods range from the
              mathematical theory of
superconductivity to representation theory and complex
              geometry.



