Title       : General Theory of Minimum Aberration and its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0204594

Award Number: 0204594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boxin Tang tangb@msci.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0204594
PI: Boxin Tang
Title: General theory of minimum
              aberration and its applications

Abstract

The investigator and his
              colleagues consider the problem of design selection for fractional factorials. 
              In situations where there is little or no knowledge about effects that are
              potentially important, it is appropriate to select designs using the minimum
              aberration criterion. Very often, the experimenter may have reasons to believe
              that certain two-factor interactions are important. Appropriate designs under
              such circumstances are those allowing joint estimation of all main effects and
              these potentially important interactions.
If the effects not in the postulated
              model, which consists of the main effects and potentially important
              interactions, cannot be completely ignored, they bias the estimates of the
              effects in the model. In the proposed research, this problem of design
              selection is solved by developing a general theory of minimum aberration. The
              general criterion of aberration to be introduced generalizes the usual
              criterion of minimum aberration, and it has the robust property that the best
              designs given by this criterion sequentially minimize the contamination of
              nonnegligible effects on the estimation of the effects in the postulated model.
              Developing a general theory of minimum aberration is also motivated by the
              desire of unifying various versions of minimum aberration in the literature. Is
              it possible to derive these versions of minimum aberration from a general
              theory that is based on a sound statistical principle? The general theory of
              aberration provides a positive answer to this question.  What is more important
              is that such a general theory enables researchers to derive other versions of
              minimum aberration that may be more appropriate for given design situations. In
              the proposal, many research problems are discussed and in some cases, solutions
              are outlined. 

Design of experiments is an area of study in statistics that
              concerns efficient data collection for industrial experiments and many other
              areas of scientific investigation. Fractional factorial designs are a class of
              experimental plans and their importance, both theoretical and practical, cannot
              be overstated. As exploratory designs, they are directly useful in identifying
              important factors at the early stage of an investigation. They also form a
              basis on which other more sophisticated designs can be built. In the proposed
              research, the investigator and his colleagues study the problem of selecting
              the best fractional factorial designs when certain prior knowledge regarding
              the effects of factors is available. The problem is solved by developing a
              general theory of design selection criteria. In addition to solving the above
              practical problem, the general theory unifies various existing design selection
              criteria, and allows researchers to derive other criteria that are more
              appropriate for their situations.  Involving students in research activities is
              an important aspect of the proposed research. The proposed research sheds new
              light on the study of fractional factorial designs, leads to new economical
              designs for the experiments in the physical, chemical, and engineering
              sciences, and most importantly, promotes the application of factorial designs
              in the areas such as biotechnology and medical research that have huge
              potential to benefit further from the design methodology.

