Title       : Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Kinetic Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0204227

Award Number: 0204227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert T. Glassey glassey@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A collisionless plasma is a fully ionized gas in which electromagnetic forces
              dominate collisional effects.  The motion of a high temperature, low density
              collisionless plasma is described by the Vlasov-Maxwell equations, a nonlinear
              system of hyperbolic partial differential equations.  In this setting
              collisions are ignored while the charge and current densities (which drive the
              Maxwell system) are determined in a self-consistent manner from velocity
              moments of solutions to the Vlasov equation.  The major question to be studied
              is this: are there shocks in a three dimensional collisionless plasma?  That
              is, could a singularity develop from smoothly prescribed initial values as time
              progresses? Smooth global solutions are known to exist in lower dimensional
              situations (e.g., two space and velocity variables) and when the data are
              "small."

Kinetic Theory includes the study of the motion and properties of
              plasmas.  Plasmas are often called the fourth state of matter (after solids,
              liquids and gases); they account for practically all of the material in the
              universe.  Plasmas are charged gases and hence are excellent conductors of
              electricity.  "Plasma engines" have been used recently to power some NASA
              spacecraft.  Notable examples of collisionless plasmas include the solar wind,
              the ionosphere, galactic nebulae and comet tails.  The motion of a plasma is
              described by a number of complicated equations dictated by physics. Among the
              mathematician's goals are to show that these equations have solutions (under
              appropriate conditions) and to approximate them numerically (so that one can
              predict certain behavior in future situations).  To show that the
              Vlasov-Maxwell system has a "nice" solution would at least partially confirm
              this system as the "right" one to describe these phenomena.  

