Title       : Macromolecular Fluids: Theory, Simulation and Experiment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  2002     
File        : a0204243

Award Number: 0204243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177004             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qi Wang wang@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              New classes of materials are processed as liquid mixtures of "designer"
              macromolecules either in  viscous solvents or in flexible polymer solutions. 
              These  macromolecules range from small 
 molecular weight, rod-like liquid
              crystals to  nano-clay platelets,  targeting a diverse family of
              high-performance materials and devices.  The molecules are well  approximated
              as  
 ellipsoids,  precisely falling  within  the class of   macromolecular 
              fluids accessible 
 by emerging theory,  computation,   and   experiment. 
              Furthermore,  rigid-unit, 
monodisperse molecules suspended in viscous solvent
              are fundamental  model systems. 
 Mathematically, they represent the leading
              edge of theory; physically, they are the 
foundation from which many
              micro-fluidic systems can now be ideally modeled, and 
eventually understood. 
                  Conductivity or barrier  properties, while  governing 
material  end-use,
              are passive during processing.  Rather, the fundamental issue for
 design and
              control is the emergence  of  structures during   processing at length 
scales
              (up to microns) far removed from individual molecules, called
 mesostructures,
              which empirically  dominate ultimate performance features. 
 Examples include
              sequestered island arrays of liquid crystals and distinguished 
 patterns that
              arise in rod-like and disc-like  nano-composites.  The onset, 
development,
              and saturation of mesostructures in prototypical flows of rigid-unit
              
macromolecular fluids is the primary focus of the workl.  The work identifies
              
open mathematical, numerical, and experimental issues, and constructs
              collective 
strategies toward their resolution, combining experimental,
              theoretical and computational
 expertise.  

New class of materials are
              processed as liquid mixtures of "designer macromolecules"
either in viscous
              solvents or in polymer melts and solutions, in which the
              designer
macromolecules are of simple geometry in a few to several hundred
              nanometers (1 nanometer is
equal to 1 billionth of 1 meter). The material
              properties are dominated by the emergence of the mesostructure at the micron
              level (1 micron is 1 millionth of 1 meter) during the material processing.
              
The PI, teamed up with a group of leading experimentalists in the field of
              complex
fluids, identifies the open mathematical, numerical and experimental
              issues and constructs
collective strategies toward their resolution combining
              experimental, theoretical and computational
expertise.
