Title       : An Integrated Strategy for Testing User-Oriented Software Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  2002       
File        : a0204345

Award Number: 0204345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeff Tian tian@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research develops an integrated strategy for the effective
testing of
              ubiquitous software systems accessed by the massive user
population, such as
              those used to support the Internet and World Wide Web (WWW),
to ensure their
              satisfactory performance and reliability from the users'
perspective. This
              strategy includes three important components:

1. Development of a set of
              high-level operational profiles (OPs),
which enumerates major functions to be
              supported by a software and their
usage frequencies by target users, organized
              in groups of related user
functions.

2. For each high-level function group
              above, a Markov chain based
model is constructed to exhaustively test
              high-level operations and
selectively test important low-level
              implementations, with the testing results
analyzed to identify system
              bottlenecks for reliability improvement.

3. Reliability of the critical
              parts identified above can be assured
using traditional testing techniques or
              other quality assurance techniques. 

This research will involve industrial
              partners, including IBM, Nortel 
Networks, and Lockheed-Martin Aeronautics,
              for result validation, 
software tool support, and future deployment.

