Title       : Empowering Universities: Preparation for the CMS Research Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0204786

Award Number: 0204786
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marvin Goldberg                         
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1800098            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Reucroft stephen.reucroft@cern.ch  (Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Swain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1221      ELEMENTARY PARTICLE ACCEL USER
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The Large Hadron Collider now being built at the European Laboratory for
              Particle Physics promises discoveries of great scientific importance. This will
              be the first particle accelerator with sufficiently high energy to enable
              researchers to study fundamental interactions of a kind never before observed -
              those responsible for giving particles mass. With its ability to explore the
              mass/energy region of one trillion electron volts (1TeV), the LHC will be
              instrumental in the completion of the Standard Model of the strong,
              electromagnetic and weak forces.   The construction of the Large Hadron
              Collider is an international effort with collaborators from many countries. 20%
              of which are from the United States including a number here at the University
              of Iowa. The Collaborators from the University of Iowa are involved with the
              CMS portion of the LHC and are particularly involved with its Forward
              Calorimeter part of the Hadron Calorimeter. 

The Compact Muon Solenoid
              (CMS): CMS is a proton-proton detector designed to run at the highest
              luminosity in the LHC. The main features of the CMS are a muon system, an
              electromagnetic calorimeter, a central tracking, and a hadron calorimeter. One
              of the goals of the CMS project it to find the Higgs Boson HO which is
              predicted to exist by the Standard Model of Particle Physics.

This proposal
              focuses on the scientific exploitation of the CMS detector, one of two
              general-purpose detectors at the LHC.  This group plan to strengthen university
              infrastructure in four areas critical to the long-term success of the CMS
              research program: software and computing, maintenance and operations, detector
              upgrade research and development and education and outreach (E/O).

