Title       : Managing Energy as a First Class Operating System Resource
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0204367

Award Number: 0204367
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amin M. Vahdat vahdat@cs.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carla S. Ellis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alvin Lebeck  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Managing the energy consumption of computers requires cooperation
between
              energy aware applications and operating systems.  This
research seeks to fully
              explore the energy management space
surrounding the interaction of
              applications and the operating system.
Applications should adjust their energy
              consumption when appropriate,
but must be provided accurate information on
              their individual energy
consumption.  The operating system must implement the
              mechanisms and
policies to determine energy consumption and allocate it fairly
              as a
global system resource.

This research will first re-examine operating
              system structure with an
emphasis on managing energy as a first class
              resource.  Energy
management cuts across all traditional system resources,
              with the CPU,
disk, network, and memory all exhibiting unique energy
              consumption
characteristics.  Next, the work will explore policies for
              allocating
energy to competing tasks.  The goal is to maintain fairness
              while
observing user-specified priorities and soft real-time deadlines.

The
              end product of this research will be a comprehensive framework for
globally
              managing energy in a diverse set of scenarios, ranging from a
single mobile
              computer, to wireless sensor networks that may have
aggregate goals across a
              large number of sensors, to hosting centers
that wish to provide maximum
              performance with minimum energy
consumption.


