Title       : Many-stage Stochastic Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204206

Award Number: 0204206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149726             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Korf korf@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
0204206
Korf

The proposed project addresses modeling, duality,
              approximation, 
implementation and application of stochastic programming
              problems with 
many time stages.  The typical so-called multi-stage stochastic
              program 
tends to be modeled as an extension of a two-stage problem (often
              referred 
to as a stochastic program with recourse).  This misses some
              important 
features of a problem with many time stages, including a
              description of the 
dynamics inherent to the problem, the structure of
              information, and the 
degree to which one may respond to that information at a
              given time stage.  
A typical problem from mathematical finance will be framed
              in a many-
stage stochastic programming setting, allowing for a description of
              the 
dynamics.  The classical pricing results of mathematical finance and
              
extensions to more complicated problems will be obtained using the new
              
model.  This model will be generalized to be applicable to a much broader
              
range of many-stage stochastic optimization problems, highlighting 
duality
              results and their significance.  In conjunction with this will be an
              
investigation into problems that could be modeled in a continuous time
              
framework, and problems with infinitely many time stages.  New 
stochastic
              programming models, and approximation techniques using the 
tools of
              variational analysis, will be developed for these respective 
problems.
              Finally, an investigation into the structure of many-stage 
problems that
              include a description of system dynamics will be 
undertaken, leading
              ultimately to the development and implementation of 
algorithms for solving
              them.

Decision making under uncertainty and the theory and techniques of
              
mathematical programming merged in the 1950's to create the field now 
known
              as stochastic programming.  A stochastic program is a 
mathematical program
              (e.g. a linear program) that includes in its 
formulation a probability
              distribution to describe uncertain parameters.  
Research consists largely of
              understanding problem structure, deriving 
duality results and optimality
              conditions, developing approximation 
techniques, and exploiting the structure
              and theory in the development of 
solution schemes.  The field's development
              began with a two-stage 
recourse model, where the cost of a decision made now
              (e.g. production) 
is affected by an uncertain outcome in the future (e.g.
              demand), and the 
possibility of taking recourse action once the future is
              revealed (e.g. 
overtime).  A typical problem is to determine the present
              decision that 
minimizes expected cost.  While much knowledge has been gained
              from 
the investigation of two-stage models, a limited view of many-stage
              
stochastic programming has resulted in which multistage problems are
              
considered as simple extensions of the two-stage case.  This fails to
              
address the inherently dynamic nature of problems with many time stages.
              
Additionally, two-stage applications tend to come largely from areas such
              
as production and manufacturing, whereas the bulk of problems with 
many
              time stages arise from financial, economic, and environmental 
planning
              applications and other problems where dynamics are driving a 
system. Thus,
              much of the new many-stage theory should be geared 
toward these sorts of
              applications.  The proposed research will explore the 
additional dynamic
              structures, theory (duality, approximation), and 
questions regarding
              implementation, of stochastic optimization problems 
involving many (possibly
              even infinitely many, or a continuum of) stages.  
This will be motivated
              primarily by financial applications.

