Title       : Detonation Shock Dynamics and Multi-Step Kinetics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2002      
File        : a0204023

Award Number: 0204023
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190822             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Short shortl@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0204023
PI: 			Short, Mark
Institution:
              		University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign
Program: 		Applied
              Mathematics
Program Manager: 	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Detonation Shock
              Dynamics and Multi-step Kinetics


There are three outstanding problems in
              our pursuit of a fundamental understanding of detonation dynamics, all of which
              are important in an engineering tool, such as those above, that utilizes
              detonations. These concern the propagation and stability of curved detonations
              with realistic reaction kinetics; the problem of how a deflagration (flame)
              undergoes a transition to detonation (DDT) and the mechanisms which cause a
              detonation to ignite or fail (criticality). One of primary goals of this
              project is to obtain intrinsic surface propagation laws for both steady and
              unsteady curved detonation waves that are governing by several forms of
              realistic, but fundamental, reaction kinetics. Also, one of the most important
              concerns in engineering applications has to do both with the successful
              initiation of detonation and preventing premature failure. Mathematical
              investigations of these events will be conducted, including research on a new
              mode of detonation propagation that must be accounted for in failure problems,
              namely the edge-detonation. Subscale mathematical modeling will be used,
              applying rational asymptotic perturbation methods to derive, for example,
              intrinsic surface propagation laws for the motion of the detonation wave in a
              given system.

The aim of this project is to further our understanding of the
              basic mathematical physics of detonations in explosive systems ranging in size
              from micro-detonic applications to the collapse of stars (supernova).
              Traditional applications of detonation theory have focused on important issues
              such as safety, to defense and mining related uses. In recent years, there has
              been substantial interest in modern high-tech engineering applications ranging
              from hardening, forming and welding of metals, to precision cutting devices and
              thin-film manufacturing.



