Title       : Weighted Empirical Likelihood
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  2002     
File        : a0204182

Award Number: 0204182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101334             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Jian Ren jren@mail.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0204182
PI: Jian-Jian Ren
Title: Weighted empirical
              likelihood

Abstract 

The objective of this research is to investigate the
              applications of a new likelihood function, called weighted empirical
              likelihood, in constructing confidence sets and tests for various important
              nonparametric or semiparametric statistical inference problems in survival
              analysis using different types of incomplete data, including right censored
              data, doubly censored data and interval censored data. Weighted empirical
              likelihood function is formulated in a unified form through the probability
              mass of the nonparametric maximum likelihood estimator for different types of
              incomplete data. The PI has shown that the high-order expansion of the
              log-likelihood 
ratio for a quite general class of statistics can be obtained
              in a unified way for various types of censored data aforementioned. Thus, with
              the help of the adjusted n out of n bootstrap, the weighted empirical
              likelihood ratio can be used to construct efficient confidence intervals or
              tests. 
The proposed procedure does not require the precise knowledge of the
              convergence rate of the statistic of interest, which is particularly appealing
              for interval censored data. All preliminary studies show that the desirable
              properties of weighted empirical likelihood method include accuracy,
              efficiency, generality, and independency of the precise knowledge of the
              convergence rate of the statistic of interest. In this research, the issues
              under consideration include: (a) Applications of weighted empirical likelihood
              in statistical inference problems with various types 
of incomplete data,
              including the construction of confidence intervals and tests associated with
              profile likelihood problems, accelerated life model, proportional hazards
              model, and logistic regression model, etc.; (b) Coverage accuracy of weighted
              empirical likelihood ratio confidence intervals; (c) Efficiency of weighted
              empirical likelihood inferences; (d) Comparison with alternative methods if
              they exist.
  
Incomplete data are frequently encountered in medical
              follow-up and reliability studies. Recently, statisticians are paying more
              attention to some more complicated types of incomplete data, such as doubly
              censored data, interval censored data, truncated data, etc., as these data
              occur in 
important clinical trials and scientific research. For instance,
              doubly censored data were encountered in a recent study of primary breast
              cancer, interval censored data were encountered in AIDS research, and doubly
              truncated data were encountered in astronomical research. Up to now, the
              statistical research on these more complicated types of incomplete data still
              generally lags behind that on right censored data.  Since Owen (1988), the
              empirical likelihood method has been developed to construct tests and
              confidence sets based on nonparametric likelihood ratio. Studies have shown
              that the empirical likelihood ratio inferences are of comparable accuracy to
              
alternative methods. However, so far the applications of empirical likelihood
              method to censored data are relatively few and are mostly on right censored
              data. Examples show that for complicated types of incomplete data, such as
              interval censored data, the investigation of the limiting 
distribution of
              log-likelihood ratio can be quite difficult. In this context, aiming to provide
              solutions for various difficult problems that arise in medical and scientific
              research, this project intends to develop reliable statistical methods based on
              a new likelihood function, called weighted empirical likelihood function.

