Title       : Limit Set, Spectral Analysis, and Traveling Wave Solutions for Functional
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0204676

Award Number: 0204676
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84730              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenzhang Huang huang@math.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this proposal is to develop new methods to study the existence
              and stability of traveling wave solutions for a class of functional
              differential equations arising from applications. A dynamical approach combined
              with an analytic method will be developed. A particular type of flow
generated
              by the proposed functional differential equations is defined. A traveling wave
              is given by the equilibrium of this flow that will be identified from the
              positive limit set corresponding to a bounded solution. This will be achieved
              by extensive investigation of the property of a positive limit set and analysis
              of the spectral property for the variational equation associated to a global
              solution contained in the positive limit set. The advantage of the proposed
              approach is that it will provide information on both the asymptotical behavior
              of a solution and the existence and stability of a traveling wave solution. The
              method will also have the potential of application to other problems, such as
              the existence of traveling wave solutions for spatially discrete systems and
              the existence of heteroclinic solution for the delay differential equation
              arising from singular perturbation problems. The techniques of spectral
              analysis developed in this research will also be a contribution to the spectral
              theory of operators in Banach space.

Traveling waves have been observed in
              many models in the fields of biology, ecology, chemistry, and physics. In
              particular, the existence of the existence of stable traveling waves provides
              the most important information on the asymptotical behavior of a dynamical
              system or identifies the target pattern that describes the most interesting
              phenomenon. The functional differential equations studied in this proposal
              include a large class of models found in the literature. These models address
              questions of interest to ecologists and epidemiologists that include
              competition, dynamics of disease transmission and persistence, and that how the
              time delay and diffusion
jointly affect the existence of traveling waves.
              Results from the proposed research will increase our understanding of
              mechanisms responsible for observed patterns and the common feature of
wave
              propagation in nature. The proposed research project will also be incorporated
              into the research and education programs in the University of Alabama in
              Huntsville. The research project will expose graduate students to biologically
              important and mathematically interesting questions to attract them to the field
              of functional differential equations and mathematical biology.

