Title       : Power, Variability, and Optimality in Adaptive Designs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2002      
File        : a0204232

Award Number: 0204232
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $205364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Feifang Hu fh6e@virginia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Rosenberger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0204232
PI: Feifang Hu
Title: Power, variability, and
              optimality in adaptive designs

Abstract:

Adaptive designs use
              sequentially accruing data in allocation decisions to reach some objective.  In
              this proposal, the objective is based on an optimization criterion, such as
              minimizing the cost of an experiment.  The investigators use the power of a
              hypothesis test as a benchmark for comparisons of adaptive designs.  They
              explicitly derive the relationship between power and the design in terms of
              bias of the target allocation from the actual allocation and variation induced
              by the design.  For four classes of adaptive designs:  urn models, sequential
              maximum likelihood procedures, doubly adaptive biased coin designs, and
              treatment effect mappings, the investigators will uniquely unify the theory for
              easy comparison based on power, optimality, and variability.

Adaptive
              designs are useful in many scientific disciplines and have application in
              clinical research, industrial experiments, bioassay, to name a few areas.  The
              idea is to dynamically use sequentially accruing data in decisions for
              collecting future data in order to satisfy some objective, which could be
              minimizing the cost of an experiment, maximizing expected treatment successes
              in a clinical trial, etc.  The use of adaptive designs can improve efficiency
              of an experiment by incorporating current knowledge into design decisions. 
              Heretofore what has been unknown is the relationship of variability of the
              adaptive designs to efficiency of the experiment.  The investigators will
              develop guidelines that will allow direct comparison of efficiency of designs
              by exploring their variability.  The grant will involve both undergraduate and
              graduate students across two campuses and will lead to increased understanding
              of how to efficiently design costly or ethically demanding experiments.

