Title       : Higher-Order and Exact Methods for Statistical Inference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0204252

Award Number: 0204252
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152488             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas J. DiCiccio tjd9@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin T. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-020204252
PI: Thomas J DiCiccio

Title: Higher Order and Exact Methods
              for Statistical Inference

Abstract

There has been burgeoning interest in
              the last decade or so in artificial likelihoods for nonparametric problems. The
              investigators also propose to develop tractable approximations to the usual and
              adjusted nonparametric likelihood ratio statistics. These approximations are
              intended both to make bootstrap inference feasible and to yield insight into
              inaccuracies of the standard asymptotic approximations. Maximizing the adjusted
              profile nonparametric likelihoods yields adjusted estimators, and the
              investigators propose to study their properties, particularly as a basis for
              the popular bootstrap-t method of inference. Small sample inference in discrete
              data problems, such as contingency tables, log-linear models, and logistic
              regression, has received much attention. One approach is saddlepoint
              approximations; another approach is the use of Monte Carlo methods to simulate
              from the relevant conditional distributions. Important new ideas from
              computational ring theory may pave the way for the next generation feasible
              methods in highly discrete problems, just as the network algorithm provided
              methods that are currently being implemented routinely in practice. The
              investigators propose to use analytic and computational concepts from the
              theory of Groebner bases and toric ideals to provide correct and feasible
              simulation methods in complex discrete problems. 

The proposed research
              concerns feasible methodologies for accurate inference in both nonparametric
              and parametric settings. In the nonparametric framework, the focus is on
              approximate inference based on pseudo-likelihoods, while in the parametric
              context, the focus is on simulation methods for exact inference in discrete
              models. The inferential methods that are to be addressed in the proposal have
              broad application in data analysis of numerous areas of modeling scientific
              phenomena.

