Title       : Dynamical Systems Methods and Geometric Integrators for Nonlinear Wave Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0204714

Award Number: 0204714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance M. Schober   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0204714
Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems
              Methods and Geometric Integrators for Nonlinear Wave
              Equations

Abstract

0204714  Schober


This project consists of three
              interrelated topics in the theory and application of nonlinear dispersive
              waves: chaotic dynamics in perturbed nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) equations, the
              role of homoclinic chaos in the generation of high amplitude (rogue) ocean
              waves, and the development and analysis of structure-preserving integrators for
              nonlinear wave equations.  Combined experimental and theoretical studies of
              water waves recently yielded a characterization of the chaotic evolution in
              perturbed NLS equations that is generic, observable, and physically
              significant.  Preliminary analysis indicates that similar results hold in fiber
              optics.  In this project, further experimental, numerical, and theoretical
              analysis will be carried out.  The latter includes extending the geometric
              interpretation of the Floquet discriminant and the associated Melnikov
              integrals for solutions in the full phase space and obtaining criteria for the
              existence of homoclinic structures for symmetry-breaking perturbations of the
              NLS equation.  The implication of these results in the context of homoclinic
              chaos and the likelihood of rogue wave formation will be examined.  The
              research also involves the development of efficient, stable multi-symplectic
              integrators for equations of interest in the water wave and optics problems.  A
              comparison of the multi-symplectic, energy, and momentum errors to the overall
              performance of the integrators (including accurate capture of qualitative
              features of the system) will be carried out.  Error bounds on the approximate
              preservation of the local conservation laws will be sought.  

The proposed
              research focuses on mathematical and computational issues central to water wave
              dynamics and nonlinear optics.  Rogue wave events can have a devastating effect
              on offshore structures and ships.  The results of this project will address
              fundamental properties of rogue wave generation and potentially have impact on
              the design and analysis of structures such as offshore oil rigs.  Soliton
              solutions of the NLS equation are used to model light pulses in high-speed
              optical telecommunication systems.  The research on multi-symplectic
              integrators will yield fast, efficient codes that can be used in numerical
              simulation of high data rate communication systems and rogue wave events.

