Title       : Collaborative Research: Theory and Methods for Nonparametric Survey Regression
               Estimation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0204642

Award Number: 0204642
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65038              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean D. Opsomer jopsomer@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DMS-0204642 & DMS-0204531 (Collaborative)
PIs:
              Opsomer/Briedt

Title: Collaborative Research: Theory and Methods for
              Nonparametric Survey Regression Estimation

This research project develops
              new methods for the efficient use of auxiliary information in complex surveys,
              based on nonparametric regression techniques. Current practice relies on
              parametric regression techniques, which have good efficiency if the regression
              model is well specified, and which have a number of appealing operational
              features. The nonparametric techniques share these operational features, lose
              little efficiency when the parametric specification is correct, and gain
              efficiency when the parametric specification is incorrect. The project
              increases the scope of applicability of the nonparametric regression estimation
              approach, by considering complex survey designs, varying types of auxiliary
              information, and alternative smoothing techniques. Specifically, the project
              investigates multi-stage surveys with cluster or element-level auxiliary
              information; multivariate auxiliary information; and alternative smoothing
              techniques. Parametric and nonparametric techniques are blended using
              semiparametric additive models to provide a flexible tool for use in complex
              surveys. 

Large-scale surveys are used to collect data in a wide range of
              fields, from studies of human populations to inventories of natural resources.
              Information external to the survey, such as administrative records or remote
              sensing, is often available. This research project makes it possible to
              incorporate auxiliary information easily and effectively into survey estimates,
              by using nonparametric regression methods. Nonparametric regression, sometimes
              referred to as smoothing, is widely used in other areas of statistics, but its
              use in survey estimation has been limited so far. The investigators show that
              incorporating auxiliary information into survey estimation through
              nonparametric regression can improve the precision of the surveys, often at
              reduced costs. 

