Title       : Knowledge-Based Support for Process Centered Software Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0204436

Award Number: 0204436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Henninger scotth@cse.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              A critical issue for process-based software development tools and methodologies
              is to balance the need for innovation with knowledge of past experiences and
              best practices.  Achieving this balance is particularly important for software
              development, which involves the development of a highly variable product
              requiring continuous process adjustments.  Past work has focused on either
              creating process frameworks at a high level of abstraction that avoids issues
              of variance or composing fine-grained activities with process languages.  These
              approaches miss important opportunities to capture and reuse process knowledge
              as a resource for future development efforts. 

The research objectives are
              to:

Advance the state of research in knowledge-based support for
              process-centered software engineering through meta-modeling tools capable of
              constructing a variety of organization-level methodologies that can be tailored
              to specific development efforts.  The tools are complemented by an
              experience-based approach that captures development practices to continuously
              refine and improve the methodology to meet emerging needs of software
              development organizations.

Employ a mixture of empirical studies to
              investigate process improvisation and the impact of delivering process and
              product knowledge sources during the development process.  This strategy will
              be used to both evaluate innovative system building efforts and improve the
              overall understanding of software development practices.


