Title       : Efficient Techniques for High Quality Delay Testing of High-Speed Circuits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 20,  2003     
File        : a0204414

Award Number: 0204414
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sankar Basu                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandeep K. Gupta sandeep@poisson.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 4710      DES AUTO FOR MICRO & NANO SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              High-speed circuits are highly pipelined, use latches as opposed to flip-flops,
              and practice extensive time borrowing to reduce overheads of pipelining. Since
              speed is a critical objective, high quality delay testing, such as path delay
              testing, is imperative for such circuits. Use of latches and extensive time
              borrowing have two important consequences that give rise to new problems in
              delay testing. First, since the paths in one block interact with the paths in
              the blocks in its fan in and fan out, it becomes necessary to test for delay
              faults multi-block paths, i.e., paths that traverse multiple blocks of a
              circuit. The number of such paths is often astronomical. Second, due to time
              borrowing, values at a latch output are not applied at any fixed time, but at
              some time within a range. Since the exact time when values are applied at the
              outputs of a latch vary from vector to vector and from one fabricated copy of a
              chip to another, it is impossible to design design-for-testability (DFT)
              circuitry that mimics the timing of events during the normal mode of operation.
              

Two types of test application schemes are proposed that can be implemented
              using scan designs that do not try to mimic the timing of events during the
              circuit's normal operation but apply values and capture responses at specific
              clock edges. It is then proven that it is indeed possible to use such scan to
              precisely test, for path delay faults, latch based circuits that use time
              borrowing. Techniques to use above DFT technique to efficiently test such
              high-speed circuits will be developed. This will include development of a
              technique to generate optimal test plans as well as tools that can generate the
              types of tests and perform detailed design of DFT circuitry required by the
              proposed approach. The proposed research will provide the first systematic
              approach for achieving, at reasonable costs, efficient testing for path delay
              faults in high speed circuits while providing provably high test quality. The
              tools developed will be leveraged and extended for instructional purposes. 

