Title       : ITWF: Climate for Opportunity and Inclusion: Improving the Recruitment,
               Retention and Advancement of Women and Minorities in Information Technology
               (IT)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2003     
File        : a0204430

Award Number: 0204430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Caroline E. Wardle                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497257             (Estimated)
Investigator: Debra A. Major   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joan Mann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald D. Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Janis V. Sanchez-Hucles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      2033 Hughes Hall
	      Norfolk, VA  23529    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1713      WORKFORCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              

EIA-0204430
Major, Debra A., Davis, Donald D., Mann, Joan, Sanchez-Hucles,
              Janis V.
Old Dominion University

Title: Climate for Opportunity and
              Inclusion: Improving the Recruitment, Retention and Advancement of Women and
              Minorities in IT

This ITWF award provides support to investigate how
              characteristics of the information technology (IT) workplace can foster
              increased retention and advancement of women and minorities.  In the first
              year, several work organizations with IT departments of varying sizes and
              demographic compositions will be recruited to participate in the study.  Survey
              and interview data will be collected from human resource directors, IT
              supervisors and IT employees in order to assess the climate for opportunity and
              inclusion of each department.  The goal is to identify barriers and enablers to
              the career success of women and minorities in IT departments. In the second
              year, a survey feedback intervention will be conducted in each participating
              organization to encourage IT departments to capitalize on their strengths and
              improve their weaknesses with regard to opportunity and inclusion for all
              employees.  In the third year, survey and interview data will again be
              collected to assess the effectiveness of the interventions implemented during
              the second year.  The objective is not only to assist the participating
              organizations in establishing an inclusive workplace environment, but also to
              develop "best practices" that can be shared, through publications and
              presentations, with others in the IT field and researchers interested in
              workplace diversity issues.  



