Title       : Large Scale Geometry, Index Theory and Representations of Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0204558

Award Number: 0204558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126660             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan L. Block blockj@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204558
Jonathan L. Block

In recent years there has been an explosion of
              interest in the
applications of large scale or "coarse" methods in geometry,
              
topology, index theory and group theory. For many topological 
and geometric
              problems of interest, this large-scale structure 
is relevant in answering
              them. The Principal Investigator will 
study three such instances. First, on a
              singular space, phenomena 
are affected not only by the global fundamental
              group, but also
by a local picture of the fundamental group. The fundamental
              
groups of the link of a stratum changes from stratum to stratum 
and affects
              the topological behavior of the space, in particular, 
the classification of
              stratified spaces must take into account 
this behavior. The PI proposes to
              study via operator K-theory
how the index theory of the strata of singular
              spaces 
(as non-compact manifolds) fit together to give an index 
theory for
              the singular space itself.  Second, the PI 
proposes to study more generally
              quantitative aspects 
of homology theory, taking into account such issues as
              the 
images of the homology of balls of a given size in the homology 
of a
              non-compact manifold.  Applications to existence of 
infinitely many
              null-homotopic geodesics are proposed. Third, 
the large-scale / small-scale
              duality between a discrete group
and its unitary representation theory has
              been studied under 
the rubric of the Baum-Connes conjecture. The PI,
              motivated by 
his work in large scale geometry proposes a broader study of
              
this duality. This requires the development of tools from 
algebraic
              geometry (especially moduli space theory) to 
apply to infinite dimensional
              unitary representations. 
These tools place families of representations at the
              fore, 
which as two effects. First, families of representations 
seem to be
              more rigid then single ones. And secondly, one 
can concentrate ones attention
              on specific parts of the 
representation theory. Thus, the PI demonstrates, in
              several
situations, that for lattices in Lie groups, the
representation
              theory in an infinitesimal neighborhood 
of the trivial representation
              coincide for the lattice and 
the ambient group. A second type of question
              proposed by the 
PI are called reconstruction problems.  When can one
              reconstruct representations on the ambient group knowing its values on
              the
lattice? The PI views this as a version of the Sampling theorem 
from
              signal processing.

Large scale geometry is the study of spaces as seen from
              an increasingly distant perspective. For many problems in geometry 
and
              topology, the phenomena at a small or moderate scale only 
obscure the
              situation and the large scale perspective shines 
the essential light on the
              subject: seeing the forest for the
trees.  This proposal focuses the attention
              of large-scale 
geometry on problems in index theory and representation theory
              
of discrete groups. Students of PI and his collaborators are 
involved at
              various stages of the project. The developments 
and anticipated results are
              intended as a bridge between 
algebraic and geometric topology, harmonic
              analysis and 
functional analysis. This should provide a clearer understanding
              
of all these subjects and enhance the interaction between 
the experts in
              them.

