Title       : Exact Coherent Structures and the Nature Shear Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0204636

Award Number: 0204636
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $206393             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fabian Waleffe waleffe@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Over the past 40 years, substantial experimental and computational efforts have
              revealed the existence and importance of complex coherent structures in shear
              turbulence. The nature and role of the coherent  structures have remained
              subjects of debate at a qualitative level due to a lack of theoretical
              understanding and foundation for these structures.  However, the gap between
              theory and experiments is closing thanks to recent discoveries of
              three-dimensional traveling wave solutions of the Navier-Stokes equations that
              are best described as exact coherent structures. This research will continue
              the study and characterization of these rich solutions in plane shear flows and
              seek to elucidate the connections between their instabilities and the disorder
              that is characteristic of turbulence. The approach is that of bifurcation and
              dynamical systems theory applied to the nonlinear partial differential
              equations of hydrodynamics. Extensions of these traveling wave solutions to
              pipe flow and mixing layers will be considered.

Shear turbulence is an
              ubiquitous phenomenon that occurs in the flow of simple fluids, such as air and
              water, and the more complex fluids that arise in biological and industrial
              processes. Turbulence has an enormous impact on the properties of fluid flows,
              such as the transport of momentum and energy and the mixing of chemicals in
              combustion, manufacturing and the environment. However, the complexity of
              turbulent flows severely limits our ability to predict the properties of fluid
              flows. This research promises to provide a fundamental understanding of the
              nature of shear turbulence thanks in large part to high-performance scientific
              computing. A database of the exact coherent structures mentioned above will be
              developed and posted on the Internet.  

