Title       : Spectra, Geometry, and Asymptotics of Some Differential Equations of
               Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  2002       
File        : a0204059

Award Number: 0204059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evans M. Harrell   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project functional analysis will be used to understand how the shapes of
              systems are connected with energy levels, whether arising as eigenvalues of
              linear equations, such as the Schroedinger equation which describes quantum
              mechanical particles, or arising from nonlinear equations like those describing
              carrier transport in semiconductors.  Small parameters are often present,
              whether Planck's constant or a physical dimension, and careful asymptotics are
              required in order to elucidate the role of the geometry of a domain. It is
              intended to seek useful estimates of energies and other physical quantities in
              terms of curvature, and to determine the shapes and geometric properties that
              optimize those quantities.

This rigorous mathematical research will
              contribute to nanotechnology and quantum mechanics.  Laboratories are beginning
              to produce very small-scale electrical devices, including quantum wires and
              quantum waveguides.   The properties of these devices, such as conductivity and
              energy levels, are sensitive to their shape and configuration.  This project
              will make these effects quantitative and help guide the design of devices.  The
              work also has implications for other quite diverse phenomena described by
              similar equations.  These include practical applications to the seepage of
              fluids and the stability of bulk matter, as well as purely mathematical
              applications to geometry.
