Title       : Inferences for Multivariate Semiparametric and Nonparametric Models with
               Applications to Risk Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0204329

Award Number: 0204329
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jianqing Fan jfan@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

PI: Jianqing Fan
DMS-0204329

The objectives of this proposal are
              to develop new and widely applicable approaches for semiparametric and
              nonparametric estimation and inferences, to study theoretical properties of
              these new approaches, and to evaluate their efficacy in data analyses. This
              proposal not only introduces a number of innovative techniques, but also
              provides various new and deep insights into statistical foundation. It will
              have significant impact on the future research of statistical methodologies,
              computation and theories. In particular, three inter-related areas are proposed
              for study. Firstly, a family of flexible semiparametric and nonparametric
              models is introduced. This allows one to study the extent to which response
              variables are associated with their covariates. The generalized likelihood
              ratio statistics is proposed for testing various hypotheses in multivariate
              semiparametric and nonparametric models. Secondly, new semiparametric and
              nonparametric models are proposed for understanding interest-rate dynamics, and
              stock price volatilities. Furthermore, the information on state-domain is
              incorporated to improve the efficiency of volatility estimation for bonds and
              to more accurately estimate the market risks of a portofolio. Thirdly, new
              techniques for variable selection, in the presence of a large number of
              variables, are proposed via nonconcave penalized likelihood. The innovation is
              that they estimate parameters and select variables simultaneously. 

The
              above techniques are widely applicable to many scientific and engineering
              problems. Multivariate nonparametric, semiparametric and large parametric
              models have been widely used. Statistical questions often arise such as if
              certain variables or factors are important to public health; if some risk
              factors contribute significantly to the survival time of patients; and if
              interest-rate dynamics or stock price processes are time-dependent or follow
              certain famous hypotheses, among others. Yet, there are no generally applicable
              tools available to answer these questions in multivariate semiparametric and
              non-saturated nonparametric models. The techniques proposed here permit one to
              objectively test scientific hypotheses without restrictive model assumptions.
              The techniques allow to better price financial derivatives and manage
              investment risk, to identify important risk variables and their possible
              interactions in the analysis of large epidemiological studies and to scrutinize
              famous hypotheses on stock prices 

