Title       : ITR: Enhancing Crystal Structure Determination through Data Mining,
               Collaborative Environments, and Grid Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  2003   
File        : a0204918

Award Number: 0204918
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Xiaodong Zhang                          
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2006        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2018965            (Estimated)
Investigator: Russ Miller miller@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Aidong Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles M. Weeks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert A. Hauptman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Josephine Anstey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1687      ITR MEDIUM (GROUP) GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,1687,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ITR: Enhancing Crystal Structure Determination through Data Mining,
              Collaborative Environments, and Grid Computing

X-ray crystallography, with
              its unique ability to reveal the atomic or near-atomic structures of a wide
              range of biomedically important molecules, is the cornerstone of modern
              structural biology. This project will support critical advances in the enabling
              technologies of automated tuning of software, learning via data mining,
              geographically distributed collaborative environments, and grid computing for
              the enhancement and determination of crystal structure.

Computer programs
              based on "direct methods" are used to determine the majority of small-molecule
              organic crystal structures. These methods begin to fail in the 100-200-atom
              range because the accuracy of the underlying probabilistic relationships is
              inversely proportional to the square root of the size of the structure. The
              Shake-and-Bake algorithm and SnB program have extended the size of crystal
              structures amenable to direct-methods phasing from 100 to 2500 atoms. SnB has
              also been used to increase the size of heavy-atom substructures in large
              proteins that can be determined from 10 to 180 Se atoms. This provides a
              bootstrap by which complete structures, containing hundreds of thousands of
              atoms, can be elucidated. Such accomplishments would have been regarded as
              impossible only a few years ago, and the ultimate potential of the
              Shake-and-Bake approach to ab initio structure determination of macromolecules
              is unknown.

The integrated SnB collaborative environment will allow multiple
              simultaneous users at distinct locations to work together in a virtual
              environment via a variety of platforms (from 3D fully immersive to desktop PC).
              Users will be able to navigate through a structure, search and import
              structures available from public crystallographic data banks, edit structures,
              and interface directly with SnB while running either in solution mode or in
              refinement mode. The users will have the ability to work in a collaborative
              fashion as they would if they were all situated in close physical proximity.
              Finally, platforms consisting of computational grids are available in many
              academic and commercial institutions that use crystallographic software. A
              grid-enabled version of SnB will be created so that it can take advantage of
              computational grids and networks of workstations that have available computing
              cycles. The introduction of SnB has had an enormous impact on the
              crystallographic community. The integration of the Shake-and-Bake methodology
              with automated data warehousing and data mining should provide equally
              spectacular advances in the near future. The introduction of collaborative
              environments and the ability to exploit computational grids is expected to have
              a significant impact as well. Advances in enabling technologies coupled to a
              widely-distributed package, provides a unique opportunity to evaluate the
              viability of these enabling technologies, which have far-reaching applications
              to a wealth of diverse areas, including computational chemistry, advanced
              design, optimization, and edutainment.

