Title       : Topics in Differential Geometry and Mathematical Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0204002

Award Number: 0204002
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yat Sun Poon ypoon@math.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0204002.

The PI's first program in this proposal is concerned
              with the 
geometry of Hermitian or hyper-Hermitian connections with totally
              
skew torsions. The results will be applicable to an investigation 
in
              quantum mechanical black holes. The PI's second program is to 
study the
              complex deformation theory and Hermitian geometry of 
nilmanifolds. Parallel
              to the algebraic analysis on the classical 
and extended moduli, he and his
              collaborators investigatge the 
geometry on these spaces from the viewpoint of
              special holonomy 
and symplectic structures. A senior participant proposes to
              
analyse the structures of compact quaternionic Kaehler manifolds 
and the
              A-hat genus of non-spin manifolds with finite second 
homotopy. Both issues
              are tackled through an analysis of the 
rigidity of elliptic genus. Through
              the theory of elliptic genus, 
the two proposers will jointly calculate a
              Hilbert polynomial 
relevant to holomorphic contact structures or rational
              curves 
invariant with respect to a holomorphic automorphisms.

The proposed
              projects here are enabled by theoretical physicists' 
and mathematicians'
              knowledge on field theory, complex deformation 
theory and differential
              topology of fixed point sets. All proposed 
projects are intended to address
              issues relevant to current 
physcial or mathematical issues. The PI's projects
              will address a 
type of geometry less  known to mathematicians than to
              physicists. 
The results will increase mathematicians' knowledge on Hermitian
              
geometry and directly addresses issues to theoretical physcists' 
concerns.
              The senior participant's project addresses a long-
standing conjecture in the
              field of holonomy. The central tool in 
this project is a novel differntial
              topological mechinary for 
studying fixed point sets with respect to group
              actions. The 
investigators joint project will combine their expertise to
              
extract topological information on a class ofspace central in 
algebraic
              geometry.

