Title       : Numerical Methods for Molecular Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a0204442

Award Number: 0204442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Skeel skeel@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal: DMS-0204442
PI: Robert D. Skeel
Institution: University of Illinois
              at Urbana-Champaign
Title: Numerical Methods for Molecular Dynamics
              

ABSTRACT

The primary goal of the research is to create more efficient
              propagators for atomistic computer simulations that reliably achieve acceptable
              levels of accuracy and thus to make possible more ambitious scientific
              calculations.  A second goal is to explore innovative techniques that simulate
              long-time molecular motions without sequentially stepping through billions of
              intermediate states, as would be necessary with standard approaches.  New
              algorithms for both dynamics and sampling are to be constructed using such
              techniques as modified energy functions that compensate for finite steps,
              stochastic stabilization, and optimization of method parameters, together with
              physical insight.  Promising algorithms are tested and compared using
              mathematical analyses and computer experiments.  Tools for mathematical
              analysis include the concept of effective accuracy, the method of modified
              equations, linear analysis, and KAM theory.  Computer experiments are performed
              on model problems chosen to reveal unambiguously the properties of interest. 
              Faster algorithms are to be implemented in molecular simulation software
              developed and distributed for public use in a project at the University of
              Illinois Beckman Institute.  Many of the techniques will apply not only to
              molecular simulations but also to simulations in astrophysics, structural
              mechanics, and fluids.

Computer simulations of atomic detail are heavily
              employed in physics, chemistry, materials science, and structural biology. 
              These calculations require the generation of sequences of atomic configurations
              either for the purpose of modeling actual motion or for the purpose of
              calculating averaged values and structures from a wide range of representative
              samples.  The computing time ranges from hours to months, so it can benefit
              tremendously from faster algorithms.  It is the objective of this research
              project to do this: to create much more efficient propagators for dynamics and
              sampling that reliably achieve acceptable levels of accuracy.  The construction
              of such algorithms employs ideas from mathematics and computer science together
              with physical insight.  Promising algorithms are tested and compared using
              mathematical analyses and computer experiments.  The successful ones are
              implemented in molecular modeling software being developed for widespread use
              in a project at the University of Illinois Beckman Institute.  These advances
              in methodology are also to be disseminated in articles targeted to
              practitioners.  Many of the techniques will apply not only to molecular
              simulations but also to simulations in astrophysics, structural mechanics, and
              fluids.  Potentially, the availability of accelerated propagation algorithms
              will lead to a variety of scientific results that otherwise would not be
              obtained.  The performance of the research will be a valuable interdisciplinary
              experience for a graduate student.

