Title       : RUI: Geometric Techniques for Quadrilateral and Hexahedral Mesh Generation with
               Applications in Medical Imaging
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2002      
File        : a0204293

Award Number: 0204293
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134789             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suneeta Ramaswami   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,9229,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
0204293
Suneeta Ramaswami
Rugers U New Brunswick

The broad goal
              of this project is the complete development of robust algorithms for the
              modeling
and visualization of data in a specific application domain, namely
              medical imaging. The focus of
the proposal is on the generation of
              quadrilateral and hexahedral meshes for medical data obtained
from structural
              studies (MR and CT) of human organs.
The generation of good quadrilateral and
              hexahedral (quad/hex) meshes is not well-understood
and several important
              questions remain open. By exploiting the geometry that is central to
              these
problems, we aim to develop algorithms for generating guaranteed-quality
              surface and volume
meshes composed of quadrilateral and hexahedral elements.
              Algorithmic techniques and data struc-
tures from computational geometry will
              be utilized towards this end. We also investigate adaptive
quad/hex meshes,
              i.e., meshes designed to have varying levels of refinement depending on
              factors
such as the desired level of detail in a localized part of the input
              domain. The algorithms will be
designed for and tested on medical imaging
              data. Improved surface and volume meshing algorithms
will directly impact
              automated clinical analysis of medical data, which is typically carried out
              by
procedures that require finite element simulations on discrete anatomical
              models. Some examples
of such procedures are elastic matching and viscous uid
              ow. Our work will be done in collabo-
ration with researchers in the area of
              brain image analysis in the Department of Radiology at the
University
              ofPennsylvania.
