Title       : Collaborative Research: Physical, Mathematical, and Engineering Problems in Slow
               Granular Flow
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0204578

Award Number: 0204578
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Shearer shearer@math.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre A. Gremaud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research effort addresses a spectrum of fundamental and applied  problems
              in the slow flow of granular materials.  It is organized into four projects,
              chosen partly because of their importance in the field of granular materials,
              but also because they raise intriguing mathematical and scientific issues of
              broader significance.  The first project attacks a fundamental physical
              problem: How to include micromechanical effects in a continuum description of
              granular flow, especially the effect of velocity fluctuations.  The second
              project concerns the mathematics surrounding multidimensional continuum models
              for granular flow, specifically the issue of extracting mathematically rigorous
              information from ill-posed partial differential equations.  The third project
              proposes to extend Jenike's radial solution for flows in axisymmetric hoppers
              to conical hoppers with a general cross section.  The fourth project deals with
              flows of fine granular materials, where the interstitial gas significantly
              affects the flow. The research program involves coordinated efforts in
              modeling, analysis, numerical simulations, and experiment.

At the heart of
              this research project is a basic question concerning the flow of granular
              materials: "What behaviors of slowly flowing granular material can be
              understood in terms of a continuum formulation?"  This question may be viewed
              as an attempt to reconcile continuum models, used in industrial design and
              engineering problem solving, with discrete models, introduced to understand the
              results of small- to medium-scale physical experiments.  Continuum models are
              highly desirable since they are much more tractable analytically and
              computationally than particle dynamics simulations, which treat the
              discreteness of the flow directly.  An important issue that arises from this
              basic question, and which is addressed in this project, is the form that a
              continuum description should take.  This issue has been the subject of debate
              in the engineering literature ever since Janssen in 1895 demonstrated that
              stresses in a column of granular material do not increase indefinitely with
              depth, but approach asymptotically to a constant. The research program has
              significance well beyond the context of granular materials in mathematics as
              well as physics.  The project is supported by a long-standing industrial
              collaboration.
