Title       : Continued Exploration of the Warm Ionized Medium using the Wisconsin H-Alpha
               Mapper
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0204973

Award Number: 0204973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1499994            (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald J. Reynolds reynolds@astro.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence M. Haffner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1216      GALACTIC ASTRONOMY PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1207,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              AST 0204973
Reynolds

An accurate knowledge of interstellar matter and
              processes is crucial to understanding the cycle of stellar birth and death and
              the evolution of galaxies. The Wisconsin H-Alpha Mapper (WHAM), a remotely
              controlled Fabry-Perot facility dedicated to the detection and study of faint
              diffuse interstellar emission lines, has opened a new window to the
              interstellar medium by making it possible for the first time to explore the
              warm ionized phase of the gas with as much or more
accuracy and detail as the
              other principal phases of the medium have been explored. These
              optical
emission line studies provide unique new information about the nature
              of the interstellar medium
and the principal sources of ionization and heating
              within the disk and halo of the Galaxy,
information that cannot be obtained
              through other techniques at other wavelengths.

Using the WHAM facility, Dr.
              Ronald Reynolds and his colleagues, at the University of Wisconsin, will carry
              out a comprehensive study of the variations in ionization and excitation
              conditions within the ionized gas and explore the strength and spectrum of the
              radiation field. Their recently completed WHAM Northern Sky Survey has given
              the first comprehensive picture of the distribution and kinematics of this gas
              over the sky and thus provides the basic foundation for this investigation. The
              complete set of survey data has been released to the community and is available
              through the website: http://www.astro.wisc.edu/wham/.  In this second phase of
              the program the investigators will observe fainter diagnostic emission lines to
              explore the nature of the new emission features discovered by the survey and to
              study the surprising differences in temperature and ionization state between
              this widespread, low-density phase of the interstellar medium and the bright,
              classical H II regions near hot stars.  From observations of faint emission
              lines of oxygen, nitrogen, sulfur, and helium, they will investigate the
              physical conditions of the diffusely emitting gas, the faint WHAM "point
              sources", the enormous filaments and loops of ionized gas that reach 1000 pc or
              more from the Galactic midplane, and the relationship of the ionized gas to the
              warm neutral hydrogen phase of the medium. By comparing these observations with
              those toward classical O star H II regions and extended regions of ionized gas
              associated with high latitude hot white dwarf stars, B stars, and supernova
              remnants, they will study the relationship between these known sources of
              ionization within the Galaxy and the warm ionized phase of the medium.
              Observations of the intermediate and high velocity clouds will be used to trace
              the changing conditions in the ionized gas and radiation field from the
              Galactic midplane to the Galactic halo, while observations of H Beta/H Alpha
              will provide information about the influence of interstellar dust along the
              lines of sight of these optical line studies. The ability of WHAM to carry out
              the observations of these and other faint emission lines was verified during
              the first phase of this program. The diverse observational program in this
              second phase takes full advantage of this powerful, unique facility and will
              produce a substantial advancement in our understanding of interstellar matter
              and processes within the disk and halo of the Milky Way. 
***
