Title       : A Process Definition Language For Guiding Multiuser Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  2002       
File        : a0204321

Award Number: 0204321
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sol J. Greenspan                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon J. Osterweil ljo@cs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Effective processes are of fundamental importance to manufacturing,
government,
              engineering, and management.  In all of these areas greater
understanding and
              control of key processes can lead to improved
effectiveness.   For the past 15
              years, it has also been recognized that
processes are fundamental to software
              development, and that effective
control of processes can lead to similar
              benefits, such as improved
understanding, coordination, efficiency, and
              automation.  It has been hoped
that this would lead to reductions in software
              development cost,
improvements in software product quality, and reductions in
              software
development time.  Our hypothesis is that progress towards these
              goals can
be speeded by establishing a scientific basis upon which to build
              the
process technologies that will support more effective software
              production.
This research project will lead to the development of needed
              improvements
to the Little-JIL process definition language, and the
              Juliette
interpreter.   These improvements will be validated by programming 
              and
running multiuser, iterative software design processes that are
              effective
in integrating the activities of humans and computer automation. 
              These
processes should be of considerable value in themselves. 
              Their
development, moreover, will sharpen and validate the Little-JIL
              process
language, resulting in clearer understandings of the
              underlying
requirements for effective process definition languages.

