Title       : Fully Nonlinear Elliptic and Parabolic Equations in Differential Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  2002     
File        : a0204590

Award Number: 0204590
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bo Guan guan@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF proposal DMS - 0204590

Principal Investigator: Bo Guan, University of
              Tennessee 

Title: FULLY NONLINEAR ELLIPTIC AND PARABOLIC EQUATIONS 
      
              IN DIFFERENTIAL GEOMETRY

Abstract:

Fully nonlinear elliptic and parabolic
              equations arise from many problems
in differential geometry.  In recent years
              these equations have attracted 
a lot of attention and significant progresses
              have been made to understand
these equations and related geometric problems.
              In this project, the principal
investigator will continue his research in this
              direction. The problems to 
be investigated in this project include isometric
              embeddings of metrics of 
nonnegative curvature; questions about hypersurfaces
              of nonnegative constant 
Gauss curvature with boundary in Euclidean space and
              more general Riemannian 
manifolds, including existence, uniqueness and
              regularity; spacelike entire 
graphs of constant Gauss curvature in Minkowski
              space; Minkowski type problems
of finding closed convex hypersurfaces of
              prescribed Weingarten curvatures;
regularity of solutions to degenerate
              Monge-Ampere equations in non-convex 
domains; regularity of pluricomplex
              Green functions and existence of 
holomorphic functions in Kahler manifolds;
              Hessian equations on Riemannian 
manifolds and applications in geometric
              problems; hypersurfaces in hyperbolic 
space of constant mean curvature (or
              Weingarten hypersurfaces) with prescribed
asymptotic boundary at infinity; and
              evolution of hypersurfaces by curvature 
functions.


Equations arising
              from most of these problems are highly nonlinear. These 
equations also model
              various phenomena in sciences and engineering. Solving 
such equations heavily
              depends on establishing apriori estimates up to second 
order derivatives. For
              many of the proposed problems in this project, these 
estimates alone are
              often not enough to lead to existence of solutions; there 
are other
              obstructions from geometry and analysis. These all impose 
challenging
              questions. Research on these problems may also develop methods of 
numerical
              approximations to the solutions that are useful in engineering and
science.

