Title       : Quantum Field Theories on Algebraic Curves and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0204628

Award Number: 0204628
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2007        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $344997             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leon Takhtajan leontak@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                DMS-0204628 - Leon Takhtajan	
                Abstract

The proposal is
              devoted to the study of quantum field theories on 
algebraic curves from
              complex analytic and algebraic points of view. 
String theory is the unifying
              theme of the complex-analytic part of
the project. The main goals of this part
              are: 1) geometric formulation 
of two-dimensional quantum Toda theories
              associated with simple Lie  
algebras; 2) Fermi-Bose correspondence for
              compact Riemann surfaces and 
closed smooth Jordan curves; 3) proof of general
              Kleinian reciprocity on 
deformation spaces; 4) construction of the universal
              Weil-Petersson 
potential for the universal Teichmuller space; 5) curvature
              properties of 
the new Kahler metric on moduli spaces of punctured Riemann
              surfaces; 6) 
explicit form of factorization formula for determinants of
              Laplace 
operators acting on higher order differentials; 7) Faddeev-Popov
              ghosts 
for string field theory of open strings. Symmetries and Ward
              identities 
for correlation functions are guiding  principles of the algebraic
              part 
of the project. The immediate and long term goals of this part are: 1)
              
proof of adelic Fermi-Bose correspondence for vertex operators, complete
              
construction of quantum field theory of multiplicative bosons and proof 
of
              A. Weil's reciprocity law; 2) construction of quantum field theories 
on
              algebraic curves in non-zero characteristic with Artin-Schreier and 
Kummer
              theories as main examples, proof of Artin's reciprocity law using 
quantum
              field-theoretical methods; 3) adelic formulation of the WZW 
theory on
              algebraic curves in characteristic zero.

In mathematical development a
              pivotal role is played by ideas from  
physics, originated in the study of the
              surrounding world. The last twenty 
five years have been characterized by
              dramatic success in application 
of quantum fields and strings to different
              areas of mathematics. The idea 
is to probe mathematical objects by quantum
              theories and to measure their 
response in order to get new information about
              the various mathematical 
properties of these objects. Usually the output is
              encoded in terms of 
partition function and correlation functions of physical
              theory, and the 
problem is to decode it back in mathematical terms. The goals
              of this 
proposal are the following: 1) to extend further quantum-theoretic
              method 
for the study of complex analytic properties of surfaces in two
              
dimensions and their families; 2) to develop a new systematic
              
quantum-theoretic approach for arithmetic surfaces and algebraic number
              
fields (like the usual field of rational numbers). Fundamental properties
              
of these objects are discrete and it is only natural to study them at a
              
microscopic scale using quantum theory. In particular, many classical
              
mathematical results about fields of algebraic functions and algebraic
              
numbers, known as reciprocity laws, can be interpreted as conservation 
laws
              (like conservation of energy) in quantum theory. The main goal of 
the
              algebraic part of the project is to develop a new approach based on 
quantum
              theory towards fundamental laws that are satisfied by the very 
basic
              mathematical objects: algebraic numbers - solutions of algebraic 
equations
              with coefficients being rational numbers, and algebraic 
functions - solutions
              of algebraic equations with coefficients being 
rational functions.
              Realization of the goals of the proposal will 
contribute to the fundamental
              interface between mathematics and physics.

