Title       : Evaluating Collective Action Theory Through Cross-Cultural Analysis of
               Pre-Modern States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0204536

Award Number: 0204536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92043              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Blanton blantonr@sri.soc.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter N. Peregrine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research by two anthropologists will make use of probability sampling
and
              comparative research methods to better understand how collective action can
              develop in the governance of pre-modern states.  This is an interesting
              problem, because  collectively-based organizations may be unstable due to
              behavioral problems.  Ideally, compliant taxpayers produce surpluses that go to
              a communal fund controlled by rulers that benefits the collectivity (public
              goods), but tensions may develop owing to the fact that rulers and subjects
              will expect each other to behave appropriately with respect to the production
              and distribution of public goods.  Ruler agency (appropriation of public goods
              for personal benefit) and subject free riding (benefiting from public goods but
              not contributing to their production) may threaten organizational stability. To
              assure that collective organizations can function, institutions must be
              developed to detect and control both agency and free riding.  To evaluate the
              theory, and to better understand how such institutional features have been
              developed in complex societies, the research will code data from the Human
              Relations Area Files and other sources on 40 to 50 well-described cases from
              all world areas. Variables to be coded include measures of public goods (such
              as roads, public water systems, public safety, and redistributive economies),
              subject tax compliance, "voice" (the ability of subjects to communicate
              opinions to rulers), and "exit" (the opportunity for dissatisfied subjects to
              leave the polity), as well as ruler behavior monitoring and controls, ruler
              morality, and measures of income and expenditures which affect policy. This
              research will advance our understanding of the nature and causes of variation
              in pre-modern states and will evaluate the degree to which collective action
              theory can be applied in diverse social and cultural settings.  The research
              should be of interest to a wide range of students in the biological and social
              sciences interested in the evolution of cooperative social behavior, including
              the social and cultural origins of democracy.

