Title       : Bound States, Singularities, and Supersymmetry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0204188

Award Number: 0204188
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandre Freire                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Stern stern@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT DMS - 0204188.

The principal investigator will seek analytic
              realizations of "stringy"
cohomology of singular varieties with trivial
              canonical bundle. He will study
the implications of such analytic realizations
              (and their generalizations)
towards providing new explanations of gauge
              symmetry enhancement mechanisms in
string theory. In collaboration with S.
              Sethi, the PI will continue his program
to analyze the supersymmetric matrix
              model quantum mechanics which has been 
conjectured to provide a definition of
              M theory. Graduate student G. Firestone, 
will study the L2 index theory for
              the nonFredholm Dirac operators whose L2
kernels give the ground states for
              this theory. Sethi and the PI will examine
methods for computing gravitational
              anomalies of field theories arising from
string theories on singular spaces.
              S. Paban, S. Sethi, and the PI will examine
the constraints imposed by
              supersymmetry on deformations of the supersymmetry
algebra associated to an
              isolated five brane. The PI will investigate the
extension of Witten's spinor
              technique of proving the positive mass conjecture
 by replacing the hypothesis
              of a smooth spin structure by the assumption of a
 spin structure degenerating
              on a codimension 2 submanifold.

M theory gives a potential framework for
              providing a physical theory which
incorporates both gravitation and the
              quantum physics describing high energy
 particles. The precise form of this
              theory is not yet fully developed. The 
 measurable consequences are even
              further from being fully worked out. This 
 project attempts to determine, for
              branches of this theory, fundamental 
 consequences, such as the number of
              particles of different types, when these
 particles combine to make more
              complex matter, and the size 
 and shape of these particles and their
              combinations.
In addition to developing the physical consequences of M and
              string theory,
such computations can be used to check for potential errors in
              the underlying 
hypotheses of M theory. This project also seeks a better
              understanding of a
mathematical model for the physical interactions between
              certain "particles"
 known as 5 branes, whose existence is predicted by M
              theory. 

