Title       : Nonregular Designs: Classification, Optimality and Construction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0204009

Award Number: 0204009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72704              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hongquan Xu hqxu@stat.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal ID: DMS-0204009
PI: Hongquan Xu
Title: Nonregular designs:
              Classification, optimality and construction

Nonregular designs, such as
              Plackett-Burman designs and many other orthogonal arrays, are widely used in
              practice due to their run size economy and flexibility.  However, many commonly
              used nonregular designs are not optimal. Unlike regular designs, which have
              been studied thoroughly in recent years, theory and construction of nonregular
              designs are still very primitive and urgently needed. The objectives of this
              proposed research are to classify and construct optimal nonregular designs. In
              the classification part, general frameworks and novel approaches are proposed
              for investigating the following important issues: estimation capacity, design
              efficiency, projection properties, and aliasing structure. In the construction
              part, novel methods and algorithms are proposed for constructing optimal
              nonregular designs for a wide variety of situations, including supersaturated
              designs and block designs.  Coding theory will be employed to develop general
              results for multi-level and mixed-level nonregular designs.

Experimental
              design is an effective and commonly used tool in scientific investigation. Over
              the last century, it has made tremendous impact in many areas of research,
              including agriculture, biology, manufacturing and high-tech industries, and
              will continue to do so for the foreseeable future. While most of the existing
              research has concentrated on the study of regular designs, this proposed
              research focuses on the study of nonregular designs. Nonregular designs are
              widely used in practice due to their run size economy and flexibility, for
              example, Taguchi designs for process improvement and quality control.  However,
              it is important to note that many commonly used nonregular designs are not
              optimal. Unlike regular designs, which have been studied thoroughly in recent
              years, theory and construction of nonregular designs are still very primitive
              and urgently needed. The objectives of this proposed research are to classify
              and construct optimal nonregular designs.  This proposal emphasizes an
              important interdisciplinary connection between error-correcting codes and
              factorial designs. The proposed work will develop fundamental results for
              nonregular designs, and will lead to remarkable new advances in design theory
              and better practice in experimentation.

