Title       : Nonparametric and Semiparametric Models for High-Dimensional Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0204869

Award Number: 0204869
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marianthi Markatou                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158070             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans-Georg Mueller mueller@wald.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

DMS-0204869
PI: Hans-Georg Mueller

Title: Nonparametric and
              Semi-parametric Models for High Dimensional Data

The investigator will focus
              on statistical models, theory, algorithms and applications geared towards the
              analysis of high-dimensional and in particular functional data. Semiparametric
              methods are particularly appropriate for such data since usually little is
              known about the structure of these data, while at the same time a dimension
              reduction step is necessary in order to avoid the "curse of dimension".
              Dimension reduction in the form of projections by fitting single index or
              multiple index models, or by truncating the number of terms included in an
              expansion of functional data, is therefore a major emphasis of this project.
              Another emphasis of this project are statistical methods that take into account
              that curve data often are random curves that are subject to individually
              varying time scales. This leads to models, theory, methodology and algorithms
              for time warping of functional data. Curve data are abundant in genetics where
              dissemination of gene expression profiles is of highest interest and also in
              the field of aging and mortality. The investigator will develop methods for
              functional regression, correlation, discriminant and cluster analysis. These
              methods will provide tools to establish relationships between random functions
              and allow classification of observed sample curves into distinct
              categories.

Large and increasingly complex data that are being collected in
              scientific and other experimental and observational studies are often data that
              may be viewed as curves or functions. Such data often contain valuable
              information about the time-dynamics of physical and biological phenomena, and
              advance statistical techniques are needed to extract it. For example,
              recordings of repeated cDNA expression data with genetic microarrays may
              contain valuable information about the dynamics of gene activation patterns and
              gene regulation. Other examples where such data play a major role concern the
              relationship between reproduction and aging, the dynamic structure of aging and
              longevity, or the relationship between various blood proteins that are recorded
              continuously. The investigator will develop statistical methods and models
              specifically designed for the analysis and interpretation of such data.
 

