Title       : The Classification Problem for Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0204454

Award Number: 0204454
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Yongwu Rong                             
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92276              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey F. Brock brock@math.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-0204454
Jeffrey F. Brock

THE CLASSIFICATION PROBLEM FOR HYPERBOLIC
              3-MANIFOLDS

The PI, Jeffrey Brock, will synthesize diverse techniques in
              the
deformation theory of hyperbolic 3-manifolds to address
              classification
problem for hyperbolic 3-manifolds.  Brock will undertake joint
              work
with K. Bromberg that employs the theory of hyperbolic cone-manifolds
to
              show that each tame hyperbolic 3-manifold M is approximated by
geometrically
              finite 3-manifolds.  This conjecture, known as the
Density Conjecture has
              recently been solved by Brock and Bromberg in
certain cases.  Brock will also
              work toward completing joint work
with R. Canary and Y. Minsky to prove
              Thurston's ending lamination
conjecture, which predicts that a tame hyperbolic
              3-manifold is
determined by its topology and its end invariants:
              combinatorial
invariants attached to the ``ends'' of a hyperbolic 3-manifold. 
              In
new joint work with Bromberg, R. Evans, and J. Souto, Brock will study
the
              question of whether each algebraic limit of a sequence of
geometrically finite
              hyperbolic 3-manifolds is itself topologically
tame.  This joint project has
              implications for a conjecture of Ahlfors
that the limit set of a finitely
              generated Kleinian group has either
measure zero or full measure in the
              Riemann sphere.  

Classifying mathematical objects plays much the same
              scientific role
as classifying biological, chemical, or physical phenomena in
              the
development of these fields.  For example, with the human
              genome
"cracked," scientists may now isolate specific genetic causes
              or
predispositions to diseases, greatly furthering the ability of science
to
              address these problems.  In the proposed research, Brock will
endeavor to
              solve the classification problem for a "generic" class of
3-dimensional
              spaces, the "hyperbolic 3-manifolds."  These
non-Euclidean spaces have
              geometry locally like our own Euclidean
space, but their large scale geometry
              is expanding exponentially:
for example, light rays (a metaphor for geodesics)
              emanating from a
point-source diverge exponentially rather than linearly. 
              William
P. Thurston's revolutionary and pioneering work in the 1970's
              and
1980's showed that almost all 3-manifolds are hyperbolic, and went on
to
              raise as many questions about hyperbolic 3-manifolds as it
answered.  From his
              contributions, a compelling conjectural picture of
the right classification of
              hyperbolic 3-manifolds has emerged as a
lasting problem for researchers in the
              field of geometry and topology.
Recent work of the PI and his collaborators
              has put the solution of
this problem within reach; the PI will make use his
              NSF support to
facilitate ongoing collaborations to solve this fundamental
              problem,
thereby making a "database" of hyperbolic 3-manifolds available
              for
wider use by other mathematicians and physicists alike.


