Title       : Authority and Social Assets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0095768

Award Number: 0095768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $431403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew Postlewaite apostlew@econ.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George J. Mailath  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project consists of two parts. The first part addresses the role of
laws
              in changing people's behavior. Laws do not directly change agents'
payoffs.
              With the standard equilibrium concepts, the role of laws is then
one of
              coordination. Different people or groups have differing abilities
              to
coordinate effectively, and any given person will not be able to
              coordinate
equally well in all situations. A person or group has "authority"
              in a
particular situation if there is an equilibrium in which they can
              coordinate
behavior for that situation. We analyze the characteristics of
              people and of
problems that allow authority in this sense to obtain.

The
              second part continues previous work by the principle investigators
              incorporating social arrangements into economic models. Previous findings
              revealed that when there is some incompleteness in markets there will typically
              be an indeterminacy in outcomes, and that what might be called social
              arrangements arise because of this indeterminacy. In previous work, what might
              be called "social assets" played a role. Social assets are assets that are
              irrelevant from any productive standpoint, but have value in equilibria when
              particular social arrangements govern. The current research lays out a model in
              which social assets arise, and investigates the determinants of potential
              social assets.


