Title       : Cytotoxic Molecules in Invertebrate Immunity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0095421

Award Number: 0095421
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony J. Nappi anappi@orion.it.luc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola Univ of Chicago
	      820 N Michigan Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606112103    773/508-2471

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Insects and other arthropods are vectors of numerous parasitic diseases of
              medical and veterinary importance, including malaria, trypanosomiasis (sleeping
              sickness, Chagas' disease) filariasis (eye worms, elephantiasis), and dog
              heartworm.  Knowledge of the factors that regulate the infection process in the
              insect vector is essential for the development of counter strategies to protect
              humans and livestock from the adverse effects of insect-vectored parasites.
              Insects possess effective innate cellular and humoral immune mechanisms that
              exhibit striking parallels between the innate immune responses of mammals,
              suggesting a common ancestry for these critically important processes.  With
              the exception of studies documenting and characterizing various immune effector
              responses for several insect species, little or nothing is known of the
              mechanisms underlying the initial non-self recognition response, or the
              identity and mode of action of killing molecules used by immune activated
              cells.  The proposed research is designed to elucidate the nature of the
              cytotoxic components generated by insects that specifically target and destroy
              their internal parasites. The researchers plan to study the cellular defence
              responses made by the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster against the metazoan
              parasite Leptopilina boulardi, and the cytotoxic responses of the reduviid bug
              Rhodnius prolixus against the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma.  Using these two
              insect-parasite model systems, the production of various reactive oxygen
              intermediates (superoxide anion, hydrogen peroxide, and the hydroxyl radical)
              will be monitored, as will the production of reactive nitrogen intermediates
              (e.g., nitric oxide and peroxynitrite), and the activity levels of two
              important enzymes, NADPH oxidase and nitric oxide synthase.  To investigate the
              changes in biochemistry and enzyme activity that occur during the immune
              responses elicited by Drosophila and Rhodnius against their respective metazoan
              and protozoan parasites, the investigators will employ high performance liquid
              chromatography with electrochemical detection, spectrophotometry, fluorometry
              and molecular techniques.  This comprehensive approach for positively
              identifying specific cytotoxic molecules and the enzymatic mechanisms by which
              they are produced during insect immune responses will be extremely useful by
              providing important insights concerning cell-cell signaling and immune
              recognition in insects.


