Title       : Collaborative Research: Fate of Recently Fixed N2 in the Eastern Gulf of Mexico:
               Does the Regeneration of N by Trichodesmium Support the Development of
               Gymnodinium Breve Blooms?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2001        
File        : a0095940

Award Number: 0095940
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Bronk bronk@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Blooms of the toxic red tide dinoflagellate, Gymnodinium breve, are an important
              feature of the Florida Shelf ecosystem. Blooms appear to initiate and develop
              in an oligotrophic, mid-shelf region 18-75 km offshore of west Florida.
              However, these waters are characterized by low concentrations of both dissolved
              inorganic and organic nitrogen (DIN and DON), and it is unclear how G. breve
              blooms meet their N demand for growth. Ambient N concentrations, model
              predictions, and stoichiometric calculations of nutrient requirements for
              growth based on observed biomass suggest that N inputs from
riverine,
              upwelling and in situ N regeneration are insufficient to support the observed
              G. breve blooms in this region. Furthermore, unpublished research, anecdotal
              information and historical red tide monitoring data suggest a correlation
              between the timing and magnitude of G. breve blooms and the occurrence of the
              filamentous, N2 fixing cyanobacteria, Trichodesmium spp. in both the Gulf of
              Mexico and Atlantic coastal waters. Little is known about the fate and
              significance of new N inputs derived from recently fixed N2 or of the pathways
              of trophic transfer whereby this new N is assimilated into oligotrophic marine
              ecosystems. It is critical to determine the fate of new N in oligotrophic
              systems and the effects of N inputs from N2 fixation on the community structure
              and function so that one can accurately assess the impact of new N on
              regenerated and export production.

The oligotrophic west Florida Shelf
              ecosystem is an ideal model system in which to examine the fate of new N inputs
              from N2 fixation by Trichodesmium spp. and the pathways facilitating the
              trophic transfer of this N.  This project will examine the idea that  blooms of
              G. breve in west Florida shelf waters are supported by the release and
              regeneration of DIN and DON from N2 recently fixed by co-occurring or preceding
              blooms of Trichodesmium spp.  The present project will examine these hypotheses
              with a three-year program consisting of laboratory and field studies to: 1)
              determine the capacity for and kinetics of N uptake and regeneration by G.
              Breve; 2) determine whether direct or indirect regeneration of NH4+
and DON
              from recently fixed N2 by Trichodesmium provides sufficient N substrates to
              support the observed growth of G. Breve; and 3  identify associated communities
              and examine trophic pathways whereby newly fixed N2 derived from Trichodesmium
              spp. stimulates production in otherwise oligotrophic waters. There will be
              active collaboration with modeling projects focused on both Trichodesmium and
              G. breve blooms in the west Florida shelf region.

