Title       : A Parameteric, Hierarchical Statistical Framework for Inference with Skewed
               Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a0095919

Award Number: 0095919
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffery N. Rouder rouderj@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dongchu Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul L. Speckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to develop a class of statistical models for the analysis of
              data having skewed distributions, especially data arising from hierarchical or
              multi-level settings.  Skewed distributions are ubiquitous in the social
              sciences.  Often, the higher-order characteristics of the distribution, such as
              the scale (variability) and shape, can provide important insight into
              substantive issues and provide for significant theoretical development.  In
              addition to having skew, these distributions typically have variability at
              several levels.  For example, businesses may be clustered by economic sectors
              and completion time data may be clustered by participant.  Data in these
              contexts often are analyzed with linear models such as regression or ANOVA. 
              Although these methods can account for the hierarchical nature of the data and
              often are well-suited to analyzing differences in means, it is difficult, if
              not impossible, to perform inference on higher order characteristics.  The
              researcher team will develop a Bayesian approach to analyzing a broad class of
              models in which statistical inference about location, scale, and shape is both
              possible and practical.  Bayesian statistics is adopted because it is ideally
              suited to hierarchical models.  Bayesian analysis depends on the researcher's
              informed knowledge of experimental conditions -- the "prior distribution."  In
              some cases, Bayesian analysis is relatively insensitive to this prior; however,
              in other cases subtle errors in prior specification can lead to erroneous
              inference.  For these reasons, the research team will develop appropriate
              "noninformative priors."  The project will produce software tools so that other
              researchers can perform Bayesian analysis on these hierarchical models.

In
              the social sciences, researchers have a well-developed set of statistical tools
              for analyzing the overall effects of manipulations on outcomes.  For example,
              experimental psychologists study how practice (a manipulation) improves
              performance (an outcome).  Current statistical tools are well-suited for
              assessing the overall (e.g., average) improvement with practice but are
              ill-suited for assessing whether practice affects the variability of
              performance or the skew in the pattern of performance (skew would occur if
              performance is good on many trials and poor on a few).  The goal of the project
              is the development of statistical tools for assessing differences in
              variability and skew of outcome measures as well as overall effects due to
              manipulations.  The results will lead not only to better understanding of the
              data but, more importantly, to better theoretical development.  For example,
              learning theories which predict that practice affects the variability of
              performance can be rigorously tested.  The developed statistical tools would be
              broad and applicable to many social science fields such as psychology,
              education, economics, and other social sciences.

