Title       : Phonons 2001: Participant Support for The Tenth International Conference on
               Phonon Scattering in Condensed Matter; Hanover, NH, August 12-17, 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 27,  2000  
File        : a0095281

Award Number: 0095281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2001    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin N. Wybourne martin.n.wybourne@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award is in support of the Tenth International Conference on Phonon
              Scattering in Condensed Matter.  The scientific objective of this conference is
              to serve as the main international forum on the physics and interactions of
              phonons. This is the first conference held in the USA since 1992.  Topics
              included in the conference agenda are disordered systems and glasses, lattice
              dynamics, Raman scattering, neutron scattering, quantum fluids, electron-phonon
              interactions, and phonon spectroscopy.  Also included are the
              cross-disciplinary and emerging areas of particle detectors, photon detectors,
              coherent phonons, and new techniques to generate and detect monochromatic
              phonons.  The conference will also have sessions devoted to phonon properties
              of micro- and nanostructures.  Examples include carrier-phonon interactions in
              quantum wires and dots, the fundamental quantum of thermal conductance and its
              connection to information flow, ultrasensitive calorimetry, the thermal
              properties of carbon nanotubes, and the mechanisms of energy dissipation in
              high frequency micro-mechanical resonators.  This award serves to support the
              attendance and participation of young scientists, post-doctoral fellows and
              senior graduate students.
%%%
This award is in support of support of Phonons
              2001, the Tenth International Conference of Phonon Scattering in Condensed
              Matter. It is the fourth such meeting held in the United States, the last one
              having been held at Cornell University in 1992. The objective of the conference
              is to serve as the main international forum on the physics associated with the
              vibrational motion of the atomic and molecular constituents of materials.
              Understanding, modeling, and possibly engineering the vibrational motion are
              important because the vibrational properties impact the development of new
              electronic and optical devices. The topics covered by the conference include
              the properties of materials, such as glasses and crystals, as well as recent
              advances in the areas of nanostructured materials.  The conference will also
              cover techniques to detect high-energy particles and photons by sensing
              vibrational energy changes in materials. This grant award also serves to
              support the development of the next generation of young scientists and
              engineers. Young faculty, post-doctoral fellows and senior graduate students
              are helped and encouraged to attend the conference so that they can participate
              in the scientific discussions with recognized leaders of the field.
***

