Title       : Selective Control of Rugged Energy Landscapes: Structural and Dynamical Studies
               of Encapsulated Clusters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2003     
File        : a0095053

Award Number: 0095053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $660000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jimmie D. Doll jimmie_doll@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jimmy Doll of Brown University and David Freeman of the University of Rhode
              Island are supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program for
              research that addresses theoretical issues concerning the prediction,
              characterization, and control of the structure and dynamics of cluster-based
              precursors.  This effort seeks to invert the logic of the minimization problem,
              by undertaking to reshape energy landscapes and thereby to exercise control
              over selected physical systems.  In particular, this research aims to learn to
              stabilize and/or chemically trap cluster conformers that are otherwise either
              unstable or metastable.  The project goals are to (1) identify possible
              approaches for achieving thermodynamic and kinetic control of selected cluster
              structures, (2) establish those observables that provide the most sensitive
              signatures of relevant cluster structure and dynamics, and (3) assist in the
              interpretation of experimental data relevant to those observables.  To promote
              the interplay between experimental and theoretical observations, collaboration
              with experimentalists at Argonne National Laboratory is planned. 

 Computer
              simulations have proved to be useful tools that aid in predicting the
              properties of new materials.  With the development of new synthetic methods
              that use nanoscale clusters as fundamental building blocks, computational
              studies of clusters are expected to grow in importance.  The outcomes of this
              research are expected to provide the necessary experience and background to
              help determine methods for controlling structures and properties of the
              component parts for materials composed of clusters, with likely applications in
              chemistry, biology, and materials science. 
