Title       : Social Security and Statistical Prediction Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0095343

Award Number: 0095343
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69816              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward Frees jfrees@bus.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to investigate the use of longitudinal/panel
              data methods to combine forecasts for different cohorts and series used in
              Social Security forecasting.  Forecasts of the Social Security system rely on
              forecasts of two components, demographic variables and economic variables.  The
              demographic variables, for example, include mortality, fertility, and
              immigration; the economic variables include labor productivity, labor force
              participation, and inflation.  Because they are from different functional
              areas, the forecasts of each component tend to be done in isolation of the
              other.  Moreover, series often are decomposed into cohorts, generally by age
              and sex and sometimes marital status, and then forecast individually, that is,
              each cohort is forecast in isolation of the others.  The project will use
              Bayesian and empirical Bayesian methods to combine, in a disciplined manner,
              information about neighboring cohorts with expert opinion of the future and
              currently available data.  This modeling strategy, together with data from
              selected series, will be used to construct and validate the proposed
              forecasting techniques.

As with almost every developed country, the U.S.
              government maintains a large financial security system that provides partial
              protection for its constituents in the event of adverse contingencies.  The
              largest portion of the U.S. Social Security system is the Old-Age, Survivors
              and Disability Insurance (OASDI) program, which provides protection against
              loss of earnings due to retirement, death, or disability.  The 2000 Social
              Security Trustees' Report forecasts that by the year 2037 revenues to fund this
              program will be exhausted.  The magnitude and timing of this predicted
              shortfall heavily influences numerous academic and public policy debates
              concerning program reform.  This project will supplement the forecasting
              methods used by the Social Security Administration and provide insights
              regarding the reliability of the predicted shortfalls.  By combining
              information from different sources, the research will achieve more reliable
              (efficient) forecasts and forecasts of components that are integrated and
              consistent with one another.  Moreover, the stochastic prediction methods will
              allow us to quantify the uncertainty in the forecasts in a probabilistic
              manner.  This is not possible with the current deterministic forecasting system
              employed by the Social Security Administration.  This research is supported by
              the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program under the Mid-Career
              Methodological Opportunities Fellowship Announcement.



