Title       : Collaborative Research: A Control Theoretic Approach to the Design of Internet
               Traffic Managers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2001    
File        : a0095626

Award Number: 0095626
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mari Maeda                              
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marwan M. Krunz krunz@ece.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 4095      SPECIAL PROJECTS IN NET RESEAR
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The scalability of the Internet hinges on our ability to tame the
              unpredictability associated with its open architecture.  This project
              investigates the development of basic control strategies for reducing traffic
              burstiness and improving network utilization.  Such strategies can be applied
              through Traffic Managers (TMs)-special network elements strategically placed in
              the Internet (e.g., in front of clients/servers or at exchange/peering points
              between administrative domains).  We believe that the incorporation of such
              control functionalities will be key to the ability of the network
              infrastructure to sustain its own growth and to nurture the Quality-of-Service
              (QoS) needs of emerging applications.

Although there have been some recent
              advances in building network elements capable of wire-speed processing, there
              is a need for fundamental research into the basic QoS control capabilities that
              these TMs should implement.  This set of capabilities have to be identified and
              implemented in a programmable, scalable architecture that allows for the easy
              and effective composition of services.   Such a flexible architecture is highly
              desirable as the Internet continues to evolve and users demand new kinds of
              service for their applications.  

TMs should be capable of quickly
              inspecting and classifying packets as they go by (e.g., marking packets into
              precedence classes), and should control the transmission of these packets
              (e.g., through pacing, scheduling, or selective dropping) to ensure desirable
              properties (e.g., satisfaction of jitter requirements, compliance with TCP
              friendliness, or improved fairness across flows).

In this proposal, we will
              address the design of dynamic dos control programmable TMs.  We focus on basic
              capabilities that could be employed at different levels of the control
              architecture. These capabilities include differentiated, aggregate and proxy
              controls.  The following are examples of how such control strategies would be
              employed by TMs.

Differentiated Control enables TMs to route flow aggregates
              with divergent characteristics on separate communication paths.  Unlike
              traditional routing, our routing metrics will respect bursitis measures, such
              as self-similarity and traffic correlation:

Aggregate Control enables TMs to
              use congestion control mechanisms for collections of flows that share the same
              bottleneck.  Unlike traditional congestion control, "Congestion-equivalent"
              flows are identified based on measures of relationship (such as
              cross-correlation and cross-covariance) and managed as a set; 

Proxy Control
              enables TMs to filter out variability (e.g., loss, delay jitter) at shorter
              time-scales.  Such a functionality is crucial for improving the stability and
              effectiveness of control mechanisms that operate over longer time-scales (e.g.,
              end-to-end).  Unlike traditional a-hoc proxy approaches, our approach will take
              into account the length and characteristics of the control loops that get
              formed between the TM and the end-systems.

Our design will be based on
              mathematical foundations from control theory and wavelet analysis.  These
              methods enable thorough analysis and control of system dynamics at different
              time-scales and an understanding of the complex interactions among them. 
              Specifically, functionality's at different levels of a TM architecture will be
              developed based integrated control-theoretic models.  These models will account
              for "nested" control loops that are driven by system characteristics, which are
              identified using wavelet analysis of passive measurements. TMs that are
              designed in such and integrated fashion, could increase flow throughput, reduce
              flow jitter and response time, and improve the stability, utilization, and
              scalability of the network.

We plan to implement our dos controls in a
              tested deployed in a controlled local setting as well as over the Internet. 
              Our implementations will be based on emerging technologies, such as Diffserv
              and MPLS, and will be stressed by bandwidth-and QoS-demanding applications. 
              Our testbed will provide a programming interface to softservices, in which
              capabilities can be turned on or off and control parameters can be dynamically
              adjusted.  To this end, we have secured the support of industrial research
              laboratories and start-up companies-namely Lucent's Bell Labs, Cisco Systems,
              Nortel Networks, and Quarry Technologies.  Specifically, we intend to use
              Lucent's Network Element for Programmable Packet Injection (NEPPI).  NEPPI
              provides an ideal foundation upon which to implement the control policies we
              propose to develop.  This project is a collaborative efforts between Boston
              University (Is: Ibrahim Matta, Azer Bestavros, and Mark Crovella) with
              expertize in characterization, measurements and control of Internet traffic,
              and University of Arizona (PI: Marwan Krunz) with expertize in traffic
              modeling, multimedia and wireless QoS.

