Title       : Robust Mechanism Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 8,  2002      
File        : a0095321

Award Number: 0095321
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen E. Morris stephen.morris@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dirk Bergemann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
An important recent application of economic theory has been to the design 
of
              markets. For example, the design of the spectrum auctions in the United
              
States and around the world has been much influenced by recent developments
              
in auction theory and the theory of mechanism design. However, much of the
              
theory has been developed with a simplified view of (1) how different
              
market participants value the objects for sale; and (2) what they believe
              
other market participants' beliefs. Such simplifying assumptions have been
              
made for the sake of tractability and the resulting theories have been
              
highly successful. However, one concern of practitioners and theorists
              
alike has been that the "optimal" mechanisms derived from theory are
              
sometimes too complex to be implemented in practice, which has lead for a
              
search for simpler mechanisms that seem to be more robust to the underlying
              
description of the environment. Our project will use new developments in
              
game theory, allowing for richer "types" of market participants (including
              
richer beliefs) to provide a theoretical justification for the use of
              
simple mechanisms.

The project addresses two separate but linked
              objectives. First, we examine 
how robust received mechanisms are to allowing
              the richer type spaces. In 
particular, researchers often argue that solution
              concepts stronger than 
Bayes-Nash equilibrium, such as dominance solvability
              and ex post 
equilibrium, are desirable because they are "robust," although
              the exact 
notion of robustness is not always described. One way of
              formalizing 
robustness is to examine whether results continue to hold on
              richer type 
spaces. In our proposal, we discuss various type spaces in
              between the 
naive type space and the universal type space, and examine how
              different 
mechanisms' performances vary as we vary the type space.

Our
              second objective is to develop new optimal mechanisms for particular 
type
              spaces, intermediate between the standard space of all payoff-relevant 
types
              and the universal type space. Optimality in this context refers to 
the
              objective of the mechanism designer, which may coincide with social
              
efficiency or simply be a revenue maximization problem for the designer.
              
When the objective of the mechanism designer requires him to maximize an
              
expected value, it will be appropriate to consider subspaces of the
              
universal type space, which can be generated from a prior distribution
              
function.

