Title       : A Laboratory Analogue for Cloud Entrainment: Experiments and Simulations of
               Volumetrically Heated Jets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2003   
File        : a0095122

Award Number: 0095122
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $201905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ajay K. Prasad prasad@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant supports laboratory experiments designed to simulate the growth of
              convective clouds and their interaction with the air surrounding them.  A major
              distinction between clouds in the atmosphere and ordinary laboratory jets is
              that the condensation occurring in a growing cloud is a steady source of heat
              and buoyancy.  In the experiments, condensation is simulated by an electrical
              grid that heats a jet as it ascends in a water tank.  Laser-induced
              fluorescence (LIF) is employed for flow visualization and particle image
              velocimetry (PIV) for measuring the velocity field of the jet.  Whole-field
              temperature measurement (WFT) is achieved by using thermochromic liquid
              crystals.  The study is motivated in part by earlier results using flow
              visualization that showed the effect of heating was to reduce the amount of
              ambient fluid entrained into the jet.  This is contrary to intuition, but may
              explain why natural clouds do not expand with increasing height as rapidly as
              laboratory jets.  The experimental work is complemented by direct numerical
              simulation (DNS) of turbulent jets, done in collaboration with researchers at
              Delft University of Technology in The Netherlands.  The goal of the work is to
              achieve a better physical understanding of the mixing processes that occur at
              cloud boundaries.
