Title       : Metabolic Energy Costs of Development in Feeding and Non-Feeding Larvae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a0095459

Award Number: 0095459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295883             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam G. Marsh amarsh@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The energetics of larval development has received considerable attention in
              life-history models. Numerous theoretical considerations of the allocation of
              maternal energy to offspring have been published to describe the important
              implications of egg-size for determining the size and age of the
              larvae-juvenile at metamorphosis. However, the maternal allocation of energy to
              eggs is only one half of the developmental energetics equation. The other half
              is the actual amount of energy that a larva will utilize as it develops from an
              embryo to a juvenile, and this aspect of developmental energetics has received
              far less attention in the literature.

The key to understanding the selective
              advantages or disadvantages of allocating lots of energy to a few big eggs
              (producing a large non-feeding larvae), or very little energy to lots of little
              eggs (producing a small feeding larvae), lies in an accurate assessment of the
              energy costs of development of each of these larval forms within a specific
              environment. The comparison of developmental energetics between different
              larval forms can be easily confounded by the phylogenetic distance between
              different larvae. However, a few invertebrate species produce multiple
              developmental forms and provide an ideal system for comparative developmental
              energetics. This project focuses on describing the energy costs of development
              in the feeding and non-feeding larvae of a single species, the spionid
              polychaete Streblospio benedicti.

An investigation of the metabolic energy
              costs of development in the polychaete Streblospio benedicti will address four
              levels of biological function that determine energy utilization during larval
              development: developmental mode (feeding and non-feeding), individual
              variability (genotype), environmental variability (temperature and food), and
              protein metabolism (proteomics). Understanding these four determinants of
              developmental energy costs will provide a comparative framework for considering
              the selective advantages and disadvantages of feeding and non-feeding larval
              forms in current life-history models that incorporate estimates of larval
              metabolic requirements into the estimates of larval age and size at
              metamorphosis. This project will produce the first examination of a discrete
              biochemical mechanism (protein turnover) to account for differences in energy
              metabolism during development (both in terms of individual and envirom-nental
              variability) and potentially indicate an underlying genetic component of
              metabolic regulation involved in the evolution of feeding and non-feeding modes
              of development in marine invertebrate larvae.


