Title       : The Evolution of Hospitals in the Twentieth Century and their Impact on Public
               Health
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2002     
File        : a0095990

Award Number: 0095990
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Melissa A. Thomasson thomasma@muohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Hospitals stand at the center of the U.S. health care system, with hospital
              spending comprising 4.6 percent of total GDP. Hospital services are provided by
              all levels of government, as well as by for-profit and nonprofit organizations.
              Despite their importance, there has been little quantitative research done that
              examines the historical development of the U.S. hospital industry and its
              impact on public health. This study bridges this gap in our knowledge by
              focusing on two primary lines of inquiry: What factors have influenced the
              historical diffusion of hospitals in the United States, and to what extent has
              access to hospital care improved the well being of Americans over the course of
              the twentieth century? Understanding these issues is critical in understanding
              the effect of modern policy changes on the health care system. To make informed
              policy decisions now, policy makers must have a solid sense of what factors led
              to the current system.
This study identifies the forces that determined the
              relative diffusion of for-profit and nonprofit hospitals in the U.S. and
              examines how these forces have changed over time. Identifying these factors is
              important because of the possible relationship between hospital quality and
              ownership, as well as because of the tax advantages of the nonprofit form. The
              study also measures the effect hospital care had on public health over the
              course of the twentieth century, and examines the extent to which access to
              medical care influenced morbidity and infant mortality. An important part of
              this analysis is to examine the extent to which access to health care differed
              for black Americans and how racial differences in the provision of health care
              affected the health of blacks relative to whites.
To investigate these issues,
              the study relies on several newly identified data sets, including a panel of
              hospital level data from 1927-1970. The hospital data provide information on
              hospital size, ownership and location, as well as several other detailed
              statistics. To shed light on how the hospital industry developed, these data
              are combined with data on state and local taxes and other variables to identify
              the factors that influenced hospital diffusion. By linking the hospital level
              data with county-level data on black and white infant mortality, as well as
              morbidity data from the state of New York,  the study measures the effect of
              hospitals on public health.
Of particular importance in both studies is how
              government spending on hospital construction has affected the industry. A key
              factor in determining the distribution and ownership of hospitals is the 1946
              Hospital Survey and Construction Act, commonly known as the Hill-Burton
              program. This program provided money to states to build public and nonprofit
              hospitals in underserved areas. How did Hill-Burton affect hospital provision?
              Since the law provided funds only to public and nonprofit institutions, what
              was its effect on for-profit hospitals? This study provides a first-time
              analysis of Hill-Burton at a disaggregated level to fully explore the answers
              to these questions. The Hill-Burton program is also important because from
              1946-1963 it contained a clause that enabled hospitals to build segregated
              facilities as long as there was equal provision of facilities for all
              population groups. Was "separate" really "equal" under this provision, which
              was struck down by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1963? By combining data on
              Hill-Burton funding with infant mortality data and other public health
              variables, the study examines the extent to which equal access to publicly
              funded health care existed for all Americans. 

