Title       : Structural Basis of Fas-Mediated Programmed Cell Death
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a0095074

Award Number: 0095074
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Milton H. Werner mwerner@portugal.rockefeller.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rockefeller University
	      66th and York Avenue
	      New York, NY  10021    212/570-8000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Programmed cell death (PCD) is a normal part of the life and death of a cell. 
              PCD can be triggered by a wide variety of stimuli, such as growth factor
              deprivation, exposure to mutagenic agents, ionizing radiation, etc. whose
              stimulus is mediated by a member of the tumor necrosis factor receptor (TNFR)
              superfamily.  A subset of TNFRs, termed death receptors (DRs), are responsible
              for transducing a death signal into a cellular response.  DRs are characterized
              by the presence of a C-terminal six-helix bundle known as the death domain
              (DD).  The DD is the focal point of the assembly of an oligomeric complex
              around which assemble a group of proteins that sense the death signal and
              transmit the signal to send it down a signaling cascade. One of the most
              important DRs is the Fas/CD95 receptor.  Fas plays a role in the regulation of
              the immune response and in the control of peripheral B and T cell survival that
              is critical to immune cell homeostasis.  Fas-mediated PCD is implicated in the
              maintenance of immune privilege in the eye and testis as well as in attenuating
              immunosurveillance of certain types of tumors.  In response to a stimulus, Fas
              is thought to oligomerize through the DD and recruit the effector FADD.  Like
              Fas, FADD contains a DD at its C-terminus and binds, albeit with unknown
              stoichiometry, to the receptor DD.  On the N-terminus of FADD is a second
              protein-interaction domain, the death effector domain (DED), which recruits the
              initiator caspase-8 to the growing signalling complex.  The Fas/FADD/caspase-8
              complex is known as the death-inducing signalling complex (DISC) and represents
              the minimal complex necessary for induction of PCD.  Although the structure of
              the FADD-DD and FADD-DED have been solved in truncated forms by NMR, there is
              yet to be a clear description of the binding surface, binding affinity or
              binding stoichiometry of FADD to Fas in an activated state.  Indeed, this
              information is lacking for all DRs identified to date.  This project will
              conduct a series of biophysical studies aimed at defining the molecular
              architecture of FADD in the Fas signaling complex.  Specifically, the relative
              orientation of the FADD DD and DED will be determined from completion of the
              full-length 3D structure of FADD in solution. The stoichiometry of the Fas/FADD
              interaction will be measured by gel-filtration, analytical ultracentrifugation
              and isothermal binding calorimetry of the complex using a soluble form of the
              Fas receptor.  It will further be determined whether the DD is sufficient for
              DISC assembly by construction of a soluble receptor mimic with a defined
              oligomerization state for the Fas-DD.  Finally, mutagenesis in combination with
              isothermal binding calorimetry and analytical ultracentrifugation will define
              the binding surface of the Fas/FADD complex and determine the binding affinity.
               Collectively these data will provide new insights into the architecture of the
              Fas DISC.  The outcome of this study will provide a molecular insight into the
              mechanism of programmed cell death.
