Title       : Measurements of Stable Isotopes in Atmospheric Gases from the NorthGRIP Ice
               Cores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  2001      
File        : a0095078

Award Number: 0095078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James W. White jwhite@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dominic F. Ferretti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
White
OPP-0095078

Atmospheric methane is an important chemical
              component of the stratosphere and troposphere and is a major contributor to the
              anthropogenic enhancement of the greenhouse effect.  Quantifying the budget of
              methane is difficult because of the wide range of source types and locations
              from which it is emitted.  Measurements of the atmospheric concentration and
              the carbon isotopic composition of methane have given us a better understanding
              of the controls over the modem methane budget.  We can gain insights into the
              modern methane budget, which is heavily influenced by anthropogenic effects, by
              studying the methane budget just prior to and during industrialization and the
              emergence of large human populations.  This research project is designed to add
              to our understanding of the paleo-methane budget by measuring the 13C:12C ratio
              of methane(d13CH4 )trapped in polar ice of the last millennium.  Over the past
              few years, the University of Colorado Stable Isotope Lab (SIL) at the Institute
              of Arctic and Alpine Research (INSTAAR) has made nearly 2000 high precision
              d13CH4  measurements on very small samples of ambient air from the NOAA/CNML
              Global Air Sampling Network.  With minor modifications, this analysis system
              will be ideally suited to measure  d13CH4 on the small amount of CH4  available
              from air bubbles trapped in ice cores.

This research is a collaborative
              effort between the SIL, the NOAA/ Climate Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory
              (CMDL) Carbon Cycle Group (CCG) in Boulder, Colorado and the Gas Consortium of
              NorthGRIP (with Swiss, French, German, U.S., Danish, and Japanese
              participation).  The Principal Investigators will examine and compare
              high-resolution methane concentration and isotopic histories during the last
              millennium as recorded in ice from the NorthGRIP area in Greenland.  They will
              make pilot measurements of d D values of methane to explore the usefulness of
              this isotope and to make measurements of d13C in CO2 (d13CO2) in the trapped
              air to help understand why PCO2 measurements made on Greenland ice have so far
              been unreliable.  The Gas Consortium of NorthGRIP will provide field and
              experimental expertise for the extraction of air from the ice cores and firn as
              well as measurements of concentrations and isotope ratios in other gases in the
              cores.  SIL will provide expertise on isotopic measurements of very small air
              samples and make isotope measurements on methane and carbon dioxide.  NOAA/CCG
              will assist in the calibration of standards and analyze gas concentrations in
              firn air samples.  The goal is to improve our understanding of the modem
              methane budget and how humans impact and modify that budget, now, in the past,
              and future.
 












