Title       : Adapting Kids Network for Deaf Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0095392

Award Number: 0095392
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448403             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy Vesel judy_vesel@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Shelley Popson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0095392
Institution: TERC
Principal Investigator: Judith
              Vesel
Title: "Adapting Kids Network for Deaf Students"

ABSTRACT

TERC
              will collaborate with Vcom3D, Inc., and staff from the National Technical
              Institute for the Deaf (NTID), on use of the SigningAvatarTM accessibility
              software to sign the web activities and resources for two Kids Network units;
              evaluate the extent to which the addition of signing promotes achievement of
              standards-based learning outcomes; report the lessons learned about best
              practices for using the SigningAvatarTM characters to sign most web-based
              science materials; and create a more robust sign/facial expression / body space
              library for use in SigningAvatarTM enabling other science curricula.

The
              collaboration brings together three organizations uniquely suited to conduct
              the proposed program of work.  Units from the award-winning Kids Network series
              (developed previously by TERC with NSF funding) were selected for the project
              because repeated controlled evaluations have shown that hearing students who
              use the units make significant gains in standards-based learning outcomes. 
              Vcom3D's staff embarked in 1997 on a course of research and development
              directed toward using visualization technologies to assist education of deaf
              and hard of hearing students.  The SigningAvatarTM software is the result of
              this work.  NTID, a college of Rochester institute of Technology (RIT), is
              known for its leading-edge research in the use of technology and technical
              signs for science instruction.  

Building on the partners' collected
              knowledge, products at the end of three years will include:

1. Kids Network
              Weather in Action unit adapted for students in Grades 3-6 who are deaf or hard
              of hearing - Teacher's Guide with SigningAvatarTM enabled online activities,
              resources, and implementation strategies to meet the needs of the target
              population.

2. Kids Network Are We Getting Enough Oxygen?  Unit adapted for
              students in Grades 6-8 who are deaf or hard of hearing - Teacher's' Guide with
              the addition of the SigningAvatarTM enabled online activities, resources, and
              implementation strategies to meet the needs of the target population.  

3.
              Summative evaluation report - Soft copy documentation of the extent to which
              the addition of signing to the web-based components of each unit promotes
              achievement of specified standards-based learning outcomes.

4. Report of
              lessons learned - Soft copy documentation of best practices for using the
              SigningAvatarTM technology to make most web-based science materials accessible
              to students who are deaf. 
 
5. New vocabulary of technical signs for the
              Avatar characters' sign/facial expression/body space lexicon - Words and terms
              primarily in the areas of earth and space, life, and physical science;
              communication; and data sharing, display, and analysis.  

TERC will have
              project oversight and responsibility for the tasks of curriculum-related
              modifications to the web activities and resources, the controlled evaluation,
              and the report of lessons-learned.  Vcom3D will add new technical signs to the
              SigningAvatarTM library and SigningAvatarTM enable each unit.  Consultants from
              NTID will assist in the selection and appropriate use of signs.  An Advisory
              Committee and an outside Project Evaluator further enhance the capacity to
              ensure that students who are deaf or hard of hearing have increased and ongoing
              access to quality, age-appropriate science materials.  

