Title       : Assessment of Population Connectivity in Caribbean Reef Fishes Using
               Microsatellite Loci
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2002      
File        : a0095955

Award Number: 0095955
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Cowen rcowen@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Colin R. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project focuses on resolving the vigorous debate over the
              importance of long distance dispersal versus very local dispersal of larval
              reef fishes. Most coral reef fish and invertebrates have a dispersive larval
              stage preceding a relatively sedentary juvenile and adult stage. Understanding
              the spatial scale at which larval dispersal operates is fundamental to
              understanding the connectedness of populations. Most older work suggests that
              wide dispersal is the dominant force, so all populations are well connected.
              Some recent work however, shows how oceanographic details and larval behavior
              may combine to favor very limited dispersal. The present research project is
              designed to show at what spatial scale dispersal is occurring by detecting
              genetic differentiation among populations. In addition to resolving this
              ongoing controversy, this activity will aid in the design of marine reserves by
              helping to identify sources and sinks of reef fish species in areas slated for
              protection. It may also be useful for other conservation purposes, such as the
              definition of separate management stocks of coral reef fish in the Caribbean
              and elsewhere, even in the absence of reserves

Through choice of sampling
              sites, focal species, and genetic approach in experimental design, the
              likelihood of detecting population differentiation and therefore scale of
              dispersal has been maximized. Sampling sites have been arranged hierarchically,
              small sites (reefs) within larger areas (islands) within regions (groups of
              islands linked by large-scale currents). The three study species differ in
              duration of the larval stage likely to disperse: from long pelagic larval
              duration in bluehead wrasse to short in blue-striped grunts. Genetic analyses
              will involve genotyping individuals at microsatellite loci. These loci have
              been shown to detect subtle differentiation among fish populations where other
              approaches have failed. Analysis of genotype data will show at what spatial
              scale populations are differentiated, reef, island, or region, indicating the
              scale of larval dispersal. Comparison of results among species will indicate
              the generality of results, or their dependence of life history traits.

