Title       : A New Asymptotic Theory for Heteroskedasticity Autocorrelation Robust Tests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0095211

Award Number: 0095211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230003             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Vogelsang tjv2@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nicholas M. Kiefer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most widely used statistical tools in empirical social sciences is
              regression models. By its very nature, social science and economic data is
              non-experimental and this leads to a host of statistical issues that are not
              encountered with data generated from controlled experiments. In particular, in
              cross section models a common problem is non-constancy of error variances
              across observations (heteroskedasticity) while in time series regressions a
              common problem is serial correlation (correlation across errors). It is now a
              well known textbook result that in regression models with heteroskedasticity
              and/or serial correlation, ordinary least squares (OLS) estimation of
              regression parameters often yields good estimates (e.g. unbiased). The problem
              is that the usual formulas for standard errors are invalid. This means that
              hypothesis tests (e.g. tests of statistical significance) are also invalid.
              This fact has long been known in the econometrics literature and over the past
              20 years there has been intensive research devoted to finding ways of computing
              standard errors that are valid in the presence of heteroskedasticity or serial
              correlation of unknown form. Such standard errors are very useful to applied
              practitioners because the form of heteroskedasticity or serial correlation is
              rarely known in practice.
	
Standard errors valid for regressions with
              heteroskedasticity (White standard errors) are now widely implemented in
              statistical programs and are covered by undergraduate econometrics texts. The
              appeal of White standard errors is that they are easy to compute and work for
              very general forms of heteroskedasticity. In models with serial correlation,
              computing robust standard errors is more difficult in practice. The practical
              problem with these standard errors is that the practitioner is required to make
              choices of so-called tuning parameters. According to the standard asymptotic
              theory (approximation theory) these choices are, for the most part, arbitrary.
              This leaves room for one researcher to use one tuning parameter while another
              researcher uses a different one. These researchers could very likely draw
              different conclusions from the same regression model. Unfortunately, there is
              no established standard for the computation of serial correlation robust
              standard errors. (The statistical packages SAS and E-Views, for example, use
              different tuning parameters).
	
This project develops a new asymptotic theory
              that explicitly captures, in a practical sense, the choice of tuning
              parameters.  This new theory allows a systematic treatment of the tuning
              parameter choice and has the potential for developing a standard of practice
              for the computation of serial correlation robust standard errors.  The research
              generated from this project will make inference in regression models more
              reliable and easier to implement for practitioners.  This will lead to higher
              quality empirical studies in economics and other social sciences.

