Title       : Regional and Local Influences on Species Richness in Coral Communities Across a
               Pacific Diversity Gradient
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 25,  2003  
File        : a0095108

Award Number: 0095108
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245453             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard V. Cornell cornell@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald H. Karlson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Species richness in coral communities has traditionally been explained in terms
              of processes operating within the local community over relatively short periods
              of time. Recent studies of other assemblages have made it clear that
              communities can be organized by a variety of processes operating at different
              spatial and temporal scales. Since coral communities are imbedded in larger
              geographic regions, regional/historical phenomena and local processes may
              jointly influence local richness and should be analyzed simultaneously. This
              study will sample corals in six island groups along a gradient of increasing
              regional species richness across the Pacific Ocean and in three different
              habitats at local sites to quantitatively evaluate the relative influence of
              regional and local processes on local richness. The Pacific Ocean gradient is
              the best possible choice for this test because of the large unequivocal trend
              in regional richness. Traveling from west to east, regional richness drops from
              over 450 species in the Philippines and Indonesia to fewer than 100 species in
              eastern French Polynesia. A hierarchical sampling design will be employed to
              measure variation in species richness, composition, and relative abundance at
              four spatial scales spanning 5-6 orders of magnitude (among replicate samples
              at a site, among sites on an island, among islands in a region, among regions).
              Data will be collected on species presence and relative abundance as well as on
              habitat breadth and depth range of selected species. This information will be
              used to test the effects of the increasing regional pool on local richness,
              evenness, habitat compression and habitat overlap at different scales. Percent
              cover of colonizable substrate will also be quantified and used to test the
              effects of the "openness" of local assemblages on their sensitivity to regional
              influences. The hierarchical design will provide a powerful framework for
              quantifying the proportion of total variation among samples that is
              attributable to each spatial scale and thus will permit a rigorous estimate of
              scale-dependency in patterns of diversity and abundance. This synthesis of
              regional and local perspectives will have relevance not only for basic studies
              of community ecology but also for applied problems associated with species
              extinctions, habitat loss and fragmentation, and ecological restoration.
