Title       : Biochemical and Molecular Autonomy of Symbiotic Chloroplasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0095129

Award Number: 0095129
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2005    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399995             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Rumpho mrumpho@umit.maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1155,9150,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Photosynthesis provides the energy that drives all plant growth, productivity
              and life on earth.  A marine sea slug, Elysia chlorotica, has acquired the
              ability to carry out photosynthesis like a plant as a result of forming a
              symbiotic association with chloroplasts of the alga, Vaucheria litorea.
              Juvenile sea slugs feed on the filamentous alga and retain only the
              chloroplasts, incorporating them into cells of the digestive epithelium. The
              chloroplasts in the now dark-green animals are functional, i.e. they evolve
              oxygen and fix carbon dioxide and actively synthesize proteins from DNA
              contained in the chloroplasts. Once the symbiosis is established, the animal
              can live and reproduce in culture without eating for the rest of its normal
              life span of nine to ten months. About 90% of all the proteins required to keep
              chloroplasts functioning and carrying out photosynthesis are encoded by DNA in
              the nucleus of the plant or alga.  These proteins must be continually
              synthesized in the cell and transported into the chloroplast to sustain
              activity.  Thus, considering that the sea slugs only acquire the algal
              chloroplasts and not any other part of the algal cell including the nucleus,
              the level of sustained chloroplast activity observed in the sea slugs is unique
              and quite remarkable.

Understanding how these chloroplasts are able to
              remain photosynthetically active outside of their normal cellular environment
              for months when higher plant chloroplasts survive only a few hours in
              isolation, forms the basis of the specific objectives of this proposal.  These
              include: 1) Characterizing the structural and functional long-term stability of
              isolated plastids, the stability of plastid proteins, and the activity of
              chloroplast proteases in sea slugs vs. algae, 2) Determining if the sea slug
              nuclear genome codes for and targets any proteins to the symbiotic chloroplasts
              and elucidating the general mechanism of protein import in chloroplasts, and 3)
              Characterizing the genetic autonomy of the chloroplasts by mapping and
              sequencing the chloroplast genome of the alga.

This symbiotic organism
              provides a unique opportunity to determine how the chloroplasts from one
              organism (alga) can form a long-term functional photosynthetic union with the
              cell of an extremely divergent organism (sea slug). This represents a process
              molecular data indicate occurred repeatedly over evolutionary history resulting
              in the diversity of plants and algae on earth today. On a much broader scale,
              this project possibly represents lateral gene transfer between two diverse
              organisms and endosymbiosis in action.  The "Solar-Powered Sea Slugs" are a
              fascinating teaching tool eliciting excitement and curiosity from people all
              around the world from scientists of several disciplines to graduate and
              undergraduate students discovering them in their readings in journal clubs, to
              young children who have seen these "crawling leaves" on the Internet or
              researched them for science fair projects. The endosymbiotic theory has
              generated and continues to generate much interest at all levels, but to
              actually observe a symbiotic association in a potentially evolving situation
              and imparting such a major new function to the other partner, is indeed rare
              and a unique opportunity for study.

