Title       : RUI: Assessing the Chemical Defenses of Caribbean Invertebrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0095724

Award Number: 0095724
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Linda Goad                              
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $440000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Pawlik pawlikj@uncwil.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Wilmington
	      601 South College Road
	      Wilmington, NC  284033201    910/962-3167

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Sponges, gorgonians, and ascidians are important components of benthic marine
              communities, particularly coral reefs. Organic extracts of their tissues have
              yielded a wealth of unusual chemical compounds that are not involved in primary
              metabolism, and their biological functions are mostly unknown. One commonly
              held theory is that these compounds are distasteful to potential predators, but
              they may also protect from fouling or overgrowth. This study is a continuation
              of a very successful RUI research program designed to assess the defenses of
              Caribbean sponges, a group whose taxonomy and chemistry is fairly well
              described. Because reef sponges, gorgonians and ascidians are abundant,
              sessile, elaborate putative structural and chemical defenses, and are subject
              to grazing from generalist and specialist predators, they provide a useful
              group for testing fundamental hypotheses proposed by terrestrial ecologists
              about plant defensive mechanisms.
Investigations of antipredatory structural
              and chemical defenses will be extended from the previous study to include
              Caribbean gorgonians and ascidians, using the successful techniques previously
              applied to sponges. In particular, optimal defense theory will be tested with
              ascidians, which elaborate both inorganic and organic chemical defenses.
              Metabolites of invertebrate species that have yielded deterrent crude extracts
              will be identified by bioassay-directed fractionation, resulting in a better
              understanding of the structure-function relationships of chemical defenses.
              Intraspecific patterns of metabolite expression will be examined to determine
              whether they conform to optimal defense theory. Hypotheses regarding resource
              allocation between defensive chemistry and growth, reproduction, and
              regeneration will be tested by manipulating chemically defended and
              non-defended reef sponges in the field. The hypothesis that fish predation
              limits sponge distributions on reefs will be tested by comparing transect data
              from reefs where sponge-eating fishes are abundant (Bahamas, Florida Keys) to
              reefs where fish predators are rare due to natural (Bermuda) or anthropogenic
              causes (Jamaica, Barbados). The hypothesis that sponge secondary metabolites
              function as antifouling and anti-overgrowth defenses will be further tested in
              the field and laboratory with gel-based assays, and these techniques will be
              used to isolate the active metabolites. Field experiments will be conducted to
              determine the rates at which active metabolites are expressed by sponges onto
              their surfaces or into seawater.
Overall, this research program will continue
              to develop one of the most systematic and complete investigations of chemical
              defenses of tropical invertebrates, while at the same time providing important
              educational opportunities for students at an RUI institution. The results will
              be useful in judging the general applicability of chemical defense theories
              derived from studies of terrestrial ecosystems, while advancing our
              understanding of the complex relationships between benthic invertebrates, their
              predators and their competitors in coral reef environments.

