Title       : The Changing Structure of Federal Aid and the Politics of the Electoral
               Connection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0095997

Award Number: 0095997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $386618             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth N. Bickers kbickers@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Considerable effort has been spent investigating the political consequences of
              the federal aid system. Previous research, has sought to link the formation of
              grant-seeking coalitions to the electoral fortunes of incumbents. The
              theoretical explanation and subsequent empirical tests of these relationships
              have centered almost exclusively on national and congressional politics.
              Missing in these studies has been a persuasive account of how the federal aid
              system has altered politics across levels of government. It is the supposition
              of this research team that by embedding state and local officials in networks
              of dependent relationships, the growth and changing character of the federal
              aid system has altered the electoral fortunes of elected officials at all
              levels of government. The investigators contend that changes in federal aid
              policies, by remaking relationships among stakeholders in federal aid programs,
              have had a significant affect on the career trajectories of elected
              officeholders, at both the congressional and subnational levels.

The goal of
              this investigation is to examine the impact of changes in the federal aid
              system on the electoral trajectories of office holders at both the
              congressional and subnational levels. The investigators  want to understand who
              runs, for what offices, and with what outcomes. The goal is to understand
              electoral trajectories in metropolitan areas across electoral offices.
              including congressional districts, county executives, and mayors offices. The
              reason for this is straightforward and compelling. Metropolitan areas reflect
              organic patterns of social and economic interactions . These interactions give
              rise to spillovers and the incentives and disincentives for inter
              jurisdictional cooperation, and thus create the potential for linking the
              electoral paths available to aspiring politicians.

To accomplish these
              goals, the investigators update and extend the data series on federal domestic
              aid programs and their subnational distribution that they initiated in 1989
              under a grant from the National Science Foundation. This database has been used
              by a wide cross-section of social scientists, and the researchers  have
              received numerous requests for contemporaneous data on the status of domestic
              aid program attributes and their subnational distribution. Current data on the
              flow of federal aid does not adequately reflect structural changes resulting
              from devolution in the relationship between the federal and subnational
              governments. Devolution of federal policy responsibilities to subnational
              governments creates the need for a different type of data on the flow of
              federal aid moneys to recipients and beneficiaries. This project closes this
              information deficiency and creates a database that will be used widely by other
              scholars interested in the topic.



