Title       : Alliance Treaty Obligations and Provisions: Designing Reliable International
               Agreements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0095983

Award Number: 0095983
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $128118             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brett Ashley Leeds aleeds@garnet.acns.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project brings together two of the central questions facing scholars and
              policymakers in international relations- how can we form successful cooperative
              agreements under anarchy, and how can we enhance prospects for peace through
              security cooperation? The investigator contends that understanding the causes
              and effects of international agreements requires an appreciation for the
              variance in their content. All military alliances are not equal; they vary in
              the breadth of their applicability, the strength of their obligations, and the
              intensity and formality of their collaborative links. This project collects
              information about this variance and uses it to advance understanding of the
              causes of war and peace.

The investigation answers the following three
              questions: Are military alliance commitments reliable? Under what conditions
              are leaders likely to violate past alliance commitments? Do alliances influence
              the initiation of war? All three studies share a common genesis in an argument
              regarding the efficacy of leaders in designing reliable agreements. In the
              process of negotiating treaties, national representatives specify particular
              conditions under which cooperation will occur and design means to encourage
              compliance with treaty provisions. Through the process of designing their
              contracts, leaders manage to make credible promises.

This argument leads  to
              the following expectations: (1) Once we take into account the specific
              conditions to which they apply and the actions required when they are invoked,
              we will discover, contrary to previously reported empirical evidence, that most
              alliance commitments are fulfilled. (2) While most alliance agreements are
              reliable when they are formed, major changes in conditions (for instance in
              power status or in domestic political organization) after an alliance is formed
              may result in a state abandoning prior commitments. Alliances featuring more
              highly institutionalized military collaboration, however, are less likely to be
              abandoned when changes in conditions occur than those that do not. (3) All else
              equal, aggressive leaders are less likely to attack countries with allies who
              have promised to intervene, especially if the potential aggressors judge the
              alliance commitments to be reliable.

This argument emphasizes the importance
              of the design of cooperative agreements, and  to evaluate this argument, the
              researcher collects information about the obligations and provisions included
              in alliance treaties. With support from her home institution, the investigator
              has developed a coding scheme and collected data covering the period 1816-1944.
              She has conducted some preliminary studies based on early data collection, and
              they have produced evidence commensurate with her expectations. The current
              investigation extends the data to cover the Cold War years, 1945-1988. While
              this period is much shorter than that covered in phase one of the data
              collection, the proliferation of countries in the post WWII era means that
              there are as many alliance treaties signed between 1945 and 1988 as in the
              entire period from 1816 through 1944. Extending the data collection will make
              it possible complete the proposed studies and to continue this research program
              after the grant period ends.

The results of  this research will enhance our
              understanding both of the causes of war and of the effects of international
              institutions on behavior. This research probes motives to commit to
              international agreements and institutions, to comply with past promises, and to
              react to deterrent threats. Means of designing effective cooperation and
              effective deterrent threats are of central interest to both theorists and
              policymakers in international relations today. This research promises to
              provide guidance on both of these issues and produces a dataset that will be
              used widely by other scholars interested in the topic.


