Title       : Collaborative Research: Weichselian Glaciation and Deglaciation History,
               Northeastern Kola and Kanin Peninsula, Russia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0095089

Award Number: 0095089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey Snyder jasnyd@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,5939,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Snyder
OPP-0095089
Forman 
OPP-0094982

This is a collaborative
              proposal between the University of Illinois-Chicago and Bowling Green
              University. The Principal Investigators propose to decipher the glaciation
              history of northeastern Kola and Kanin peninsulas, Russia.  This region,
              situated near the presumed last glacial maximum (LGM) confluence of the
              Scandinavian and Barents Sea ice sheets, is very important to the
              reconstruction of both ice masses.  However, recent published glacier
              reconstructions of the region propose a variety of different interpretations. 
              In particular, uncertainty exists on the glaciation of Kanin Peninsula during
              the LGM and on the presence and extent of an independent Ponoi ice cap on
              eastern Kola Peninsula during deglaciation.  Much of the uncertainty in this
              region results from a lack of chronological control on features associated with
              glaciation and deglaciation of the region.
To test these conflicting
              hypotheses, the Principal Investigators will undertake a broad glacial geologic
              field program which emphasizes the collection of data to provide an improved
              chronology of deqlaciation.  They will do complementary geochronologic methods
              rock surface exposure dating utilizing the accumulation of cosmogenic 36Cl and
              10Be and radiocarbon dating of basal organic materials preserved in lakes. 
              Surface exposure samples will be collected from exposed glacial erratics and
              glacier-scoured bedrock surfaces.  Radiocarbon samples will be obtained by
              coring glacier-scoured lakes, abundant in the region.  In addition, new basic
              data on glacial geology, such as ice-flow-direction indicators and glacial
              stratigraphy, will be collected and integrated with previous observations in
              the region to provide a geomorphic and stratigraphic framework for their
              investigations.
		This research should lead to significant improvements in our
              knowledge of the extent of Late Weichselian glaciation and the chronology and
              patterns of deglaciation in the region.  Better knowledge of the existence and
              timing of an independent Ponoi ice cap will provide a means to assess regional
              climatic gradients during the Younger Dryas and earlier late-glacial climate
              events.  Furthermore, improved reconstruction of Late Weichselian glaciation
              and deglaciation of the region will aid the broader scientific community by
              providing more realistic data to improve models of global climate, Earth
              rheology and sea-level change.



