Title       : A New Framework for Monetary Theory and Policy Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0095775

Award Number: 0095775
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248273             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Wright rwright@econ.sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops a new framework for the analysis of monetary theory and
              policy. This model integrates desirable features of several models in the
              literature. In particular, it has the microfoundations of search-based monetary
              models; it shares many of the interesting theoretical implications of
              overlapping generations models; and it allows one to analyze relevant policy
              issues as one does in cash-in-advance models.   Since the new model is explicit
              about the micro market structure that gives rise to a role for money in the
              first place, it allows detailed study of the generality and robustness of
              predictions from reduced-form approaches like cash-in-advance models. At the
              same time, the model goes well beyond most existing theories based on detailed
              micro structures, like the search-based models, in that those models typically
              assume very severe forms of inventory restrictions (e.g., agents can hold at
              most a very small amount of money). Those restrictions were imposed in this
              literature purely for technical reasons. The new framework does not need any
              such restrictions. Hence, it is well suited for macro policy and empirical
              analysis even though it has an explicit micro foundation. At the same time,
              even without technical restrictions on inventories, the new model is extremely
              tractable - one can derive many analytic results for fairly general
              specifications.
