Title       : Is There Profit in Reforming the Poor? The English Experience, 1812-1855
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0095616

Award Number: 0095616
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory N. Price                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23644              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Clark gclark@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marianne Page  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
This project estimates the social costs of the welfare system that operated in
              England prior to the Poor Law Reform of 1834.  The old system gave all persons
              a legal entitlement to a subsistence income if they could not support
              themselves.  Since the subsistence allowance for married workers with children
              was often greater than the available wage, it was feared the old system created
              great economic losses by reducing the work incentives and limiting labor
              mobility.  The reform retained the right to subsistence, but subsistence was to
              be delivered in a much less attractive form to the able bodied - in a workhouse
              under close supervision.  The reforms led to reduced welfare payments per head
              of the population after 1834.  We measure whether these cuts produced the
              efficiency gains predicted by looking at what happened to the rental value of
              property in parishes where their were more poor relief recipients before the
              reform.  We also test whether the reforms speeded migration from low wage rural
              parishes to high wage urban parishes.  As part of the project we combine data
              on poor payments and land rents with a database on parish characteristics
              constructed by Clark under an earlier NSF grant to create a rich source of
              characteristics of parishes in England in the years 1800-51 that will be useful
              to future economic and social historians.

	We find that the Old Poor Law,
              despite its apparent deficiencies, served mainly as a transfer of income from
              land owners to the poor with little extra costs in the form of reduced labor
              inputs, labor effort, or labor mobility.  These results that it was possible
              for many years to run a welfare system that guaranteed subsistence, and that
              more than 10% of the population in rural areas participated in, without
              creating great social costs.  In future research we will explore what
              overlooked features of the old system kept social costs down.  

