Title       : Layered Contract, Enforcement Institutions, and Intermediaries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0095207

Award Number: 0095207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39626              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel Watson jwatson@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Most economic relationships (employer/employee, buyer/supplier, etc.) have
              some contractual element.  The success of any particular relationship depends
              on how well contracts can be enforced.  Contract enforcement is facilitated by
              several different institutions.  The most visible
institution is the public
              court system.  In addition, there are many less formal institutions ---
              involving arbitrators, mediators, and other intermediaries --- that play a
              role.  For instance, it is becoming more and more common for contracts to
              require parties to resolve disputes through
binding arbitration, rather than
              using the court system.  However, even if parties agree to such "alternative
              dispute resolution," the court system is still in play since the courts are
              ultimately needed to enforce the judgments of arbitrators.  Parties in
              long-term relationships sometimes can
enforce agreements on their own, but
              they still count on external institutions to some extent.  Thus, the
              institutions that enforce contracts (e.g., the public courts, private
              arbitration systems, and informal convention) generally overlap and influence
              one another.

This project focuses on the relative merits of, and the
              interaction between, enforcement institutions.  It develops an understanding of
              how institutions determine the scope of contracting and how economic activity
              is impacted.  The project has two components.  The first component involves
              developing the theoretical tools necessary for economists to explicitly study
              the  constituents of contract enforcement, to analyze the strategic aspects of
              contracting, and to compare features of various institutions. For example,
              institutions differ on the basis of renegotiation and enforcement costs and
              regarding the kind of information that can be
utilized by authorities.  This
              project produces a flexible, game-theoretic framework that makes explicit these
              costs and informational constraints.  Specifically, the project shows how to
              combine "cooperative game theory" (which focuses on negotiation and the
              alternatives available to groups of people) with "non-cooperative game theory"
              (which focuses on individual incentives).  The project also develops the
              concept of "layered contract," which describes how various institutions
              overlap.  

While the first component of the project is mainly geared toward
              economic theorists, the second component of the project involves detailed
              analysis of some actual contracting environments and legal systems.  In
              particular, the project explores how the ability of parties to renegotiate
              their contracts influences whether their relationships will be successful. 
              Renegotiation is partially controlled by institutions.  For example, the U.S.
              court system generally supports efforts of parties to renegotiate their
              contracts, although there are instances where renegotiation is not allowed. 
              This project examines the strategic effects of the ability of agents to
              recontract in an ongoing relationship.  Moderate recontracting costs (rather
              than renegotiation being free or totally barred) are shown to have value in
              many contractual relationships, a fact which has important implications for the
              optimal design of legal rules.  In addition, the project explains why different
              contractual relationships use different enforcement institutions (some use
              arbitrators, others use the courts, etc.).  The project also studies optimal
              contractual arrangements in the face of constraints on allowable contract
              terms.  For example, courts do not always enforce contracts verbatim, but often
              push aside provisions that clash with legal principle.  Implications for the
              design of governance systems, specialized dispute resolution systems, and
              non-legal intermediation systems are explored.  The research yields direct
              policy implications, informing the debate on how to structure the legal system
              and encourage the appropriate development of less formal enforcement
              institutions.

