Title       : Learning and Reputation with Asymmetric Information as Seen in Rural African
               Health Care
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2001        
File        : a0095235

Award Number: 0095235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56973              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Leonard kl206@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the role of patient information concerning
              multiple
aspects of quality in the health sector of Tanzania, and how this
              information
changes and is updated when quality changes. 
In Tanzania, as in
              most African countries, patients, even the poor, have a
number of choices when
              they seek care. Although it may involve significant
additional expense,
              patients frequently bypass one facility to seek care at a
more distant
              facility. Differences in quality can explain this phenomenon.
However, it is
              widely held that patients cannot directly evaluate many aspects
of quality in
              health care. Patients know that one facility is cleaner or has a
more polite
              staff, but they do not know the quality of their consultation or
prescription.
              They seek the services of a professional because they do not know
what
              professionals know, and this leaves them unable to fully evaluate the
services
              they receive.
This project collects a unique data set in which patient choices
              are matched
with objective measures of a variety of aspects of quality as
              evaluated by
other physicians. Though patients cannot directly evaluate all
              aspects of
quality, another doctor can. The data depicts patients' willingness
              to incur
additional travel cost for different objective aspects of quality.
              
Preliminary analysis of an earlier round of data collection has shown
              that
patients know about unobservable aspects of quality. The additional round
              of
data quantitatively characterizes the method by which patients learn
              about
something that they cannot directly observe. The data depicts quality
              that
varies between facilities, between the various organizations that
              provide
health services in Tanzania, within these organizations and over time.
              Using
this data, the project reveals whether patients assign reputations
              to
organizations, management practices within organizations,
              individual
facilities, or even individual doctors. It addition, it depicts the
              speed with
which patients update their information about quality.
        The
              manner and speed with which patients learn and update information
about
              quality has important implications for the future of
              decentralization,
privatization and regulation of health services in Tanzania
              and Africa in
general. 


