Title       : U.S. GLOBEC National Coordinating Office
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0095069

Award Number: 0095069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 15,  2001   
Expires     : December 31,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2864748            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Fogarty mfogarty@whsun1.wh.whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Groman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of U.S. Global Ocean Ecosystems Dynamics (GLOBEC) research is to
              understand the potential impacts of climate change on ocean ecosystems. U.S.
              GLOBEC has matured into a multi-regional program with ongoing or planned
              studies in the Georges Bank Northwest Atlantic region, the California Current
              off Oregon and northern California, the Coastal Gulf of Alaska, and the
              Southern Ocean. These study sites have been specifically chosen to afford
              opportunities to examine the potential impacts of climate change on key
              physical processes affecting recruitment of marine populations. In order to
              continue these research programs, this grant will provide support for the
              Coordinating Office for the U.S. GLOBEC Scientific Steering Committee. The
              national office provides coordination and support for the regional programs,
              scientific planning and review, and communication. As the program has developed
              into a functional multi-regional program, the emphasis of the Scientific
              Steering Committee has shifted from scientific planning for the local field
              programs to an emphasis on coordination and planning for comparative studies
              and for integration within and between regional studies. The Coordinating
              Office will assume data management responsibilities for the U.S. GLOBEC program
              as a whole. This effort will supplant and expand the role currently played by
              the Georges Bank Data Management Office. It will ensure standardization of data
              sources and will provide ready access to all data sets according to the U.S.
              GLOBEC Data Management Policy. The Coordinating Office will be relocated to
              Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution and will remain in place for the duration
              of the U.S. GLOBEC Program. The principal advantages of a fixed location for
              the GLOBEC Coordinating Office at WHOI include greater stability in funding and
              time horizon for office personnel and ease in establishment and maintenance of
              a central data hub for each of the U.S. GLOBEC study sites.
