Title       : Assessing and Explaining Consumer Landscape Practices: Towards an Ecology of the
               City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 22,  2001  
File        : a0095993

Award Number: 0095993
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Robbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Some of the most significant problems of an urbanizing globe are environmental
              externalities created by modern city dwellers in the course of their daily
              lives.  These problems are notable for extreme complexity, being aggregated
              into larger scales but formed from the disaggregated choices of individuals. 
              The very ordinariness of these daily decisions, moreover, makes them easy to
              overlook, so that problems in urban ecology remain under-analyzed.  An
              exemplary case of such a problem, and an extremely serious non-point source of
              water pollution in its own right, is the deposition by American households of
              herbicidal, insecticidal, and nutrient chemicals in management of their
              property.  These chemicals are applied to lawns in the United States at a rate
              per hectare that matches, and often exceeds, that of modern agriculture. 
              Despite environmental awareness and education, such deposition continues to
              increase.  This research examines the problem of chemical application and
              management using both intensive and extensive methodological components.  The
              research will first conduct a national phone survey, using an instrument
              pre-tested in an earlier statewide survey, to quantitatively assess economic
              and demographic factors that explain variations in chemical use.  This will be
              accompanied by an intensive interview-based municipal survey that evaluates the
              relationship of homeowner behaviors to environmental aesthetics, consciousness,
              opinions, and feelings.  The research will also analyze the lawn chemical
              industry by focusing on their marketing practices and conduct an assessment of
              lawn cover nationally.

By creating an extensive and intensive research
              protocol for analysis of this urban environmental problem, the research forms
              the foundations of a research program in urban ecology.  It pursues an
              explanation not only of lawn chemical practices but more generally of why
              individuals participate in activities with far-reaching, if invisible,
              environmental impact.  It queries what the driving social and economic forces
              are behind their logics and seeks to link their behaviors to larger patterns of
              environmental change.  The work will therefore aid in formulation of a unified
              human/environment research program that connects the actions of city dwellers
              to broader patterns of global change.

