Title       : Computer Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Scholarships Program (CSEMS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a0095228

Award Number: 0095228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guillermina Damas gdamas@mdcc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Rene Garcia  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MDCC-Wolfson
	      300 NE 2nd Avenue
	      Miami, FL  331322295    305/237-7776

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Technology is rapidly becoming the enabler of the new economy. Significant
              advances in technologically- oriented industries have created new
              infrastructure for both business and social interaction while transforming the
              way we live, learn and work on a day- to- day basis. These advances will
              continue to have a profound impact on the supply and demand for skilled labor
              in the new millennium. Indeed, approximately 50% of all jobs in the United
              States are expected to be either in or closely related to information
              technology (IT) and telecommunications products and services, by the year 2006.
              Consistent with the demographic composition of the surrounding community, our
              campus serves a non- traditional, ethnically diverse student body. This project
              enables low- income, minority and/or female students who meet established
              academic criteria to obtain Associate in Arts or Associate in Science degrees
              in computer science, mathematics or engineering. These students are eligible
              for transfer to an upper- division school or to enter the workforce directly in
              their chosen field. Thus, the goals of this project include: (1) Increasing the
              number of low- income, minority and/ or female students obtaining degrees in
              computer science, mathematics and engineering; (2) improving the overall
              quality of education for all students majoring in computer science, engineering
              and mathematics and; (3) enhancing the professional development and career
              choice opportunities of participating students. Over the two- year project
              period, scholarships are being distributed to students in computer science,
              engineering and mathematics. Measurable criteria including grade point
              averages, retention rates and graduation rates are utilized to determine the
              degree of academic achievement, retention and professional development/
              graduation among scholarship recipients versus non- recipients. 

