Title       : Particle Size Distributions within Arctic Polar Stratospheric Clouds to
               Complement Particle Composition and Scattering Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2001      
File        : a0095158

Award Number: 0095158
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Swanberg                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $248082             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Deshler deshler@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Deshler OPP-0095158

A more complete quantitative understanding of polar
              stratospheric ozone loss requires further work in several areas. The
              microphysics of the nucleation, growth, composition, and sedimentation of
              particles in polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs) is one of these areas. PSC
              particles provide sites for the heterogeneous chemistry required to activate
              chlorine, which then destroys ozone. The pivotal role played by PSC particles
              is most evident in the Arctic where ozone loss is essentially modulated by
              temperature, a surrogate for PSCs, from year to year. The frequency, duration,
              and timing of PSC occurrence determines the extent of chlorine activation and
              denitrification in the stratospheric polar vortex, and thus the amount of ozone
              loss. Removing some of the present uncertainties concerning PSC formation
              temperatures, particle composition, and particle phase will permit more careful
              modeling of the amount of chlorine processed by PSCs and the extent of
              denitrification. The activation of chlorine and ultimately ozone loss is
              dependent on all of these factors.

This work takes advantage of invitations
              from several European colleagues to collaborate on joint measurements of PSC
              particles during the winters of 2000/2001 and 2001/2002. The European
              institutions and their measurements are: Max-Planck-Institut fur Kernphysik -
              Heidelberg, particle composition CNRS-Laboratoire de Meteorologie Dynamique -
              Paris, gas phase water vapor concentration; CNR - Istituto di Fisica
              dell'Atmosfera - Rome, aerosol backscatter and depolarization; and Danish
              Meteorological Institute - Copenhagen, aerosol backscatter and
              microphysical/mesoscale modeling. Under previous support these four
              instruments, plus the particle counters used in this work, have been integrated
              onto one balloon gondola which will simultaneously measure, in situ, PSC
              particle composition, concentration, size, depolarization, backscattering, and
              gas phase concentrations of water. This gondola was flown for the first time in
              January 2000 in the Arctic.

This grant will complete four more Arctic PSC
              measurements with this unique set of instruments. Two instruments will be used
              to measure the ambient concentration of condensation nuclei and of aerosol with
              radii >=0.15 - 10.0 mm in 12 size classes. From these measurements size
              distributions can be estimated. To provide estimates of the volume of the
              condensed nitric acid and water in the PSCs, a second aerosol counter will be
              included to measure the background stratospheric aerosol. This instrument will
              be fitted with an inlet heater, thus sampling aerosol after they have been
              exposed to an inlet wall temperature of 250 K for ~ 0.1 s prior to
              sampling.

In addition to providing aerosol size distributions and estimates
              of condensed volume for the joint measurements, the work will continue to focus
              on methods to infer particle index of refraction, which is a function of
              composition, through comparisons of our size distribution measurements with in
              situ optical scattering measurements at a number of wavelengths. Estimates of
              particle index of refraction which result from these comparisons will be used
              in the interpretation of particle composition measurements.

These new joint
              measurements will follow the first successful set of measurements by this
              configuration of instruments in January 2000. The January 2000 measurements
              constituted the first direct measurements of single particle composition within
              a PSC, coincident with a characterization of aerosol size, concentration,
              phase, and optical properties. These measurements revealed a PSC composed of
              layers of liquid droplets interspersed with layers of nitric acid hydrates. The
              agreement amongst the various instruments in capturing the fine layered
              structure of the cloud was impressive. Many layers of the cloud fit well within
              our thermodynamic understanding of PSCs while some new HNO3 rich particle types
              were observed. 

