Title       : Measurement and Modeling of Local Scale Energy and Mass Exchanges in Urban
               Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0095284

Award Number: 0095284
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210832             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine S. Grimmond grimmon@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,9278,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Land surface and atmospheric alteration by urbanization leads to the development
              of distinct urban climates, which ultimately due to differences in the budgets
              of heat, mass, and momentum between the city and its pre-existing landscape. 
              This study, through measurements and simple modeling, will enhance current
              understanding of surface - atmosphere exchanges in cities and their spatial
              variability at the local or neighborhood scale.  This work will be conducted in
              two inter-related parts.  First, a multi-city urban hydro-meteorological
              database consisting of surface energy balance fluxes, standard meteorological
              variables, and detailed spatial information on surface cover (materials and
              morphology) will be developed.  This will be achieved by integrating results
              from previous studies, published and unpublished, and by conducting new
              long-term flux measurements at three carefully selected sites (Baltimore, USA;
              Lodz, Poland; Marseille, France).  Second, simple parameterization schemes to
              simulate each of the surface energy balance fluxes in urban areas will be
              developed and evaluated.  The objective is to develop a scheme with broad
              utility, thus it will be based on routinely collected meteorological data and
              simple surface parameters.  Schemes for the individual fluxes will be evaluated
              separately and then integrated into a model called Local-scale Urban
              Meteorological Parameterization Scheme (LUMPS).  The new data compiled and
              measured will be used to independently evaluate LUMPS. 

Urban areas
              represent a location where a large and ever-increasing proportion of the
              world's population live, and where a disproportionate share of natural
              resources are used.  The data collected in this study will enhance current
              understanding of the fundamental physical processes involved in the generation
              of urban climates and their spatial variability.  The integrated model
              developed from this research (LUMPS) will be capable of simulating the spatial
              variability of energy balance fluxes within and between cities.  Given the
              easily-available data inputs of LUMPS (standard meteorological data and surface
              characteristics), it promises to be a tool of practical utility for the broad
              group of scientists interested in understanding, predicting, and mitigating
              urban climates.

