Title       : A Comparative Welfare State Data Set, 1960-2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 8,  2001   
File        : a0095367

Award Number: 0095367
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133415             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lyle A. Scruggs scruggs@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      438 Whitney Road Extension
	      Storrs, CT  062691133    860/486-3622

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since its publication in 1990, Gosta Esping-Andersen's The Three Worlds of
              Welfare Capitalism has been perhaps the most frequently cited comparative study
              of the welfare state. His typology of three distinctive welfare regimes, based
              on empirical measures of the outcomes of social policy, has been referenced and
              reproduced in numerous studies, serving as a critical starting point for
              subsequent work. Yet the empirical data Esping-Andersen used in developing his
              popular typology (specifically, the de-commodification index and regime
              stratification measures) is outdated and inadequate for contemporary research
              needs. It is based on a cross-section of social program characteristics in a
              single year, 1980. Even for that year, the results have not been replicated. It
              is indeed surprising, then, that prominent work continues to reproduce
              (somewhat uncritically) Esping-Andersen's empirical data to describe and
              characterize welfare state regimes almost twenty years later.

This
              investigation develops a cross-national and time series data set of comparative
              welfare state outcomes in 18 OECD countries based generally on EspingAndersen's
              programmatic criteria. In addition, the investigators collect data that take
              steps towards overcoming a gender-bias in the original three worlds typology.
              The project collects and makes public to the international scholarly community
              annual data on the components of welfare state regimes and outcomes from 1960
              to the present. Future updates will keep the data set as current as
              possible.

The data set contributes to the systematic comparison of welfare
              state programs in advanced capitalist democracies. It will be a valuable tool
              in developing and testing theories of welfare state development as well as how
              public policies operate and evolve, and constitute a basis for advancing
              systematic comparative scholarship on the welfare state beyond its current
              reliance on program expenditure data.

The project:

o	provides an
              important "update" and history of the characteristics of national welfare
              states in a way that is empirically consistent with Esping-Andersen's seminal
              work

o	allows researchers to test theories of social policy dynamics-- e.g.,
              "convergence" or "crisis" arguments linked to demographics or globalization,
              and "path dependency" or "new politics" arguments--that the available
              expenditure data cannot

o	incorporates important features of how welfare
              states provide benefits to "liberate" and assist women in traditional roles of
              social reproduction, i.e., care-giving.

The investigation promises to
              enhance substantially our understanding of the topic and produces a dataset
              that will be used widely by scholars interested in the topic.






