Title       : Advances in Local Independence and Unidimensionality Assessment for Dichotomous
               and Polytomous Item Exams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2001  
File        : a0095987

Award Number: 0095987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114954             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian Habing habing@stat.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research is concerned with the statistical analysis of large-scale
              standardized educational and psychological tests.  The data from these tests
              are commonly analyzed using the item response theory (IRT) paradigm.  Many IRT
              based procedures rely on the assumptions that testing data can be modeled as if
              it measures a single ability or dimension (unidimensionality), and that the
              responses to the questions on the exam are independent of one another once the
              examinee's ability level is known (local independence).  The standard
              procedures for verifying that these two assumptions hold suffer from a variety
              of weaknesses.  In particular, they either require additional assumptions about
              an underlying parametric statistical model or an ad-hoc correction for
              statistical bias.  This research will refine recently proposed methods for
              verifying these assumptions by using the parametric bootstrap procedure and
              nonparametric regression.  The research will expand the theory of the
              parametric bootstrap and nonparametric regression from other areas of
              application to IRT.  This will be done both for tests whose items are scored
              simply as correct or incorrect as well as for those that allow for partial
              credit.  The end result of this research will be a theoretically justified,
              computationally feasible method of verifying the assumptions of
              unidimensionality and local independence without need of a specified parametric
              model or an ad-hoc bias correction.

The role of standardized tests has been
              ever increasing in education in the United States.  They are used for
              everything from determining college admissions decisions to attempting to judge
              the effectiveness of schools and school districts.  As such, it is vital to
              continually improve the statistical methods used to insure the accuracy and
              fairness of these standardized tests.  Many of the statistical procedures
              currently used to insure the reliability of these tests are based on some
              underlying technical assumptions that can be difficult to verify.  The result
              of this research will be methods that the practitioner can use to insure that
              the procedures for verifying the accuracy and fairness of the standardized
              tests are performing as expected.  Given the historically close interaction and
              spirit of collaboration between the large national testing companies,
              university researchers, and state and local departments of education, these
              results will be immediately disseminated to agencies which directly affect
              every student in America.  In addition to this immediate application, this
              research also will provide insights into the future development of reliable
              methods for insuring accuracy and fairness of standardized tests even when the
              desired underlying technical assumptions are not met.

