Title       : The Role of Surface Reactions and Hydrogen Surface Diffusivity on the
               Environmental Embrittlement of (Ni,Fe)Ti Alloys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2003   
File        : a0095381

Award Number: 0095381
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yip-Wah Chung ywchung@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0095381
Chung 

This grant deals with the fundamental issues surrounding the
              moisture-induced embrittlement of intermetallic alloys with a focus on
              (Ni,Fe)Ti. In spite of the reactivity of individual components to water,
              (Ni,Fe)Ti alloys are not embrittled by moisture, as long as the Fe
              concentration is less than 9 a/o. However, they become severely embrittled by
              moisture at higher Fe concentrations. This calls for a detailed re-examination
              of the traditionally accepted mechanism of moisture-induced embrittlement of
              intermetallics. That is, in addition to the dissociation of water to produce
              atomic hydrogen on intermetallic surfaces, what other factors are required to
              produce moisture-induced embrittlement? Using a surface science approach, this
              study looks at the water vapor reactivity of single crystal (Ni,Fe)Ti surfaces
              of different orientations and Fe concentrations. The objective is to determine
              whether or not water dissociation to produce atomic hydrogen occurs, and, if
              so, how strongly the atomic hydrogen is bound to the intermetallic surface.
              Most important to improved understanding is a quantitative determination of the
              diffusivity of hydrogen on these surfaces using electron-stimulated desorption.
              These investigations should provide the necessary atomic scale details to
              explain the inter-relationships among moisture-induced embrittlement, surface
              reactivity, and mobility of atomic hydrogen in intermetallic alloys.
              
%%%
Intermetallic alloys offer promise as high temperature structural metal
              alloys.  One potential problem is the reactivity of intermetallics with the
              environment.  This grant explores one facet of this problem.
***

