Title       : Excited State Reactivity of Copper(I) Complexes in Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0095274

Award Number: 0095274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2001   
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth L. Stevenson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry  Program of the
              Chemistry Division is supporting Professor Kenneth Stevenson, Chemistry
              Department, Indiana-Purdue University at Fort Wayne, for the study of the
              excited state reactivity of copper(I) complexes in solution.The ultraviolet
              excitation of aqueous solutions of copper(I) complexes containing donor
              ligands, such as halide, cyano, amido, and alkyl, results in the formation of
              reactive species that include exciplexes, i.e. complexes formed between excited
              state and ground state species, and possibly excimers, i.e. excited dimers
              formed by excited and ground-state species. In some cases the exciplexes or
              excimers may form a bond through a bridging ligand; in other cases the bonding
              in the aggregated excited species may have metal-metal bonding, a very rare
              phenomenon. The goal of this project is to expand the understanding of these
              excited-state species, and to search for new complexes that generate them. A
              systematic study of the photochemistry and photophysics of copper(I) complexes
              will be conducted utilizing laser flash photolysis and time-resolved and
              steady-state spectrofluorimetry. The rates of formation and/or decay of the
              various excited state species will be determined and the various intermediates
              and energy relationships will be determined. 

Copper has many important
              applications in electronics. This study will concentrate on the way copper
              complexes interact with very short bursts of intense laser generated light.
              This will provide information on the ways that copper compounds can effect the
              conversion of light energy to chemical energy and how they can mediate the
              generation of electrical energy by the absorbtion of light. A particularly
              significant part of this project is the heavy involvement of undergraduate
              students. The project will introduce these students to research at an early
              stage in their educational experience.


