Title       : Symposium: Molecules, Muscles, and Macroevolution: Integrative Functional
               Morphology, to be held January 4-7, 2001, Chicago, IL
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  2000  
File        : a0095244

Award Number: 0095244
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  2000   
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Miriam A. Ashley-Ross rossma@wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alice C. Gibb  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lara A. Ferry-Graham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The discipline of functional morphology is dedicated to understanding the
              relationship between form and function in living animals. Historically, this
              field has been dominated by comparative anatomists who have described animal
              form, and inferred function. More recently, functional morphologists have added
              modern tools such as high-speed imaging and electromyography to quantify animal
              behavior and to correlate behavior with muscle activity patterns. Currently,
              there is a small but growing awareness that techniques from other fields, which
              have not traditionally been used to study animal form and function, and can
              make great contributions to our understanding of the mechanistic basis of
              animal performance. At the 2001 Society of Integrative Biology Meetings, to be
              held Jan 4-7 in Chicago, IL, experts from various fields will present talks
              detailing the modern, fully integrative nature of the field of functional
              morphology in the symposium: "Molecules, Muscles, and Macroevolution:
              Integrative Functional Morphology". 
 
The primary goal of this symposium is
              to present current innovative research that extends past the bounds of what is
              often considered "traditional" functional morphology. Though the topics covered
              will be necessarily diverse, all the speakers in the symposium will address the
              following issues: (1) What new information is gained by combining the
              techniques of the "other" discipline with those of functional morphology? and
              (2) How can functional experimental approaches inform the "other" discipline?
              The speakers are all young scientists who combine functional morphology with
              approaches from various other disciplines. This symposium will highlight the
              innovations that these individuals are incorporating into their research
              programs and promote the careers of these up-and-coming scientists. This
              symposium is also meant to promote interactions among researchers in diverse
              specialties, encourage intellectual "cross-fertilization" among functional
              morphologists in various sub-disciplines, and inspire comparative anatomists
              who have relied on traditional approaches to expand their research program to
              include new techniques and conceptual frameworks. The proceedings of the
              symposium will be published in the American Zoologist, the official journal of
              the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology.  

