Title       : Exploring Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0095684

Award Number: 0095684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2324851            (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel Barstow Dan_Barstow@terc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tamara Ledley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : TERC Inc
	      2067 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  02140    617/547-0430

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goal of "Exploring Earth" is to weave into a tightly integrated package the
              revised textbook, in depth student investigations of core topics in Earth
              sciences, and a web site of Earth science images, animations and other
              visualizations.  The project is a collaboration between the publisher
              (McDougall Littel) of the most widely used high school Earth science textbook
              and TERC.  The investigations serve as challenging and stimulating entry points
              into or extensions from major topics, providing opportunity for student-guided
              applications to real-world scenarios.  They include investigations at local
              study sites, design of experiments, working with visualizations, and real-time
              data and experimenting with models and simulations.  The website features
              images from space, real-time data, and information about theories, data and
              recent events to extend and deepen student learning.  Students develop an
              understanding of Earth and space science and of Earth as system by experiencing
              Earth and space science as a process of inquiry, exploration and discovery; by
              observing, exploring and monitoring the environment around them; and by
              learning to use the tools of modern technologies.  The project builds upon
              previous work of both parties to provide all teachers a pathway for easier
              change to the increased use of inquiry and electronic technologies.  The
              materials contain a guide for professional development of teachers and
              workshops are held to support learning Earth science in urban environments. 
              The evaluation includes pilot and field testing the materials and evidence of
              student learning.  



