Title       : Collaborative Research: Documenting the Global Middle Miocene Climatic Optimum
               in the High-Latitude North Pacific
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2001       
File        : a0095147

Award Number: 0095147
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louie Marincovich louiem@calacademy.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal Acad of Sciences
	      Golden Gate Park
	      San Francisco, CA  941184599    /   -

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
Marincovich
OPP-0095147


This is a collaborative proposal between
              the California Academy of Sciences and Florida Atlantic University. 
              Shallow-water marine molluscan faunas in Alaska and Kamchatka are the
              northernmost empirical evidence of early middle Miocene global warming in the
              high-latitude North Pacific.  The Principal Investigators will document the
              degree of shallow-water marine warming and paleoseasonality in this region
              during the Climatic Optimum (14.5 to 17 million years ago), based on new and
              existing mollusk collections and stable isotope analyses of selected mollusk
              species from Alaska and Kamchatka.  They will also provide stratigraphic and
              age constraints for the four or more Climatic Optimum warm-water episodes
              evidenced in stratigraphic sequences in these regions. 

This project will
              focus on faunal and stable isotope studies of two shallow-water molluscan
              faunas that exhibit clear evidence of the early middle Miocene Climatic
              Optimum, in the Narrow Cape Formation of Kodiak Island and the Kavranskaya
              Series in northwestern Kamchatka.  Analyses of mollusks previously collected by
              the Principal Investigators from the Bear Lake Formation on the Alaska
              Peninsula will be incorporated into the study.  The common occurrences in these
              formations of the warm water bivalves Anadara, Dosinia, Glycymeris, Macoma and
              Nutiallia, and the gastropods Fulgoraria (Musashia), Gibbula, Nassariuv,
              Turritella, and Tyrannoberingius will provide a basis for paleotemperature
              estimates using both faunal and isotopic criteria.

The research should
              establish the degree of warmth and paleoseasonality at the northern limit of
              the Climatic Optimum in the Pacific and put this paleoclimatic event in bio-and
              chronostratigraphic contexts.  These data will make it possible, for the first
              time, to include the shallow-water marine climate of the high-latitude North
              Pacific region into numerical climatic and oceanographic models.

