Title       : Evaluation of Techniques for the Group Housing of Rats in Standard Vivariums
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0095267

Award Number: 0095267
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38162              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert Holson rholson@nmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NM Inst of Mining & Tech
	      801 Leroy Place
	      Socorro, NM  878014796    505/835-5690

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Housing for rodents used in research has changed little in the past 75 years. 
              Typically rats are paired two per cage in plastic cages not much larger than
              shoe boxes, and cages are held on upright wheeled metal racks having four or
              five shelves, with four or five cages per shelf.  Such caging provides little
              opportunity for exercise or either cognitive or social stimulation, yet
              alternatives are limited without radically altering housing facilities.  This
              proposal will create and evaluate two alternative group housing modes, both
              based on the existing rack configuration and hence consistent with current
              housing facilities.  Both types of facility will be compared to existing caging
              in terms of cost as well as ease of identification and capture of the rodent. 
              More importantly, these alternative group-housing facilities will be assessed
              for their effects on the rat occupants.  Fighting, activity levels, body
              weights, health status and housing effects on cognitive development will be
              assessed and compared to standard two per cage housing.

  Benefits to be
              realized from this project are substantial.  Research involving environmental
              enrichment and social behavior in rats will profit from design and evaluation
              of practical, standardized and sanitary housing environments that will fit into
              the standard rodent vivarium.  Secondly, and of far greater importance, this
              project has the potential to substantially improve standard rodent housing
              facilities without greatly increased costs or vivarium space requirements. 
              Such an improvement would have positive consequences both for research and for
              the quality of life of the rodents.

