Title       : Interactions between Organic Matter and Minerals in Marine Sediment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0095287

Award Number: 0095287
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439837             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard G. Keil rickkeil@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0095287

Although marine geochemists have known for some time
              now that sedimentary organic matter is bound primarily as organic-clay
              aggregates, little is known about the physicochemical nature of  these
              clusters.  In this project an organic geochemistry research team at the
              University of Washington will conduct a systematic survey of coastal zone
              sediments with varying oxygen exposure times to examine the organic-particle
              association.  Density fractionation techniques will be used to quantify
              organic-clay aggregates, and the organic matter  composition of the density
              fractions will be determined. The analytical techniques used to characterize 
              the aggregates will include X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Matrix
              Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization Time of Flight Mass Spectroscopy
              (MALDI-TOF-MS) because these techniques  offer unique views on organic matter
              quality and because they complement traditional measurements  (CHN, amino acid
              hydrolysis, etc.). Laboratory experiments will be conducted in which different
              mineral  and organic materials are mixed in a controlled fashion, and the
              formation and subsequent microbial  degradation of organo-clay aggregates will
              be monitored. The information gathered from these two sets  of studies will
              then be used in the field off the coast of Washington, where organic-mineral
              interactions  will be evaluated for fresh materials collected in the water
              column and at the sediment-water interface.  Special emphasis will be placed on
              examining the degradation patterns observed for proteins, peptides  and amino
              acids because these components are observed in both the reactive and refractory
              pools of  sedimentary organic matter.  

The application of XPS and
              MALDI-TOF-MS to the investigation of sedimentary organic matter  diagenesis and
              organic-mineral interactions will allow appraisal of how both the bulk
              characteristics of  surface-associated organic matter change as well as yield
              detailed information about the reactivity of  proteins and peptides in the
              experimental systems. The ultimate goal is to quantify the functional 
              relationship between mineral and organic matter and thus better determine how
              the relationship can be used to understand organic carbon cycling in the marine
              environment.      


 

