Title       : Identification and Characterization of the Last Unknown Catalyst in Lignin
               Biosynthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 31,  2002  
File        : a0095075

Award Number: 0095075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2005      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $462925             (Estimated)
Investigator: Clint Chapple   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The end products of the phenylpropanoid pathway play important roles in plant
              structure and plant growth and development, as well as in plants' defenses
              against biotic and abiotic stresses.  Phenylpropanoid pathway-derived
              metabolites are important in both human health and in agricultural contexts. 
              An important gap in our understanding of phenylpropanoid metabolism is
              represented by p-coumarate 3-hydroxylase (C3H), the only enzyme of the pathway
              that has not been characterized, and the enzyme encoded by the only gene of the
              pathway that has not been cloned.  The 3-hydroxylase is an enigmatic enzyme. 
              It has eluded all attempts over the last thirty years to unambiguously
              characterize it in detail at the enzymatic level. This research project focuses
              on a new mutant of Arabidopsis that is likely to be defective in the gene
              encoding this enzyme.
Past research has shown that Arabidopsis is an excellent
              model plant for the isolation of previously unidentified phenylpropanoid
              pathway genes.  By screening for plants that fail to accumulate soluble
              fluorescent phenylpropanoid secondary metabolites, a number of new Arabidopsis
              mutants that display a reduced epidermal fluorescence (ref) phenotype have been
              identified. One of these mutants, ref8, is defective in C3H activity.  The
              identification of the ref8 mutant provides a unique opportunity to isolate the
              gene encoding C3H. A preliminary phenotypic characterization of the ref8 mutant
              has been conducted, and the C3H gene has been cloned.  C3H is a cytochrome
              P450-dependent monooxygenase, the activity of which has been verified by
              expression of the wild-type gene in yeast.  The goals of this project are to
              characterize this poorly-studied enzyme, to clarify its role in the
              phenylpropanoid pathway, to identify when and where the protein is expressed,
              and to determine why ref8 mutations lead to alterations in plant growth and
              development.

	
 


