Title       : Gender, Culture, and the State: Family Policy in Conservative Countries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  2001        
File        : a0095251

Award Number: 0095251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joane Nagel                             
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110834             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joya Misra misra@soc.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Family policies play a critical role in lowering poverty rates for families with
              children, in particular for single parent families, and affect whether women
              pursue employment when children are young.  Why do some countries provide more
              generous support for families than others?  How do these policies relate to
              female work, gender equality, and religious values of nations?  This project
              answers these questions through the study of the development of family policy
              in three conservative regimes (France, Germany, and the Netherlands) that
              profess a strong commitment to the support of families.  Taking a
              comparative-historical approach, it analyzes similarities and differences in
              these three family policy traditions in order to understand better both the
              origins and outcomes of these traditions.  In so doing, it addresses debates
              over the causal importance of social Catholic ideology, pro-natalism, political
              parties, and women's movements to public polices.

Specifically, the project
              analyzes family policy legislation (both successful and failed) in France,
              Germany, and the Netherlands from 1950 through 2000.  By gathering data on
              family allowances, parental leave, child care, tax benefits, child support, and
              benefits to single parents, the analysis provides a history of family policies
              in each nation, compares family policies across the three nations, and
              estimates quantitative time-series models of changes in policies over time. 
              The methods thus test for possible causes of family policies across the
              nations, and the project contributes more broadly to the understanding of the
              sources of public policies.

