Title       : Applying Remote Sensing and Geographic Information System to Arab Fertility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0095641

Award Number: 0095641
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $359999             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Weeks john.weeks@sdsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Arthur Getis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas A. Stow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mahmoud Gadalla  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : San Diego State Univ Fdn
	      5250 Campanile Drive
	      San Diego, CA  921821931    619/594-5731

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research adds to an understanding of the Arab fertility transition by
              investigating the existence of spatial patterns of fertility differentials and
              change over time in urban and rural settings in two Arab nations: Egypt and
              Jordan.  The research is guided by a conceptual framework that explains the
              fertility transition as a combination of human capital changes in local
              contexts (the supply-demand framework) and the spatial diffusion of ideas and
              behavior regarding family size (the "horizontal" component of the cultural
              diffusion perspective).  The major thrust of the research is oriented toward
              the exploration of the spatio-temporal component of fertility change in rural
              and urban areas in Arab countries, predicated on the more general hypothesis
              that reproductive behavior is a function of both who you are and where you are.
               The project extends the work that the researchers have already begun
              incorporating an explicitly spatial component to the analysis of the Arab
              fertility transition.  This spatial component has two important aspects: (1)
              measuring the extent to which where you are influences reproductive behavior,
              net of who you are; and (2) quantifying the environmental context in which
              reproductive decisions are being made.  These objectives will be accomplished
              by applying techniques of remote-sensing, geographic information system (GIS),
              and local indicators of spatial association and combining them with census data
              for study sites in Egypt and Jordan.  The satellite imagery offers the ability
              to generate otherwise unavailable information about the
              ecological/environmental context of the local areas in which reproductive
              behavior is occurring.  The incorporation of these variables into a GIS with
              the census data offers a way to statistically analyze the information using
              emerging spatial-statistical techniques.  These techniques permit the
              quantitative assessment of spatial clustering of low and high fertility, and
              they also permit the calculation of spatially filtered regression models which
              are able to distinguish between variability in the dependent variable
              (fertility) that is due to the spatial component (where you are) and that which
              is due to the non-spatial component (who you are). 

Although the project is
              not individually pioneering the use of any of these techniques, no demographers
              have yet put all of these pieces together in this way.  Since these techniques
              are still quite new in demographic research, the conduct of and products from
              this research project will provide models for advancing the role of spatial
              perspectives and methods in demographic education and research.  The project
              will demonstrate that an understanding of regional fertility transitions
              requires an understanding of the way in which fertility levels and their change
              over time exhibit spatial clustering, and of the way in which spatial
              clustering is related to specific social ecological environments.  The methods
              employed offer a model of how an increase in local prediction could increase
              the effectiveness of locally applied policies that may influence reproductive
              decisions.  At the broader societal level, the substantive results will help to
              guide intelligent use of always-scarce resources in improving reproductive
              health in developing countries.

