Title       : Financial Institutions for an Unstable World
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0095109

Award Number: 0095109
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225338             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Gale douglas.gale@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is a growing awareness that globalization, particularly the opening up of
              previously closed financial systems to global markets. has the potential to
              increase the exposure of financial systems to new and greater risks. The
              classical theory of risk sharing treats risks as exogenous (e.g., as states of
              nature). The new risks associated with globalization are largely endogenous.
              The traditional tools of financial economics can be used to describe and
              analyze these risks, but new models and new kinds of analysis are needed.
              Economists are now in a position to address questions about the optimal design
              and regulation of potentially unstable financial systems. This project
              addresses several problems in the area of economic policy, regulation and
              institutional design arising out of the recent work on financial crises.

One
              difference between this work and much of the rest of the literature is that
              this project focuses on the microeconomic properties of financial institutions
              and markets that are crucial for understanding the phenomenon of financial
              fragility and endogenous instability.  For the most part, first-generation
              models of financial crises analyze the behavior of a single representative
              bank, are partial equilibrium in nature and consist of a contracting problem
              followed by a coordination problem.  In order to understand the origins of
              financial crises, we need models that describe complex, decentralized financial
              systems comprising both financial institutions and financial markets.  This
              project develops such models of complex financial systems and uses this
              approach to explore four issues: optimal provision of liquidity when financial
              intermediaries are opaque; the relationship between aggregate uncertainty,
              financial fragility, and contagion; the relationship between monetary policy
              and asset prices; and the design of optimal currency areas.

