Title       : The Evolution of Investment Conventions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2001  
File        : a0095606

Award Number: 0095606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109645             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Bentley MacLeod wmacleod@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Herbert Dawid  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Project Description for "The Evolution of Bargaining Conventions" by
Herbert
              Dawid and W. Bentley Macleod

         Legal scholars and economic historians
              have long recognized the
importance of social conventions and norms for the
              efficient and smooth
operation of the economy. For example, if an employee
              feels that his or
her employer is fair, then conflict is reduced, and the
              individual will
invest more into the relationship. However, it is extremely
              difficult to
precisely define the notion of a fair convention.

         One
              approach is to study the evolution of coventions in an
explicit bargaining
              problem where individuals have to decide how to divide
the gains from trade.
              The current literature has shown that the 50/50
split is a stable convention
              in a variety of situations. That rule however
does not reward individuals who
              may contribute more to a relationship, a
point that Grossman and Hart argue
              may explain why ownership is structured
to make one party a residual claimant
              to the profits of a firm. What has
not been studied, and is the object of the
              current project, is the
evolution of bargaining conventions in the presence of
              relationship
specific investments.

        We show that that the addition
              of relation specific investments
can result in social conventions that are
              very different from the 50/50
split. Moreover, this research addresses an
              important open question raised
by Henry Hansmann and Reinier Kraakman, namely
              why is it efficient for
ownership to be concentrated in the hands of a single
              individual or group.
We show that depending upon the information structure,
              both ownership and
the bargaining conventions evolve to a "fair rule" that
              encourages
efficient relationship specific investments, and low levels of
              conflict.
In particular, we demonstrate that it depends crucially
              on
complementarities between the specific investments of the
              individuals
whether such fair and efficient conventions are developed.

    
                 This work is theoretical and uses an abstract framework that might
not be
              directly applicable in its current form. However, it does study the
conditions
              that give rise to norms which encourage efficient behavior in a
decentralized,
              anonymous economy.  Understanding the structure of
efficient social norms may
              also have implications for the efficient
running of exchange mediated through
              the internet. Elucidating the type of
information needed to ensure efficient
              exchange in these cases may help us
better understand the rules that need to
              be used in "New Economy" to
ensure its continued success and growth.
