Title       : The Direction of Technical Change and Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0095253

Award Number: 0095253
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178112             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daron Acemoglu daron@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There is widespread agreement that technical progress is the engine of economic
              growth.  Despite a large literature investigating determinants of technical
              progress, there is relatively little work on what factors shape the incentives
              to develop different types of technologies.  For example, the general consensus
              among economists is that technical change throughout the past two centuries has
              been labor-augmenting, in the sense that it increased the productivity of labor
              more than that of capital.  Similarly, technical change appears to have been
              skill-biased at least for the past 50 years, in the sense that it has benefited
              skilled and educated workers more than unskilled and less educated workers.
              Despite these well-established patterns, we know little about the reasons why
              technological developments have taken these particular forms. 

This project
              investigates the incentives for firms and the society to develop and implement
              different types of technologies.  It demonstrates that the size of the markets
              that technologies command and relative factor prices shape these incentives:
              there will be more effort devoted to develop technologies that save on more
              expensive factors and command a greater market size.  It shows how these
              factors explain the broad patterns we observe in the data.

The project draws
              implications for this type of technical change for cross-country income
              differences.  For example, skill-biased technical change will increase the
              income gap between rich countries that are abundant in skilled workers and poor
              countries that are scarce in skilled workers.  Similarly, depending on how
              substitutable capital and labor-intensive products are, labor-augmenting
              technical change may also increase this gap.  The project also investigates how
              differences in the scarcity of labor may affect the growth rate of the economy,
              and offers an explanation for why countries with greater labor scarcity may
              have been the first ones to industrialize during the 19th century.

