Title       : The Political Economy and Impact of Race-Specific Policy, 1940-1970
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a0095943

Award Number: 0095943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135279             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Collins william.collins@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project widens the scope of inquiry into twentieth century African-American
              economic progress by examining the political economy that underpinned the
              adoption of a variety of race-related policies and then by measuring the impact
              of those policies.  The investigation focuses on the 1940 to 1970 period when
              anti-discrimination legislation pertaining to labor and housing markets was
              debated and enacted at municipal, state, and federal levels of government.  To
              this point in time, the economics literature has focused primarily on assessing
              the impact of the federal legislation.  Consequently, economists' understanding
              of the emergence of race-specific policies is empirically weak; the effects of
              sub-federal legislation remain under-explored; and the connections between
              African-American mobility, political participation, and economic status remain
              dimly lit.  Thus, economists and policymakers have an incomplete picture of how
              and how much government policy has contributed to the economic status of
              African-Americans.
	The project begins by exploring empirically the economic,
              political, and social forces that combined to promote anti-discrimination
              policies.  This is accomplished by exploiting variation across states and
              cities in the timing of policy adoption, by assembling detailed studies of the
              internal political economy of particular states, and by identifying potential
              interactions across localities and across layers of government (municipal,
              state, and federal).  The project then integrates consideration of the
              policies' origins with evaluations of the policies' impacts on labor and
              housing markets.  Again, variation across locations in the timing of policy
              change provides a useful basis for the measurement of policy impact. 
              Ultimately, the project seeks to achieve a more complete and more coherent
              assessment of the connections between government policy and African-American
              economic progress in the twentieth century.


