Title       : Microstructure and Properties of the Ferromagnetic Shape Memory Alloy Ni2MnGa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0095586

Award Number: 0095586
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285347             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc J. De Graef degraef@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This research aims to get a better understanding of the interactions between the
              magnetic domain walls and the crystallographic intervariant boundaries as well
              as these aspects in various phases in shape memory alloys. The proposed study
              addresses the physical and magnetic microstructure and properties of
              Ni-Mn-Ga-Al alloys, with an emphasis on compositions with near room-temperature
              transformations. The magnetic microstructures are systematically investigated
              by means of Lorentz microscopy augmented by phase reconstruction techniques,
              and domain configurations are analyzed in terms of micromagnetics modeling
              efforts. Microstructural and micromagnetic observations are augmented by
              magnetic property measurements. Single crystals are grown at CMU and at the
              Naval Research Laboratory while polycrystalline bulk and thin film samples are
              produced at CMU. Thin films are grown by means of pulsed laser deposition
              techniques. Since magnetic actuation can provide large displacements with
              relatively simple driving circuitry, future actuator devices may include
              ferromagnetic shape memory films based on the NiMnGa alloy system. Educational
              efforts of the proposed program are directed towards the teaching of advanced
              materials characterization techniques, and involves website development (with
              the aid of undergraduate students) and the creation of a new course in
              collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh.
%%%
Magnetic actuator
              devices could potentially have a large impact on Micro Electro-Mechanical
              Systems (MEMS). Applications of ferromagnetic shape memory alloys in actuators
              will only be possible if an in-depth understanding of the microstructural and
              micromagnetic features is obtained. The primary goal of this research is to
              obtain such an understanding.    

