Title       : Kindling Inclusionary SMET Education for Persons with Disabilities (KISMET
               Project)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  2003   
File        : a0095994

Award Number: 0095994
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447803             (Estimated)
Investigator: David Nast dnast@ccm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Kuperstein  (Principal Investigator former)
              Bette Simmons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : County College of Morris
	      Rt 10 & Center Grove Road
	      Randolph, NJ  07869    201/361-5000

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0095994
Institution: County College of Morris
Principal
              Investigator: Judith Kuperstein
Title: "Kindling Inclusionary SMET
              Education
for Persons with Disabilities" (KISMET)

ABSTRACT

The County
              College of Morris (CCM) is an established leader in associate degree level
              science education.  Annual surveys of SMET graduates from 1994-98 with very
              high response rates show that over 91% report being employed, enrolled in
              4-year institutions, or both.  In 1989, CCM created its Horizons Program
              dedicated to the needs of students with learning disabilities (sld), that has
              grown from 35 participants to over 500 with 38% coming from 9 other counties. 
              CCM has also developed a successful system for providing tailored services to
              students with physical disabilities (spd) and an active Disability Awareness
              Committee.  Adaptive equipment and software are used to make its
              state-of-the-art SMET classrooms and laboratories accessible, and special
              tutoring is provided as needed.  An analysis of the limited individual data
              available on CCM's sld and spd reveals that CCM is providing SMET programs that
              are attractive, but they point out issues that deserve investigation relating
              to noticeable clustering of these students in a very limited number of SMET
              programs. 

The overall goal of the proposed project is to create increased
              inclusionary SMET education opportunities for students with disabilities (swd)
              that should attract more of these students into SMET programs and careers. The
              various components to accomplish this are in-place (i.e. quality SMET programs
              and faculty, an established Tech Prep Consortium of secondary schools, and
              proven assistance programs for swd).  The specific objectives of the proposed
              KISMET project are to:

Upgrade CCM's capacity to provide SMET education to
              students with disabilities by:  
(1) improving articulation and transition
              coordination with secondary schools,  
(2) orienting faculty toward
              inclusionary thinking regarding this population, and  
(3) increasing the
              availability of support services and assistive equipment.
Develop more "swd
              friendly" delivery of SMET curricula, including training faculty in identified
              successful techniques.
Improve the tracking of swd SMET enrollees and their
              progress at CCM as a means to both learn "what works" for this population and
              better serve individual swd.
Increase first-time enrollments, retention and
              persistence to graduation by swd in SMET programs, including decreased
              abandonment of SMET for non-SMET majors.

The project will use a New
              Transition Coordination Outreach Initiative to Secondary Schools, a Special
              Recruitment Effort, a Faculty Task Force to Improve SMET Curricula Delivery,
              Faculty/Staff Development activities, and Additional Direct Assistance. 


