Title       : US-Egypt Workshop: Microbial Ecology, Cairo, Egypt, May 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a0095302

Award Number: 0095302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank B. Dazzo dazzo@pilot.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Tiedje  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : X376      STATE-SCIENTIFIC AFFAIRS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 1305,5944,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0095302
Dazzo

Description:  This award is for support of a US-Egypt Workshop
              on Microbial Ecology to be held in Cairo, Egypt, May 2001.  The US organizers
              are Dr. Frank Dazzo and Dr. James Tiedje, Center for Microbial Ecology,
              Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.  The Egyptian co-organizer
              is Dr. Sherif Eissa, President of the National Research Center in Cairo.  The
              purposes of the workshop are to discuss jointly selected important topics in
              the area of microbial ecology and to identify specific areas where research
              collaboration will be mutually beneficial.  Individual workshop sessions will
              be dedicated to microbial diversity in natural and managed systems, biosafe
              microbial inoculants for agriculture, microbial remediation of pollutants, and
              microbial ecology of extremophiles.  The proceedings will highlight areas
              recommended for collaborative research.
 
Scope:  This award will support a
              US-Egypt workshop in an area that is increasing in importance both in the
              United States and in Egypt.  The understanding of the diversity of
              microorganisms is becoming more important as it is widely recognized that less
              than 0.1% of the microbial diversity on Earth has been discovered.  Moreover,
              how these unknown organisms exist, or coexist, in widely diverse and, in some
              cases, extreme environments is unknown.  An understanding of the metabolic and
              physiological processes, as well as the genetic plasticity and ecological
              requirements which allow these organisms to survive in extreme and
              ever-changing environments is essential for many reasons in both industrially
              developed nations and less industrialized countries.  The workshop participants
              will identify potential cooperative research and joint projects between
              American and Egyptian scientists.  US participants come from several academic
              institutions and include several junior scientists.  The Egyptian participants
              will represent academia, government, and the private sector.  The Egyptian
              coorganizer is the president of the primary government research organization in
              that country.  This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting US-foreign
              scientific collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  Funding for this project
              is provided by the Division of International Programs, through the US-Egypt
              Joint Fund program.
