Title       : Workshop and Related Acctivities for Developing Research Protocols or the Study
               of Global Economic Change; Worcester, Massachusetts; November 2001
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2001     
File        : a0095205

Award Number: 0095205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34926              (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Angel dangel@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Peet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dramatic changes in economic activity around the world and new approaches and
              methods for studying the geographic dimensions of global economic change have
              made recent decades exciting ones for economic geographers.  Much progress has
              resulted from the work of researchers who have sought to employ an enlarged
              concept of the "economic" and build upon new developments in social theory and
              the philosophy of science.  Major questions remain regarding many facets of
              global economic change, however, including expanded analysis of the scalar
              dynamics of global economic change, and especially of economic globalization
              processes per se; integration of nature-society and space-society research
              traditions through the study of global economic change; and increased
              engagement by economic geographers with policy processes, and more generally
              issues of governance.  This project will facilitate communication among
              economic geographers through three related sets of activities designed to
              stimulate and facilitate future work on global economic change.  The three sets
              of activities are (1) the discussion and development of research protocols for
              the study of global economic change, which will be undertaken by a "virtual"
              research community over the Internet; (2) a focused workshop (to be held in
              November 2001 at Clark University in Worcester, Massachusetts) to present
              initial research, discuss use of the protocol, and consider ways to "build up"
              from individual studies to broader synthesizing statements on global economic
              change; and (3) ongoing maintenance of a Web site as a depository and
              clearinghouse for linked research projects.

This project will bring many
              different economic geographers together to follow-up on prior agenda-setting
              activities through more coordinated efforts that assist in the organization of
              research and that provide feedback on initial studies by both new and
              established researchers.  In additional to addressing issues of theoretical and
              conceptual framing, the network of scholars who will engage in this activity
              will address methodological and institutional obstacles by developing research
              protocols that facilitate comparative research on the complex, multi-scalar
              processes associated with global economic change as well as the diversity of
              attendant geographical outcomes.  Through these activities, more meaningful
              research on the geographic dimensions of global economic change will be evident
              through both collaborative research and through more meaningful studies by
              individual researchers.

