Title       : Molecular Machinery of Cell Plate Formation in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  2002       
File        : a0095112

Award Number: 0095112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Herbert                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Desh Pal S. Verma   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The architecture of a plant organ primarily depends primarily upon the plane of
              cell division.  The orientation of cell division is determined during the G2
              phase of the cell cycle and is followed at cytokinesis by building a cell plate
              in the center of the phragmoplast, a cytoskeleton held structure .  The cell
              plate is built by the fusion of Gogi-derived vesicles but the detailed
              mechanism how this structure is formed and how polysaccharaide biosynthesis
              commences is not known.  Understanding the two key events, i.e. fusion of cell
              plate vesicles and the activation of callose synthase, during cell plate
              formation is of paramount importance.  The PI has earlier demonstrated that a
              novel dynamin-like protein, Phragmoplastin, is involved in building the cell
              plate.  Phragmoplastin appears to generate"dumbbell-shaped"
              vesicle-tubule-vesicle (VTV) structures which fuse at their ends to create
              tubulo vesicle-network.  They have isolated two proteins that interact with
              phragmoplastin.  These are cell plate-specific callose synthase and a novel
              UDP-glucose transferase and have been able to purify callose synthase complex. 
              This project is aimed at determining the precise role of Phragmoplastin by
              measuring its GTPase activity and its regulation by calcium ions and
              phospholipids.  The regulation of phragmoplastin will be determined by
              measuring its phosphorylation state and GTPase activity during cytokinesis. 
              They have recently cloned the gene encoding the cell plate-specific callose
              synthase (CalS), a key enzyme involved in building the cell plate, and will
              study regulation of this enzyme, including its interaction with Phragmoplastin,
              and UDP-glucosyl transferase (UDP-GT).  The isolation of callose synthase gene
              has allowed them to establish that callose synthase and cellulose synthases are
              two separate enzymes.  An understanding of the mechanism of cell plate
              formation may help modify the plant architecture, and may allow to regulate
              polysaccharide biosynthesis, including both callose and cellulose.  Since cell
              plate formation is unique to plants, this study has potential biotechnology
              applications by developing herbicides with cell plate as a target to control
              plant growth, and modify a plant organ or plant architecture at-large to
              increase plant productivity. Thus this study has application in both
              agriculture and forest industries.
