Title       : International Trade and Industrial Evolution: An Empirical Framework for Policy
               Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0095574

Award Number: 0095574
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $383031             (Estimated)
Investigator: James R. Tybout jxt32@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. Roberts  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Industrial sectors are continually evolving in terms of the variety of
              products they offer, the mix
of their active producers, the prices these
              producers charge, and their productive efficiency. Using
plant-level panel
              data from developing countries, this project characterizes the way that
              these
evolutionary processes respond to trade policy reforms and to changes in
              the exchange rate
regime. The analysis is based on structural models of
              industrial evolution that highlight producer
heterogeneity, firm-specific
              productivity shocks, new firms' start-up costs, and uncertainty about
the
              future. By moving away from representative plant analysis, the project captures
              many micro
features of industrial sector responses that the existing trade
              literature misses.

The basic model used in this project quantifies an
              industry's dynamic response to changes in the
intensity of import competition.
              It characterizes the time paths of firm-level capital gains and
losses, entry
              and exit patterns, price-cost mark-ups, job creation and destruction,
              average
productivity, productivity dispersion, and the menu of product
              varieties available to consumers.
Generalizations of the basic model are also
              analyzed. These allow firms to export some of their
output when it is
              profitable for them to do so, and/or to make investments that expand
              their
capacity or imperfectly control their productivity shocks. The
              generalized models address
additional issues, including the question of how
              import competition or exporting opportunities
might induce or discourage
              investment and productivity growth. All versions of the model
quantify the
              role of expectations and policy credibility in shaping responses to policy
              reforms.

The models are econometrically fit to large data sets that the
              principal investigators have acquired
from Colombia, Morocco, and Taiwan. For
              each country, these multi-year data sets contain
detailed plant- or firm-level
              information on sales revenues and input costs. Augmented by data on
tariffs,
              the exchange rate, and the total value of imports, this cost and revenue
              information
supports estimation of the basic model. For the extended models,
              data on export revenues and on
productivity-enhancing expenditures (like fixed
              investment, worker training and technician
salaries) are also used.

The
              methodological contribution of the project is to adapt applied industrial
              evolution models to
an open economy setting, and to implement these models
              using available micro data. In so doing
the project breaks new ground
              concerning the measurement of sunk start-up costs and
              firm-specific
productivity trajectories. The project also facilitates policy
              debates by quantifying many
dimensions of industrial responses to policy
              reforms in a single integrated framework. The
consequences of commercial
              policy reforms that are of interest to business and labor (changes
              in
profitability, capital gains or losses, and job creation or job
              destruction) are measured and
compared to the consequences of interest to
              consumers (changes in prices and the available menu
of product varieties).
