Title       : Small Sample Refinements of Moment Based Estimators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0095132

Award Number: 0095132
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Guido M. Kuersteiner gkuerste@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Moment based estimators such as Generalized Method of Moment estimators (GMM)
              are routinely used in estimation of economic models. This project analyzes the
              small sample properties of such estimators. Approximate formulas for small
              sample bias and variance are sued to evaluate different estimation methods.
              Bias corrections based on these formulas are obtained to improve the small
              sample behavior of existing procedures.

Typically, economic models imply an
              infinite number of moment conditions. A selection rule has to be adopted to
              decide which moments to match. An early literature on efficient GMM estimation
              established that in prinicple all available moments should be matched
              asymptotically in order to achieve the most efficient use of the information
              contained in the data. More recent research on the other hand, has found that
              inclusion of more and more moment conditions usually is associated with bad
              small sample performance.

The research will include extensive simulation
              experiments that will shed light on the quality of higher order approximations
              and the performance of different refinements in small samples. Ultimately this
              line of research is intended to give applied researchers guidance in choosing
              the most appropriate statistical tools for a given modeling situation.


