Title       : Primary Production Rates in the N. Pacific from Oxygen Isotope Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  2001     
File        : a0095534

Award Number: 0095534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $370000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul D. Quay pdquay@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1389,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0095534

In this study, researchers at the University of
              Washington will determine the in-situ rates of gross and  net primary
              productivity in the North Pacific Ocean using measurements of the isotopic
              composition and saturation level of dissolved oxygen.  Marine productivity
              affects a wide range of fundamental properties of the earth  from, for example,
              the concentration of CO2 and O2 in the atmosphere to the magnitude  of
              potential fisheries harvests. Within the near future, potential climate
              change-induced  alterations of ocean productivity could feedback into changes
              in the rate of anthropogenic  CO2 build up in the atmosphere. All in all our
              ability to quantify rates of marine  productivity is critical to our
              understanding of how earth's carbon cycle has changed in  the past and will
              change in the future.  

Primary production (PP) rates in the ocean have
              historically been determined  from rate measurements made in bottles. However,
              bottle measurements of PP suffer to  an unknown extent from the inequality
              between in vitro and in situ conditions.  Furthermore 14C uptake derived
              estimates of PP, by far the most common in vitro  method, suffers an additional
              uncertainty about whether the rates represent gross or net  PP. In a classic
              comparison, estimates of carbon export rates derived indirectly from 
              subsurface estimates of oxygen utilization rates were twice the 14C-based
              measurements  of primary production rates (Jenkins and Goldman, 1985). These
              uncertainties  emphasize the need for PP rate determinations using methods that
              do not rely on bottle  incubations.  

Recently a new technique has been
              developed to estimate both gross and net PP in  the ocean (Luz and Barkan,
              2000). It depends on extremely precise measurements of the  isotopic
              composition of dissolved O2. The advantage of this method is that it does not 
              require bottle incubations.   In this study, the principal investigator will
              use this oxygen isotope method to determine in situ rates of gross  and net PP
              in the N. Pacific and compare these rates to bottle measurements of PP made 
              using 14C and 18O labeling techniques. The research team will make these
              measurements at two  JGOFS time series sites in the subtropical (Station ALOHA)
              and subpolar (Ocean Station Papa)  North Pacific. Both these sites have 10 or
              more years of 14C-based productivity data with  which to compare in situ PP
              estimates determined by this new method. The time history of PP rate 
              measurements at these two sites, the several estimates of carbon export made at
              these  sites over the years (e.g., sediment traps, O2 budgets, DIC budgets, 234
              Th budgets, etc.),  and the contrast in biogeochemical regimes of these two
              sites (high vs. low nutrient) make  the North Pacific an excellent choice for
              extending the application of the oxygen isotope  method.  



 

