Title       : Development of Ultra-High Resolution in Vivo NMR Methods for Functional
               Molecular Physiology Studies in Mouse Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2002        
File        : a0095173

Award Number: 0095173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474767             (Estimated)
Investigator: D.S. Fahmeed Hyder fahmeed.hyder@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for development of hardware and software needed for
              ultra-high resolution functional magnetic resonance imaging (f-MRI) of the 
              mouse brain. Efforts will focus on design of miniature radio-frequency coils
              and on design of pulse sequences tailored for the unusually small volume
              element of the mouse brain.  Additional work will implement fMRI data
              processing methods for time-domain analysis and reproducibility optimization to
              create maps representing changes in functional neuroenergetics at both high
              spatial and temporal resolution and in both normal and transgenic mice. The
              proposed tools will facilitate functional molecular physiology studies of a
              type not now possible with the mouse. Such studies are possible with larger
              animals such as the rat where the ability of MRI and related techniques to
              monitor cerebral energetics and hemodynamics has shown that high resolution
              maps of cerebral energetics provide a direct measure of neuronal function. The
              existence of  techniques that can be used to produce gene knockouts and
              transgenic animals has made the mouse an attractive target for studies of
              organismal function at all levels, from that of the gene to that of the whole
              organ. The ability to combine use of the two technologies should lead to
              significant advances in detailed understanding of the physiology of the mouse
              brain and, by extension, brains of other mammals.


