Title       : Predicting Social Movement Success: Woman Suffrage Successes and Failures in the
               United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0095224

Award Number: 0095224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100048             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie Cornwall marie_cornwall@byu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brigham Young University
	      D 341 Asb
	      Provo, UT  846021043    801/378-6177

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine the success of the woman suffrage movement. 
              Supplementing data previously collected for the 22 western states with data
              from the 26 States located east of the Mississippi River, the project will
              identify factors associated with suffrage successes in the West and the
              subsequent diffusion of suffrage initiatives throughout the other states.  More
              specifically, the study will explore the influence on suffrage success of
              organizational forms and characteristics (e.g., constitutional conventions and
              territorial founding dates), changing gender norms and access to the public
              sphere, diffusion and legitimation, and social movement organizing. Data will
              be collected for the eastern states by visiting state archives, reading
              legislative journals and proceedings of state constitutional conventions, and
              collecting secondary histories of the suffrage movement.  In addressing this
              question, the project will contribute to the understanding of social movement
              resource mobilization and political opportunity, incorporating them within new
              institutionalist paradigms of political science, economics, and sociology. The
              study also incorporates current gender theories that view gender as more than
              an inborn feature of individuals. Gender is a social institution that orders
              the social processes of everyday life. As such, gender is incorporated into the
              new institutionalist paradigm as both constraining and providing opportunities
              for action.
