Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA): Synchronization Approaches for
               Managing Distributed Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0095527

Award Number: 0095527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amr El Abbadi amr@cs.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Divyakant Agrawal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 5918,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              0095527
El Abbadi

This three-year award for U.S.-France cooperative research
              involves Amr El Abbadi, Divyakant Agrawal of the University of Santa Barbara
              and Jean-Michel Helary, Achour Mostefaoui, and Michel Raynal of the IRISA
              project at the Institute for Research in Informatics and Applied Mathematics
              (INRIA) and University of Rennes in Rennes, France. The US and French research
              teams will address issues in the management of data in distributed systems. 
              They will explore distributed data warehouse problems and problems of 
              replication.  In the former, local data are maintained and updated in various
              sites.  A data warehouse is then required to maintain aggregate information
              summaries.  Information is incorporated into the warehouse in an incremental
              manner, and message passing is used to calculate the incremental changes.  In
              the replication problem, various copies of different objects are stored on
              sites in a distributed system.  The goal is to execute transactions locally at
              each site, and then propagate the updates while maintaining the ability to
              serialize.  

The US team at Santa Barbara brings to this collaboration
              expertise in the area of distributed databases and replication.  This is
              complemented by the IRISA/INRIA team's expertise in solving distributed systems
              problems using causality, checkpointing and consensus. The project will advance
              understanding of methods and techniques for managing large amounts of data in
              distributed systems. It may result in significant efficiencies and better
              understanding of the interplay between ordering of events and semantics of
              events in distributed systems.

This award represents the US side of a joint
              proposal to the NSF and the French National Institute for Research in
              Informatics and Applied Mathematics (INRIA).  NSF will cover travel funds and
              living expenses for the US investigators and graduate student.  INRIA will
              support the visits of French researchers and graduate student to the United
              States. 

