Title       : Turbulence and Transport in Magnetized Filamentary Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2002       
File        : a0095363

Award Number: 0095363
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kile B. Baker                           
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George Morales morales@physics.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Maggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will study wave turbulence and associated transport of heat
              and mass in filamentary structures in magnetized plasmas.  Filamentary
              structures are encountered in many space plasmas, including the solar corona
              and the auroral ionosphere.  In general, filamentary structures are a
              manifestation of self-organization in magnetized plasmas and their presence can
              have a profound impact on the global transport properties of the medium.  The
              methodology is to study the dynamics of temperature, density and current
              filaments under controlled conditions in the laboratory and to relate the
              results to theoretical and modeling studies that permit the generalization of
              the observed behavior to situations encountered in naturally occurring plasmas.
               Experiments are to be performed in the Large Plasma Device (LAPD) at UCLA. 
              The experimental program focuses on narrow magnetic field-aligned structures in
              density, temperature, and current created by various techniques.  The unique
              environment available in the new LAPD device for the exploration of these
              topics will allow for a critical scrutiny of the models used to interpret data
              acquired by a new generation of spacecraft having increased spatial and
              temporal resolution.  The research will shed light on problems related to basic
              plasma physics.  Plasmas are ubiquitous in space and have many practical
              applications.  Understanding the behavior of natural and artificially created
              plasmas is essential to solving fundamental scientific problems as well as
              improving the performance of plasma-based systems on earth.
