Title       : Information-Based Complexity of Multivariate Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2001        
File        : a0095709

Award Number: 0095709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255209             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grzegorz Wasilkowski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 2865      GRAPH & SYMB & GEO COMPUTATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              
Many multivariate problems of practical interests are intractable in the worst
              case setting. Such intractability could be removed by either identifying new
              properties (i.e., classes) that allow for efficient algorithms or by switching
              to the average (or probabilistic) settings. This is often referred to as
              breaking intractability.  A substantial part of the proposed research will deal
              with breaking intractability of a number of important problems. This will lead
              to deeper knowledge of the complexities of multivariate problems and will
              result in new efficient algorithms for a host of important problems.
              

Related to the average case study are path integrals.  The research will be
              a continuation of a recently initiated study on the complexity of path
              integration and will provide additional complexity bounds and new efficient
              algorithms. 

A number of important problems deal with classes of functions
              of unbounded domains. However, there are but few corresponding complexity
              results and, in practice, commonly used algorithms are ad hoc and are not
              optimal. Significant part of the proposed research will deal with problems
              defined for classes of functions with unbounded domains; both the worst case
              and the average case settings will be studied. This will enrich understanding
              of the complexity of such problems and will provide new algorithms that are
              optimal (or almost optimal). 

The theoretical work will yield new and
              efficient algorithms for a host of important problems. These algorithms will be
              developed and thoroughly tested. Graduate students will be involved in both
              theoretical and development phases of the research. 


