Title       : Clearinghouse on Mathematics, Engineering, Technology and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 15,  2002  
File        : a0095948

Award Number: 0095948
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Arthur Karshmer                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198978             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry G. Lang HGL9008@RIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # HRD-0095948  
Institution: Rochester Institute of
              Technology
Principal Investigator: Harry G. Lang
Title: "Clearinghouse on
              Mathematics, Engineering, Technology and Science (COMETS): A Comprehensive
              Resource in the Education of Deaf Students"  

ABSTRACT

The proposed
              Clearinghouse On Mathematics, Engineering, Technology, and Science (COMETS)
              will serve as a major resource for information dissemination.  The Project will
              also build a network of many professionals who will use the resources for
              systemic reform, and will evaluate its information dissemination strategies
              with these audiences.  The goals of the project are to: 1) develop a
              comprehensive resource to provide synchronous information through interactive
              components to eight target audiences of professionals, parents, and students
              available on the World Wide Web and in print: 2) field-test the applicability
              of the information and the dissemination strategies in both formal and informal
              professional development activities; and 3) develop a network for systemic
              reform through information dissemination in the education of deaf students in
              science, education, mathematics, and technology.

The revolution in computer
              technologies shows promise for enhancing information dissemination to students
              who are deaf or hard of hearing and the professionals responsible for their
              education.  In particular, the World Wide Web has been shown to be successful
              in an experimental prototype project as part of a previous NSF-funded teacher
              preparation project.  Abundant evidence shows that many of the needs of
              professionals serving deaf students in science, mathematics, engineering, and
              technology (SMET) areas can be met through quality, interactive resources that
              are made available on the World Wide Web.  

With quality control associated
              with individual and institutional authority, the Internet can be a credible
              change agent in an information dissemination program for systemic reform in
              science and mathematics for deaf students.  COMETS, based at the National
              Technical Institute for the Deaf (NTID), a college of Rochester Institute of
              Technology (RIT), is an interactive Web site.  Project staff will present
              educational research findings and draw implications for teaching, curriculum
              development, and the provision of support services in SMET areas.  The
              application of the information will be field tested in formal professional
              development activities.  The quality of the information to be shared will be
              high, extracted from periodicals refereed by national experts.  The project
              will also include a comprehensive evaluation of information dissemination and
              the findings regarding the most effective evaluation strategies will be shared
              with others through presentations and publications.  An existing network will
              be expanded from approximately 400 teachers to include administrators, support
              service professionals, parents, and representatives from organizations critical
              to systemic reform in the education of deaf students.  The acronym "COMETS"
              presents an appropriate metaphor.  As with the so-named astronomical bodies,
              this project will leave a trail of material and energy which will be available
              for a long time to come.  

