Title       : Benthos of the Cariaco Basin: Is the Eukaryotic Community Similar to that of the
               Santa Barbara Basin?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2001      
File        : a0095564

Award Number: 0095564
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68315              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan M. Bernhard joan.bernhard@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 501
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Benthos of the Cariaco Basin:
Is the Eukaryotic Community Similar to that of
              the Santa Barbara Basin?

The Cariaco Basin, the second largest known anoxic
              body of water known on Earth, has been extensively studied for its water-column
              processes and sedimentary record, but virtually nothing is known about the
              benthos of the oxygen-depleted and anoxic regions of the basin. An abundant
              community of metazoans and protists has been described from the sedimentary
              anoxic-oxic interface in the Santa Barbara Basin, and this study will examine
              the possibility that the Cariaco Basin supports a similarly rich benthic
              consortium. The broad objective of the proposed project is to describe the
              eukaryotic benthos of the Cariaco Basin.  We will: 1) quantify the eukaryotic
              community using Percoll gradient extraction and fluorogenic staining; 2)
              examine the eukaryotes for prokaryotic associates using DAPI staining and
              ultrastructural examination; 3) identify the benthic foraminiferal assemblage
              using various viability indicators  (i.e., fluorogenic probes, ultrastructure,
              conventional rose Bengal staining); and 4) determine changes in the benthic
              foraminiferal community composition across the anoxic / oxic interface. These
              specific aims will be addressed using material collected on one short cruise to
              sample the Cariaco Basin using the Venezuelan ship RV Hermano Gines in May
              2001. Replicate multicores will be taken at each of 8 sites in the northeastern
              sector, at one site located in the eastern sub-basin, and at one site on the
              saddle between the two sub-basins. Bottom-water oxygen concentrations will be
              determined with microwinkler analysis. Results will impact the areas of benthic
              ecology, biodiversity and biogeography, and paleoceanography. Cell biology and
              evolutionary biology may also benefit if novel symbioses or adaptations to this
              extreme environment are identified.

