Title       : Photochemical & Related Thermal Mechanisms of Transition Metal Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2002   
File        : a0095144

Award Number: 0095144
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $621500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Ford ford@chem.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510305   Photocatalysis                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program provides
              continued support for photochemical research by Dr. Peter C. Ford,Chemistry
              Department, University of California, Santa Barbara.  The photochemical
              mechanisms of nitric oxide (NO) generation as well as the dynamics of thermal
              reactions between NO and metal centers of bioinorganic interest will be
              studied.  Flash and continuous photolysis of various mononuclear metal nitrosyl
              and metal nitrito complexes will be conducted, placing particular emphasis on
              the molecular design of compounds that may serve as precursors for the
              photochemical delivery of NO to desired targets on demand.  "Antennas"
              constructed of porphyrins or other chromophores that absorb red light will be
              coupled to the precursors to allow for low-energy excitation of the metal
              nitrosyl part of the compound by single photon or two photon absorption
              mechanisms.  The chemistry will also be extended to systems that generate
              nitrosyl hydride (HNO) and nitroxyl anion (NO-), two species that also may have
              biological importance.

When light is absorbed by a molecule, the energy that
              the molecule acquires sometimes initiates a chemical reaction.  In this case, a
              precursor molecule disintegrates to release nitric oxide (NO) plus a
              metal-containing byproduct.  Because NO is a bioregulator of the cardiovascular
              system as well as participating in immune responses, the controlled release of
              this molecule has many potential medical benefits.  This fundamental study may
              lead to new strategies for photodynamic therapy and other uses of nitric oxide.
               Several graduate students will be trained in this important new area of
              inorganic chemistry.
