Title       : Optimized Synthetic Strategies, Structures, Properties and Modification of Open
               Framework Oxides with High Ion Exchange Capacity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 4,  2002    
File        : a0095633

Award Number: 0095633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439103             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Parise john.parise@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project focuses on microporous and zeolitic materials with negatively
              charged frameworks, regularly spaced pores and channels of molecular dimension
              that possess  cation-exchange properties that can sometimes discriminate
              between ions and/or gases based upon size and shape. Apart from formulating
              strategies for the discovery of new materials with these characteristics, it is
              important to understand the structural basis for any selectivity.  Recent
              structural results, obtained using synchrotron radiation, suggest strategies to
              increase ion exchange capacity.  It is hypothesized that low valent metals can
              replace common higher valent ones in framework structures, lithium for silicon
              for example, thereby producing highly negatively charged frameworks with
              enhanced ion exchange capacity and selectivity.  The crystal chemistry of
              lithium makes it ideal in this regard and investigations of several new
              lithosilicates indicate a rich structural chemistry. Syntheses to expand the
              range of materials with Li in the framework will be pursued, including attempts
              to tailor the exchange properties of "pure" silica and aluminosilicate
              molecular sieves. This will be coupled with studies of the relationships
              between the sorbtive and catalytic properties of these new materials.  An
              extension of Li-substitution into tetrahedral networks is the substitution of
              Na into octahedral networks.  This effectively lowers the cationic charge on
              the framework and increases the number of extraframework cations and so ion
              exchange capacity.  The structure of the first example of this synthetic
              philosophy is an Octahedral Molecular Sieves (OMS) based on the chemistry
              Na4[Na8Nb12.8Ti3.2]O44.8(OH)3.2o8H2O.  We are planning to expand the catalogue
              of such materials and to seek the structural basis for their selectivity toward
              strontium. 

These classes of materials are potentially useful in separation,
              contaminant removal and sequestration applications. They are important to
              environmental technologies that improve remediation  and mitigation, and
              decrease future cleanup costs by emphasizing pollution avoidance and novel
              approaches to the measurement, assessment, and feedback for the optimization of
              pollution avoidance and prevention.  It will also impact industrial ecology by
              providing materials that can be applied to improve manufacturing processes and
              their environmental impact. Students trained in these areas of high-technology
              will likely be very competitive in the future job market.

