Title       : FASEB-sponsored Research Conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure being held in
               Snowmass Village, Colorado on August 19-24, 2000.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a0095241

Award Number: 0095241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Victoria Lundblad lundblad@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Progress in our understanding of yeast chromosome structure, and the mechanisms
              and control of chromosome replication and segregation continues to proceed at a
              rapid pace.  To bring together leading and new scientists that work in this
              area, The Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology (FASEB)
              will sponsor a research conference on Yeast Chromosome Structure, Replication
              and Segregation to be held August 19-24, 2000, at Snowmass Village, Colorado. 
              This conference will represent the sixth iteration of what has become the most
              successful and important meeting of this field.  This conference succeeds in
              several essential areas.  First and foremost, the findings presented are always
              on the "cutting edge", as each of the five previous meetings have upheld a
              strong tradition of presenting primarily unpublished results.  Second, the
              meeting is attended by most of the leaders in the yeast chromosome transmission
              field, and in striking contrast to many meetings, Principal Investigators are
              present and actively participate for the entire meeting.  The conference also
              provides a good balance of students, postdoctoral fellows, junior and senior
              researchers, with an informal atmosphere that contributes greatly to
              interactions between younger and older scientists.  For students, this serves
              as an essential aspect of their scientific education, and for Principal
              Investigators, the conference keeps them abreast of the latest findings and
              stimulates collaborative efforts.  Participation of women and minorities, both
              as organizers and as session speakers has been excellent for the past five
              meetings, and remains a strength of this current meeting.  Finally, this is the
              only conference that is specifically devoted to this topic.  Therefore, for
              scientists working on chromosome structure and transmission, this meeting has
              served as a critical vehicle for the dissemination of important findings and a
              major source for generating scientific interactions.  The objectives for the
              2000 meeting are to bring together both leaders in the field as well as new
              investigators, to continue the extremely high level of excitement and
              scientific excellence that has characterized the past five conferences. 
