Title       : Entrepreneurship in the Information Age: Beyond Craftsman Tradition and the
               Future of Japan's Capitalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  2001  
File        : a0095977

Award Number: 0095977
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95876              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuko Aoyama yaoyama@clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project explores critical, yet poorly understood aspects of Japan's
              entrepreneurship as the economy shifts from industrial to the informational
              economy.  Although entrepreneurship has been a focus of numerous studies in
              economic development, there is no consensus on its definition, process of
              formation, and how it can be effectively promoted.   Furthermore,
              entrepreneurship is seldom examined with a cross-national perspective, and as a
              result, important foundations, such as regional tradition, cultural norms, and
              business practices, have largely been ignored as drivers of entrepreneurship. 
              This project addresses the changing role of regional-cultural contexts for
              entrepreneurship, through historical as well as contemporary studies of three
              distinctive regions in Japan.  The project seeks to 1) examine risk-handling
              and incentive-generating characteristics of entrepreneurs in the information
              sector; 2) analyze how different regional contexts (industrial networks, social
              interactions, and cultural practices) function as catalysts for entrepreneurs;
              and 3) assess the role of entrepreneurship promotion policy for the 21st
              Century.  The project will involve interviews of firm mangers and governmental
              officials in each region, and the data will be analyzed with a focus on those
              factors relating to the socio-cultural foundations of entrepreneurship and the
              geographical ties to the region.

The research will provide empirical
              evidence that could lead to the development of a theoretical framework that
              integrates economic and cultural incentives in the study of entrepreneurship. 
              The project will also generate a foundation for comparative research on the
              development of informational economy between regions and countries.  In
              practical terms, understanding the dynamics of entrepreneurship in the world's
              second largest economy has implications on the growth and stability of the
              global economy.

