Title       : Impacts of Public Information Infrastructure Access
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0095191

Award Number: 0095191
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185354             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Shapira ps25@prism.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Youtie  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project investigates the impacts of public provision of information
              infrastructure on the diversification of online population, the adoption of
              information technology by population segments without previous Internet
              experience, and the development of skills and networks which can assist small
              city communities in an increasingly information-driven economy.  The project
              will address these topics through an assessment and evaluation of online usage,
              non-usage and consequences in the City of LaGrange, Georgia. Through public
              provision of easy-to-use Internet access, the city aims to increase its online
              population and overcome economic, social and psychological barriers to online
              take-up.  The city also seeks to spur a greater proportion of its residents to
              develop information access and Internet skills that can contribute to its new
              information-based economic strategies.  The project will analyze and assess the
              effects of LaGrange's ambitious information infrastructure initiative using
              varied methodological approaches.  A panel of household users and nonusers of
              the WorIdGate public information utility will be tracked and comparisons will
              be made with online users in the city who access the Internet in other ways. 
              Particular focus will be placed on understanding effects among users with no
              prior Internet experience, versus those with prior experience and nonusers who
              did not take up the service.  Detailed case studies will be conducted with a
              smaller subset of households to support in-depth learning of how the system is
              used and to guide subsequent questionnaire design. Interviews will also be
              conducted with city officials, community and business leaders, and the
              information utility managers to probe the city's decision-making processes,
              expectations, experience, and learning in offering a public information
              utility.  There is an increasing concern in the United States about people and
              communities who are on the wrong side of the "digital divide" and, in response,
              a growing number of experiments to find ways to bridge this.  In this context,
              the project will provide guidance for decision-making regarding the
              development, deployment and use of information technology.  The project will
              allow a detailed exploration of current, divergent theories and perspectives on
              the effect and benefits of information technologies.  Results will include
              presentations and publications to academic, policymaking, and practitioner
              communities.
