Title       : Subterranean Estuarine Chemistry: The Role of the Fe/Mn Redox Cycles on the
               Transport of U, Ra and Th Isotopes to the Coastal Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  2001     
File        : a0095384

Award Number: 0095384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284803             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew A. Charette mcharette@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward R. Sholkovitz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0095384

Two geochemists at the Woods Hole Oceanographic
              Institution will conduct a study to gain a better understanding of the chemical
              transformations that take  place in a subterranean estuary.  Groundwater,
              nearly 97% of the Earth's freshwater reservoir,  may contribute significant
              fluxes of dissolved chemical species to the oceans via transport  through
              "subterranean estuaries".  Subterranean estuaries are mixing regimes of
              seawater and fresh ground water that underlie many coastal regions). Since
              little is known  about chemical reactions and fluxes associated with submarine
              groundwater, quantifying its  impact on the coastal oceans requires a focused
              and in-depth study of an enclosed estuary that receives a well documented flux
              of ground waters.  The investigators have identified Waquoit Bay, Massachusetts
              -- part of  the National Estuarine Research Reserve system -- as an ideal
              location for an initial study of these  processes. 

The project will consist
              of two parts:

 o Establishment of the temporal variability in chemical
              compositions across the subterranean estuary.  External forcing functions such
              as tidal-pumping as well as rainfall recharge of the aquifer  will likely play
              important roles in the location and structure of the groundwater/seawater 
              interface. 

 o Study of the geochemical reactions and transformations in
              subterranean estuaries of three  important classes of elements - (1) redox
              sensitive elements (Fe, Mn and U), (2) scavenged  elements (P, Th isotopes) and
              (3) mobile elements (Ra isotopes).  How significant are the  addition and
              removal processes operating on these three classes of elements in subterranean 
              estuaries?  Is the formation of an "Fe/Mn Curtain" in the sediments of a
              subterranean estuary  an important process with respect to the transport and
              transformation of scavenged and  mobile elements? Particular focus will be on
              the redox chemistries of Fe and Mn and on the  systematics of U-Th-Ra series
              isotopes.  

This project combines relevance to important societal problems
              with the study of  fundamental oceanographic and geochemical problems
              associated with the transport and  reactivity in a complex interface. 
              






