Title       : Collaborative Research: An Experimental Approach to Organizational Culture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0095570

Award Number: 0095570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $129973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberto Weber rweber@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Organizational culture is a familiar concept to both researchers and
managers. 
              It is frequently cited as the source of a firm's efficiency or as
the cause of
              problems in firm adaptation or mergers.  However, in spite of
its familiarity,
              it has been difficult to capture exactly what
organizational culture is and
              how it affects firms.  We propose a series of
studies that use an experimental
              procedure to create something very similar
to culture in the laboratory.  The
              basic elements of culture, based on
common threads in the research literature,
              are that it is something that
arises through shared history and understanding
              between members of an
organization, that it depends on the organization's
              history and can
therefore vary greatly between firms, and that it allows
              members of a firm
to coordinate activity and therefore perform more
              efficiently.

Our experiments use a task that allows "firms" consisting of
              two or more
subjects to develop culture through repeated interaction.  In
              our
experiments, language serves as a metaphor for culture - subjects need
              to
develop a way to refer to unknown and complex objects using simple,
              short
phrases in order to perform a task quickly.  These "cultures" that
              subjects
develop end up being based on the group's shared history in
              performing the
task (what aspects of the objects did they focus on
              initially?), they end up
being idiosyncratic and varying greatly between
              groups (as an example: one
group came to refer to an object as "Macarena"
              while another group referred
to the same object as "coffee cups"), and they
              end up allowing the groups to
coordinate and improve efficiency (the one word
              descriptions allowed groups
to jointly identify objects quickly).

Our
              initial experiments investigate what happens when two groups that
              have
developed culture independently - and have become efficient at
              performing
the task - are merged.  Not surprisingly, differences in cultures
              lead to
decreases in the efficiency with which the merged group performs the
              task.
In addition, subjects are not aware of how difficult it will be to
              integrate
even these simple cultures, leading them to overvalue the merged
              firm.
Finally, once culture conflict arises, subjects blame the source of
              the
failures on incompetence on the part of other subjects rather than on
              the
difficulty in integrating different cultures.  Future experiments
              will
further explore the last phenomenon by more closely examining the extent
              to
which subjects place the blame for merger failure on others rather than
              on
culture incompatibility.  One implication is that managers may
              fire
employees too frequently, blaming low performance on their
              incompetence
rather than on the need for cultural integration.  We will also
              explore how
cultural integration is related to whether members of an
              organization have
common or opposed incentives.

