Title       : Inflation and Policy Rules
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2003      
File        : a0095766

Award Number: 0095766
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $177584             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marco Bassetto bassetto@atlas.socsci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The determination of the price level and inflation has long been a central
              concern for macroeconomists. This reflects the widespread view that the control
              of inflation is important for economic welfare. In view of its central
              importance, it is perhaps surprising that the basic determinants of the price
              level and inflation continue to be under dispute. Recently, this dispute has
              become more heated with the arrival of the "fiscal theory of the price level"
              which puts a new twist on the debate. The traditional, monetarist view has
              highlighted the importance of an independent central bank and has held that
              high inflation can only be ultimately fueled by high rates of money growth. In
              this view, the fiscal policy is important, but mainly so because excessive
              deficits may eventually force the central bank to monetize. According to the
              fiscal theory, the government can instead target directly the price level using
              fiscal variables alone, such as the present value of future surpluses and the
              current level of nominal debt.

These two views stem from important
              differences in the equilibrium concept different researchers have in mind. The
              failure to reconcile these differences follows from the fact that a key feature
              of the economy, the price-formation mechanism, is left implicit. This project
              uses game theory to fully specify how prices arise from the actions of the
              government and the private players in the economy, without resorting to the
              fiction of a Walrasian auctioneer. In this environment, it is plainly
              impossible for the government to commit in advance to a sequence of primary
              surpluses/deficits that is independent of the actions of the private sector,
              except in a very special case. However, this negative conclusion on the key
              assumption of the fiscal theory of the price level does not extend to its key
              result: the price level can still be pinned down by the fiscal policy. When
              money is explicitly modeled, the traditional result linking inflation to high
              money growth rates is restored; however, the fiscal theory leads to a unique
              equilibrium even with an interest rate peg, which was previously commonly
              associated with price indeterminacy.

Spelling out completely the assumptions
              on the government strategy that lead to a fiscal theory of the price level is
              very important for policy advice. Previous papers on the subject claimed that
              price stability could be achieved by a firm commitment by the government to
              ignore any debt crisis and pursue a policy of exogenous and fixed
              surpluses/deficits. This project shows that in a debt crisis a fiscal
              adjustment is forced onto the government. The appropriate advice for achieving
              price determinacy through the fiscal side of the economy calls for more taxes
              during the crisis without any tax cut ever. Such a strategy would make the
              expectations of a debt crisis self-defeating, but both the ability to commit to
              it and the credibility of such a commitment might be much more problematic than
              what is needed for the policy rule advocated by previous papers.

From a
              theoretical perspective, the approach developed here is valuable for a wider
              class of problems. This project shows that there is a fundamental tension
              between the description of a policy rule, which specifies how the government
              should react under all contingencies, and the definition of a competitive
              equilibrium used in macroeconomics, that only describes equilibrium allocations
              and prices. A game-theoretic description of the economy can thus be useful to
              revisit the vast literature that studies how the adoption of a particular
              policy rule can avoid or cause equilibrium indeterminacy.

