Title       : Hydroecological Organization and Dynamics in Urbanizing Watersheds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2002     
File        : a0095796

Award Number: 0095796
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276222             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Band lband@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The linkages between the mechanisms and pathways of water movement through
              landscape, and the human/ecosystem processes controlling terrestrial-aquatic
              nutrient loading, have not been clearly understood.  This area of research has
              been cited as a priority need in geographic, hydrologic, and ecosystem
              sciences.  This project specifically assesses and quantifies the role played by
              the spatial organization and connectivity of watershed hydrologic and ecosystem
              form and process on the dynamics of nitrogen cycling and export in urbanizing
              watersheds.  The work will include both natural and human modified landscapes,
              focussing on areas we are currently monitoring as part of the Baltimore
              Ecosystem Study, an NSF funded Long Term Ecological Research site.  The project
              includes field sampling of soil moisture, stream discharge, and nutrient
              concentration patterns.  An integrated spatial hydroecological data and
              simulation system (i.e., a geographic information system GIS) and a set of
              indices will be developed to predict and explain the sensitivity of ecosystem
              and catchment export of nitrogen to alterations in surface cover and hydrologic
              flowpaths.

The project will develop important data, theory, and techniques
              assessing the impacts of human modification of integrated hydrologic and
              ecosystem processes at the landscape level (e.g., small catchments or
              neighborhoods).  The GIS/modeling system represents and simulates the pattern
              of ecosystem, water, carbon, and nutrient storage and cycling along drainage
              flowpaths at the hillslope scale (ridge to stream).  These drainage sequences
              in turn influence catchment export efficiency of nutrients at the scale of
              typical subdivisions in urbanizing watersheds.  This project augments and
              complements the long term monitoring components of the Baltimore Ecosystem
              Study by providing higher spatial and temporal resolution information focussing
              on hydrologic and ecosystem processes within small watersheds that are amenable
              to design and restoration efforts.  The research will generate a better
              understanding of the role of natural and designed landscape patterns on
              cumulative watershed impacts, a capability to evaluate alternative watershed
              development and restoration scenarios, and tools to rapidly screen existing
              development patterns for nutrient export potential.

