Title       : Temperature-Dependent Male Sex Determination in the Red-Eared Slider Turtle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  2003   
File        : a0095753

Award Number: 0095753
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  2001      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Crews crews@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Many egg-laying reptiles lack sex chromosomes, depending instead upon the
              incubation temperature of the egg to determine the sex of their offspring, a
              process known as temperature-dependent sex determination (TSD).  How
              temperature both stimulates and inhibits genetic cascades to determine the type
              of gonad and direct sexual differentiation is the focus of this application. 
              This investigator and his colleagues have developed the red-eared slider turtle
              (Trachemys scripta elegans) as an animal model system to study TSD. These
              researchers have demonstrated that male and female gonadal development are the
              result of separate genetic cascades influenced by steroid hormones, and that
              specific enzymes activate or inhibit steroid hormone effects on sex
              determination.  In the red-eared slider system, female (or ovary) determination
              involves estrogens whereas male (or testis) determination involves
              nonaromatizable androgens.  Mammals and turtles share a common evolutionary
              history and recent findings indicate that despite a difference in the trigger
              (environmental temperature vs. sex chromosomes), the red-eared slider shares
              many characteristics of sexual development with the mammalian system, including
              the same genes involved along the sex determination pathway.  Experiments are
              designed to identify the genes involved in testis formation and then to
              determine how temperature and sex hormones accomplish this feat.  For example,
              relative levels of gene expression will be measured using quantitative reverse
              transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern blot analysis. 
              Localization of gene expression will be analyzed with in situ hybridization.  
              The ability to manipulate sex in a primitive vertebrate species by incubation
              temperature, exogenous hormones, and other agents provides unparalleled
              experimental control, thereby enabling more detailed analysis of the normal
              pattern of gene expression during sex determination than is possible with other
              amniotes (reptiles, birds and mammals are known as the amniote or higher
              vertebrates) having sex chromosomes.  This work is important for several
              reasons.  First, it has long been assumed that steroid hormones of maternal or
              embryonic origin are not involved in gonad formation in mammals and birds.  The
              work with TSD reptiles indicates that this conclusion may be premature. 
              Second, since TSD may represent the evolutionary precursor to sex chromosomes,
              potential temperature and steroid effects in sex determination may be present,
              but partly or wholly masked, in warm-blooded vertebrates.  Third, temperature
              has not been adequately investigated as a factor in steroid hormone action at
              the genetic level in warm-blooded animals despite numerous studies documenting
              how both hormone responsiveness and hormone action are markedly dependent on
              temperature.


