Title       : Dissertation Research: Developmental Maintenance of Evolutionary Conservatism: A
               Comparative and Experimental Analysis of Sphenoid Skeletogenesis in Birds and
               Mammals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1997       
File        : a9701104

Award Number: 9701104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8775               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen K. Smith kksmith@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Smith  9701104         Basic mechanisms underlying morphological conservation 
              are not well understood.  While some anatomical regions  undergo major
              evolutionary transformations, others are  resistant to change.  The relations
              among structures in one  part of the vertebrae head, the sphenoid region, have 
              remained constant during five hundred million years of  evolution despite
              numerous modifications in other parts of  the skull.       Classical
              comparative anatomy and contemporary  molecular and cellular approaches are
              combined to  investigate morphogenetic processes involved in pattering  the
              sphenoid skeleton and t characterize developmental  properties that may enable
              evolutionary conservation of this  region across vertebrates.  Two
              complementary studies are  proposed.  The first identifies specific elements
              that are  important in pattering the sphenoid skeleton.  Previously  performed
              experiments such as gene knockouts, surgical  manipulations, and teratogen
              treatments are analyzed to  generate data on how perturbations to the neural
              tube,  notochord, trigeminal nerve, and pituitary gland affect the  sphenoid
              skeleton possess intrinsic patterning information.  This involves new
              experimental transplantations of neural  crest and mesodermal cells.       This
              investigation 1) provides and understanding of how  morphogenetic events affect
              skeletal patterning, 2) gives  new insights on the integration of complex
              cranial  structures, and 3) contributes important examples to the  study of
              developmental interactions in morphological  evolution.
