Title       : Effective Diophantine Geometry over Function Fields
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9701489

Award Number: 9701489
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Minhyong Kim kim@math.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kim  9701489    This award provides funds for M. Kim to continue his past
              research on the Diophantine geometry of curves over function fields of
              arbitrary characteristic.  In elementary language, this is the study of
              equations of  type f(x,y,t)=0  (1)  viewed as a two-variable polynomial
              equation whose coefficients are functions of t to which we seek solutions
              (x,y)=(p(t), q(t)), that is, pairs of polynomials (or rational functions) which
              satisfy  f(p(t),q(t),t)=0 as a function of t.  In particular, he will continue
              his previous work on `effective' Mordell conjectures over function fields,
              which allows one to find all solutions to (1) (for f's of high genus) by giving
              a priori bounds on the `height' (which in this case is the degree) of solution
              pairs (p(t),q(t)).  A result of this sort over number fields is the long-term
              eventual goal of this research This is an outstanding problem in Diophantine
              geometry whose resolution would provide a crude algorithm for finding all
              rational solutions to Diophantine equations in two variables over the rational
              numbers.  The specific projects go in three closely related directions:  (1)
              finding more refined geometric height inequalities in arbitrary characteristic
              to serve as efficient input into algorithmic search for solutions;  (2)
              embedding the PI's previous work into the study of curves on surfaces of
              general type in the spirit of Bogomolov's theorem on boundedness of curves of
              bounded genus, and that of his joint work with Shepherd-Barron; (3) approaching
              geometric height inequalities from a more explicitly algorithmic viewpoint in
              the hope of finding techniques which would transfer more readily to number
              fields than the existing ones.    This project falls into the general area of
              arithmetic geometry - a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of
              mathematics: number theory and geometry.  This combination has proved
              extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved problems that withstood
              generations.  Among its many consequences are new error corre cting codes. 
              Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and compact
              disks.
