Title       : RUI: Rare Earth Ions in Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a9701576

Award Number: 9701576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard T. Brundage rbrundage@stcloudstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St. Cloud State University
	      740 Fourth Avenue South
	      St. Cloud, MN  56301    320/255-2122

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9229,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701576  Brundage    This is a renewal project from an undergraduate
              institution.  The proposed  work  is  a  study of the stability  of  trivalent 
              and divalent  ions  in  fluorophosphate glasses  and  the  effect  of valence 
              on  the  coherence of excited  states.   The  project  is motivated  by  recent
               measurements of unusually  long  coherence times   for  trivalent  europium 
              in   fluorophosphate   glasses  developed  for  high-power  laser 
              applications.   The  divalent  europium ion is stable in this glass, but can be
               photoionized  to the  trivalent  ion  by intense UV light.  The  divalent  ion
               is unusual  for  rare-earth ions, but is  stable  for  ytterbium  and samarium
               as  well as europium  in some crystals and glasses.          We  will 
              investigate  the  stability  of  different  valences,   the  photoionization 
              process,  and the  coherence  times  of  excited electronic                
              states  for  these  three  ions  in  fluorophosphate  glasses.  %%%  This  is 
              a renewal project for the study of the  fluorescence  of rare  earth  ions in
              glasses. Rare earth  ions play  an  important role  in  many  optical  devices,
               such  as  lasers  and  optical memories.   The  ions  absorb  and  emit  light
               when  they  make transitions  between  different electronic states.  The 
              frequency bandwidth  f  these  transitions is  an  important  parameter  in 
              determining the  performance  of optical devices.  The narrower the bandwidth 
              the greater  the  storage  capacity of an  optical  memory  based  on frequency
               coding  of data. The PI recently  discovered  that  the bandwidth  of  the 
              emission of the  rare earth  europium  can  be decreased   by  starting  with 
              divalent  ions  and  removing  one electron  by  photoionization using intense
              UV light  to  produce  trivalent ions.  The PI will study europium and other
              rare  earth ions that occur in the divalent state to determine the  effect  of
              photoionization on the bandwidth of optical  transitions.  ***
