Title       : Dissertation Research: Selective Attrition During Song Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9701351

Award Number: 9701351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5667               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Beecher beecher@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9701351  Beecher  Bird song is widely recognized as a model system for
              investigations into the biological basis of learning.  It provides the best
              example to date of natural learning in a vertebrate, with many striking
              parallels to human language learning.  Moreover, in recent years many
              discoveries concerning the brain mechanisms underlying song learning have
              suggested that this model system may reveal much about the general processes of
              learning in the brain.  This proposal will examine one key aspect of song
              learning, the tendency of young birds to memorize more songs than they will
              ultimately keep for their final repertoire of songs.  Most studies have been
              done in the laboratory, but the major study will be conducted on a free-living
              population of song sparrows, thus permitting evaluation of the adaptive
              significance and ecological context of song learning.  The major question
              addressed is why do male song sparrows produce more song types during juvenile
              song than they have in their final adult repertoires?  Specifically, why do
              they keep certain songs and not others.  The hypothesis is that they keep those
              songs that best match those of their neighbors during their first breeding
              season.  The research will record "plastic" songs of juvenile males (song is
              not fully formed until March or April of the bird's first spring) and compare
              these to "crystallized" song types in the bird's adult repertoire and to the
              songs of adult males present in the bird's natal summer and his first spring (a
              partially overlapping group).  A parallel study in the laboratory of
              hand-raised birds tutored by several adult males will also be conducted.  This
              research will allow a better understanding of how song is learned, and insights
              into learning processes in general.
