Title       : Arithmetic of L-Values
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9701782

Award Number: 9701782
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn H. Stevens ghs@math.bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          9701782   Stevens         The principal investigator intends to
              continue his work on special values of  L-functions and their relation to
              arithmetic geometry.  The proposed research would improve our understanding of
              both automorphic forms and  p-adic cohomology by providing new tools for
              studying the former and by providing concrete examples of the latter.  The PI's
              recent proof of a conjecture of Mazur, Tate, Teitelbaum, and Coleman raises new
              questions about analytic families of automorphic forms, their  p-adic 
              L-functions, and families of galois  representations and overconvergent 
              F-crystals.  The proposed research would clarify how such families degenerate
              at special non-crystalline points and would describe monodromy at such points
              in terms of a deformation in the weight direction, thus enlarging the standard
              picture of monodromy in potentially useful ways. This research would also
              complement Kato's recent work on values of  L-functions and  K_2  of modular
              curves by providing tools for deforming Kato's theory in  p-adic analytic
              families.  In related work, the PI hopes to develop a  p-adic Eichler-Shimura
              correspondence that would relate his theory of overconvergent modular symbols
              to Katz's theory of overconvergent modular forms and to construct analytic
              families of non-ordinary half-integral weight modular forms by generalizing a 
              p-adic theta lifting developed in earlier work of the PI. Finally, the PI
              intends to generalize these ideas to automorphic forms on other reductive
              algebraic groups. This research offers promising tools for the construction of 
              p-adic analytic families of non-ordinary automorphic representations together
              with natural deformation spaces of Galois representations, and multivariable 
              p-adic  L-functions.  This is connected with a number of new investigations,
              including  p- adic monodromy, Jochnowitz's conjectures on the  square root of
              theta  operator on half-integral weight forms, and the p-adic deformation
              theory of Galois representations.         This project falls into the general
              area of arithmetic geometry -a subject that blends two of the oldest areas of
              mathematics: number theory and geometry.  This combination has proved
              extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved problems that withstood
              generations.  Among its many consequences are new error correcting codes.  Such
              codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and compact disks.
