Title       : "CAREER: Towards Understanding the Temporal Universe"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : AST 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9701716

Award Number: 9701716
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eileen D. Friel                         
	      AST  DIVISION OF ASTRONOMICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Nemiroff nemiroff@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1219      SPECIAL PROGRAMS IN ASTRONOMY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,1206,1217,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Nemiroff    The universe we live in changes continually, but most
              changes are not  easily observed. The planned projects will have a  focus on
              some of the  few areas of astronomy where significant change occurs on easily 
              measurable time scales.   The study of change may brings clues which  have far
              reaching implications - from the better understanding of the  nature of dark
              matter to the better understanding of the nature of high  energy environments. 
              The temporal nature of humanity's understanding  of our universe lends itself
              nicely to public outreach efforts and  educational programs.  Programs on the
              following topics will be carried  out:    Gamma Ray Bursts:  The temporal
              aspects of gamma-ray bursts will be  further explored.  Previously, there was
              the successful detection of  the existence of time-dilation in gamma ray bursts
              (GRBs).  The precise  amount of time-dilation. however, is still unknown by
              almost a factor  of 1.5.   The effort will be to  work toward increasingly
              accurate  calibration of this important attribute with regard to different 
              samples, systematic errors, and the amount expected from calibration to 
              best-fit cosmological brightness distributions (Log N - Log P).  Definitive
              resolution of the GRB distance scale debate would occur were  a gravitational
              lensing signature isolated.  The search for lens  detection in GRB data will be
              extended to all GRB data as it becomes  available.   The search for new hard
              GRBs in the BATSE data stream will  be extended.     Gravitational
              Microlensing:  The temporal aspects of gravitational  microlensing will be
              further explored. Previously, there was success in  quantifying the success
              rate of microlensing (MACHO) searches before  results were reported, and
              predicting the usefulness of finite source  lenses in determining the nature of
              the lenses. Currently, the  microlensing searches are entering a new era - one
              where common single  lens, point source events have only statistical value.
              More complex  events, such as those  involving binary lenses and finite
              sources, have  become increasingly important as they give more direct evidence
              of the  mass, velocity, and distance to the lens. The effort will continue to 
              study how best to deconvolve mass, distance, and velocity using  multiple lens
              and finite source size effects. The mass and density of  Galactic lenses
              currently implied is controversial and goes to the  heart of the Galactic dark
              matter problem. The effort will include the  use of computer simulations to
              better study which microlensing  measurements best deconvolve mass from the
              amplitude and duration of  finite source events, predict which type of MACHO
              surveys would yield  best information about the density and composition of our
              Galactic  halo, and scrutinize public domain data for finite source size
              effects  and implications.     Astronomical Debates: Disputes at the forefront
              of astronomy also  change.  Two successful astronomical debates have been
              staged.  These  modern debates act a natural platform for the teaching of
              astronomical  subjects and for public outreach. Three more debates are planned.
                  Astronomy Picture of the Day (APOD): As the universe changes daily, so 
              does APOD. Each day APOD will display a different astronomically  oriented
              picture on the World Wide Web along with a heavily hyperlinked  description. In
              its 1.5 year existence, APOD has acquired many  thousands of readers and has
              been praised by magazines including The  New Yorker. APOD' s archive now
              contains many of the most famous  astronomy pictures. APOD's use in education
              is shown by it popularity  in astronomy class home pages, and its outreach
              potential by the high  access rate from the businesses domain. The  APOD's will
              be expanded,  to create an outreach program for cooperating U.S. universities,
              and to  directly incorporate student interns in APOD's daily routine.
