Title       : Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Origins of Diapause in Marine Harpacticoid
               Copepods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9701524

Award Number: 9701524
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9970               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce C. Coull bccoull@sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701524  COULL    The ability to survive in a state of suspended animation is
              commonly called dormancy or diapause.  The spores of fungi and bacteria, the
              seeds of higher plants, the larvae of certain insects, and the cysts of some
              crustaceans, notably the brine shrimp (Artemia), are among the better known
              examples of diapausing stages in organisms.  Among crustaceans (crabs,
              lobsters, shrimp, and their kin) those inhabiting inland bodies of water,
              especially those that occasionally freeze or dry, are more likely to possess a
              diapausing stage than are species living in the ocean.  Diapause occurs, as
              expected, in many species of miniature freshwater crustacea called harpacticoid
              copepods, but it also occurs, unexpectedly, in at least two marine species. 
              Since the marine environment is not likely to freeze or dry, the benefits of
              diapause are unclear.  Three possible explanations account for the presence of
              diapause in marine species:  (1) diapause arose in marine harpacticoid copepods
              and was retained in their freshwater descendants; (2) diapause arose in
              freshwater harpacticoid copepods, and was retained in their marine descendants;
               (3) diapause arose independently in freshwater and marine lineages of
              harpacticoid copepods.     In this research, Bruce Coull and doctoral candidate
              Regina Wetzer will use molecular and anatomical data to establish the
              phylogenetic relationships of marine and freshwater copepods belonging to
              families known to contain diapausing species.  These "family trees" and
              comparative methods will allow Coull and Wetzer to ascertain the evolutionary
              history of diapause in closely related families of harpacticoid copepods, and,
              in particular, to find out which hypothesis best explains how diapause arose in
              marine qpecies.  The work may help provide a more general explanation of how
              diapause can arise in environments that are OstableO, lacking fluctuations such
              as Ocold-hotO or Owet-dryO seasons.
