Title       : Extremal Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9701211

Award Number: 9701211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerrold R. Griggs griggs@math.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laszlo Szekely  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Griggs  9701211    This award funds further research in extremal combinatorics.
              In extremal set theory, one can replace the old questions,  ``how many sets can
              one have under the following restrictions'', by new ones, ``how many   families
              of sets can one have under the following restrictions''.  The investigators
              will advance projects in this area of research, which was started by R.
              Ahlswede et al. with strong motivation from information theory.  The
              investigators will study subset sum distributions of vectors and abelian group
              elements.  This area of knowledge started with the Littlewood-Offord problem
              and became dependent on extremal set theory. Extensions to higher dimensions
              suggest tantalizing new problems of fundamental interest. Problems from
              extremal graph theory the  investigators will investigate include:  (1) Bounds
              for the independence ratio in degree-bounded graphs, with restricted maximum
              clique size, and algorithms for independent sets guaranteed to achieve the
              bounds.  (2) The maximum size of bipartite graphs with given parts under
              excluded cycle conditions.  (3) The maximum size of n-vertex graphs such that
              no k vertices have more than m edges, continuing work (by Griggs et al.) on
              generalizations of theorems of Turan and Dirac Szekely recently discovered a
              connection between crossing numbers of graphs and the Szemeredi-Trotter
              theorems in combinatorial geometry.  The investigators will build on this
              progress by considering these problems from extremal topological graph theory: 
              (4) Bounds for crossing numbers of graphs.  (5) Further investigation of the
              connection between crossing numbers and combinatorial geometry.  (6) Graph
              drawings, where many  pairwise  crossing  edges are excluded.      This is
              research in extremal combinatorics, a subject at the very core of our
              understanding of how discrete structures work and how to use them optimally.
              Significant longstanding open problems are abundant in extremal combinatorics,
              and new problems frequently come from nearby rapidly d eveloping fields such as
              information theory, computer science, computational biology, or number theory.
              Certain database security models require the solution of certain extremal
              combinatorics problems in order to optimize their performance.
