Title       : CAREER: Surface Scattering Effects in Mine Detection and Remote Sensing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9701678

Award Number: 9701678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joel T. Johnson johnson@ee.eng.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9701678  Johnson  The detection and identification of buried mines is an
              important problem given the risk land mines pose to civilian populations, and
              scattering from the surface of the ground plays a significant role in the
              ground penetrating radar technologies currently under investigation.  Ground
              surface scattering is also important in the remote sensing of soil moisture
              with microwave sensors, and can strongly influence the accuracy of soil
              moisture estimates obtained from satellite or aircraft measurements.  However,
              the contribution of soil surface scattering to radar measurements is still not
              well understood, and only empirical models, which allow little insight into
              methods for reducing surface clutter effects, are currently available for
              predictions.   Analytical approximate models for ground surface scattering have
              also been developed, but the  underlying approximations often are not valid for
              soil surfaces, and the models require specification of a surface spatial
              frequency spectrum, which is difficult to measure and for which little
              information is available.    In this project, detailed studies of ground
              surface scattering which allow new insight into the  important physical
              processes will be performed through analytical, numerical, and experimental
              techniques.  The Ohio State ultra-wideband ground penetrating radar system will
              be used to measure surface scattering at the ElectroScience Laboratory (ESL)
              indoor range under a variety of conditions, with surface height profiles
              measured to insure their accurate characterization.  A comparison of measured
              data with numerical model predictions for the exact profiles measured
              distinguishes this work from previous purely empirical studies of ground
              surface scattering, and enables conclusive determinations of the extent to
              which distributed surface versus discrete and/or volume scattering is
              significant.  Comparisons with existing analytical models will be performed
              based on this improved understanding, with a new analytical model which inc
              ludes both surface and discrete or volume scattering effects resulting from the
              study.  Further measurements will be done on a variety of outdoor surface
              profiles, and methods for reducing surface clutter effects on ground
              penetrating radar and soil moisture remote sensing systems will be
              investigated.  ***
