Title       : Dissertation Research: A Phylogenetic Approach to the Evolution of Senescence in
               Natural Populations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9701209

Award Number: 9701209
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Tessier tessier@kbs.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9701209  Tessier  Aging, as measured by the physiological deterioration of
              animals as they grow older, is the subject of much current research.  Why aging
              occurs and what underlying genetic mechanisms are associated with aging are
              also topics of considerable research.  Traditional laboratory genetic work has
              confirmed much of the theoretical work.  However, relatively few scientists
              have examined genetic variation of aging in wild populations, or the ecological
              context in which this variation exists.  The proposed research will address
              these gaps in our knowledge through life table experiments and detailed
              descriptions od sources of natural mortality.  Daphnia, a common freshwater
              crustacean, will be studied because its ecology is well known and it will
              reproduce clonally.  This mode of reproduction allows sampling of the natural
              genetic variation in the lab, where life tables can be constructed under
              controlled conditions.  Thus, rates of aging for natural populations can be
              estimated without interference from extrinsic mortality.  Aging rates can be
              compared to data from field estimates of mortality rates.  Sources of mortality
              (e.g., predation, disease, habitat seasonality) can then be used to examine the
              relationship between intrinsic lifespan (and other aging indicators) and the
              expected wild lifespan.  The research will also test theoretical predictions
              that rapid aging could be indirectly advantageous in certain ecological
              contexts.  The investigators will characterize early life history traits (e.g.
              growth, maturation) and look for tradeoffs with rates of aging.  A high rate of
              aging should be sustainable only if there are correlated advantages early in
              life, such as accelerated growth.  Conversely, poor reproduction or growth
              early in life should be sustainable only if it benefits an animal through
              longer life.
