Title       : Polarized Soft X-ray Studies of Magnetic Ultrathin Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1998       
File        : a9701409

Award Number: 9701409
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian P. Tonner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              W:\awards\awards97  9701409  Tonner    This  renewal  project  will study the 
              structural  and  magnetic  properties  of metastable magnetic ultrathin films
              of transition metals,  grown under controlled conditions by ultra-high vacuum 
              physical vapor deposition and by sputter-deposition. Growth  conditions will be
              chosen to produce novel crystal structures,  which are not ordinarily found in
              the bulk phase diagram. We  combine structural and magnetic measurements to
              correlate  changes    in   the   magnetic   phase   diagram   with   surface 
              crystallography  and morphology. Multiple structural techniques are employed, 
              including quantitative electron and photoelectron diffraction,  and   surface  
              x-ray  diffraction.  Magnetic  measurements   are  primarily  done using
              circularly polarized soft x-ray circular dichroism.  The emphasis is on
              ultrathin binary alloys, coupled ferromagnetic  bilayers, and 'wedge' and
              'sandwich' nanostructures.  %%%  This  is a renewal project in which  modern
              techniques of crystal  growth  will be used  to create magnetic nanostructures
              which have  unique and surprising  properties.   We are searching for  ways to
              produce magnetic materials that can be useful in  a new generation of computer
              digital electronics. These  devices, called spin-valves or spin-transistors,
              use magnetism  in the way that the older transistor uses electronic  charge.
              Since the magnetic information can be stored for  long periods without the need
              for an external power source,  spin-valves are attractive as a new type of
              computer  memory device for portable computers. The physical properties  which
              are desirable for a high efficiency spin valve  require us to control the
              growth of magnetic layers with  atomic precision. The magnetic behavior of
              these metastable,  ultrathin, magnetic films can be completely different from 
              that of an ordinary 'bulk' material. We are studying the  relationship between
              structure and magnetic properties, to  develop ways of predicting and
              optimizing ultrathin mag nets  for spin valves.  ***
