Title       : CAREER: High Resolution Optical Microscopy Studies of Mesostructured
               Polymer-Dispersed Liquid Crystal Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2000      
File        : a9701509

Award Number: 9701509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244446             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Higgins higgins@ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported  in the
              Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, will use near-  field scanning
              optical microscopy to study polymer-dispersed  liquid crystal thin films. 
              Professor Higgins and his students at  Kansas State University will study the
              mesoscale structural,  electronic, and dynamical properties of these thin film
              materials  for application as flat-panel displays.  This integrated CAREER 
              research project will afford students the opportunity to learn  how the spatial
              confinement of organic mesostructured systems  affects their properties as
              relates to flat-panel displays.   State-of-the-art optical microscopy methods
              that provide  submicron spatial resolution will be used in this work.  Other 
              educational projects to be developed during this project involve  computer
              simulations on data analysis, analog electronics,  Fourier transforms, and
              chromatographic separations for use in  undergraduate course work and a new
              course in chemical  microscopy.  Many materials of scientific and technological
              interest involve  spatial variations in the electronic, structural, and
              chemical  properties on very small distance scales.  In order to devise 
              materials with desired features on this spatial scale it is  necessary to
              develop methods for quantifying the properties at  the near single molecule
              limit.  This CAREER research project  will apply state-of-the-art near-field
              optical microscopy to the  study of such properties of polymer-dispersed liquid
              crystalline  materials.  Undergraduate and graduate students will be exposed 
              to the application of these new methods to study these materials  that have
              potential for use in making flat-panel display devices.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
