Title       : CAREER: Multi-threaded Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2001     
File        : a9701679

Award Number: 9701679
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric K. Torng torng@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Many computer systems are multi-threaded.  Traditional  on-line problems
              abstract away the existence of multiple  threads, either by collapsing multiple
              threads into a single  thread or by reducing each thread to a single request.
              This  project studies a new class of problems:  on-line systems  with
              multi-threaded inputs.  To model multi-threaded inputs,  multiple client input
              model where each client (thread) is  represented by a directed acyclic graph
              (DAG) are  introduced.  Three practical problems investigated are the 
              multi-threaded paging problem, where processes compete for  both central
              processing unit (CPU) time and fast memory  locations; the multi-threaded disk
              scheduling problem where  processes and/or database transactions compete for
              access to  the disk; and the multi-threaded operating system problem,  the
              natural combination of these two problems.  These  problems generalize into the
              k-client problem, a dual  version of the well-studied k-server problem, and the
               k-server l-client problem.  One important goal of this  research is to learn
              how to design a complex system such as  a fast memory manager, a CPU scheduler,
              and a disk  scheduler.  In particular, determine if the algorithms and  results
              obtained by considering each system component in  isolation can be easily
              combined to produce new algorithms  and results for the complete system. In
              education, there are  two complementary projects.  The first project deals with
               the process of learning how to teach.  The PI applied for  and received a
              highly competitive MSU Lilly Endowment  Teaching Fellowship.  In this intensive
              year-long program,  the PI will work together with a group of five promising 
              young faculty to learn fundamental educational principles  taught by leading
              education scholars from around the  University and around the country.  The
              second project is to  build a more cohesive curriculum emphasizing the
              practical  importance of all topics, especially theory.  This is  achieved by
              leading a departmental effort to wr ite a  comprehensive computer science
              textbook written in hypertext  markup language (HTML).  This HTML textbook will
              utilize  hyperlinks to highlight the connections between and within  courses. 
              For example, links will connect a module on stacks  and queues from a data
              structures course with modules from  an operating systems course where these
              structures are used.  This HTML textbook project may also supplement
              departmental  efforts to offer distance learning courses to nontraditional 
              students.
