Title       : CAREER: Towards an All-Optical Network Infrastructure: Interconnection of
               Photonic WDM Broadcast-and-Select Local Area Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9701113

Award Number: 9701113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George N. Rouskas rouskas@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The career development plan outlined in this proposal focuses on the  
              integration of the research and teaching objectives of the principal  
              investigator.  The research project addresses a number of important issues in
              the    design and interconnection of optical networks.  The ultimate goal of
              the proposed work is to develop viable solutions   for a seamless nationwide
              all-optical network infrastructure.  The educational component includes
              development of graduate-level   courses on all-optical networking and on
              internetwork architectures   and protocols, integration of topics on lightwave
              technology in    existing graduate and undergraduate introductory network
              courses, and   active involvement of undergraduate students in network
              projects.    In an all-optical network using wavelength division multiplexing
              (WDM),   information is transmitted as optical signals throughout the path from
                source to destination.  By using multiple concurrent channels, each on a
              different wavelength,   WDM has the potential to exploit the enormous
              information-carrying   capacity of fiber and deliver an aggregate throughput
              that is several   orders of magnitude higher than it is possible today.  Given
              the installed base of optical fiber, and the maturing of optical   component
              technologies, it appears that current network technologies   will eventually
              evolve to an all-optical infrastructure.  The deployment of such an
              infrastructure will cater to the needs of   emerging bandwidth-intensive
              applications.  However, large scale interconnection of optical networks raises
              a   number of fundamental and challenging problems that require novel and  
              innovative solutions.  As part of his career development plan, the principal
              investigator    proposes to address a number of these issues, including
              multiple   access in broadcast-and-select WDM networks, traffic scheduling of  
              unicast and multicast traffic, interconnection of photonic local area  
              networks, architectural issues in wavelength routed backbone networks,   dist
              ributed control, and issues related to the interaction among   subnetwork and
              backbone protocols.  Our work is expected to further our understanding of the  
              characteristics of optical networks, and to provide insight on how to  
              overcome some of the limitations of the technology.  The objective is to
              produce an analytical framework that will make it   possible to evaluate
              alternative architectures and protocols.
