Title       : Dissertation Research: The Ecological Genetics of PhenotypicResponses to Three
               Light Environments in Collinsia verna
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9701148

Award Number: 9701148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4645               (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Jarosz amjarosz@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan Kalisz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    9701148  Jarosz   Most organisms live in variable environments.  For
              example, nearly all plants experience frequent temporal fluctuations in
              temperature, light, moisture, and nutrients during their lifetimes.  Only
              recently have biologists begun to address the significance of this
              environmental heterogencity with regard to natural selection.  A general
              expectation is that environmental heterogeneity will favor plants that are
              phenotypically plastic.  An adaptively plastic plant expresses a phenotype
              appropriate for the environmental conditions in which it occurs.  For example,
              a plant growing in shade might produce large thin leaves to efficiently harvest
              the limited light, while the same plant growing in full sun might produce
              smaller, thicker leaves to minimize water loss.  Each leaf phenotype allows the
              plant to be more fit, i.e., to produce more seeds, than if the alternate
              phenotype were expressed.  Despite the ubiquity of phenotypic plasticity of
              most traits, the ecological meaning and adaptive relevance of phenotypic
              variation in natural populations have seldom been investigated.  The PIs will
              characterize the genetic basis of phenotypic responses to three light
              environments by studying individuals of known genetic relationship in a natural
              population of the winter annual wildflower, Collinsia verna (blue-eyed Mary). 
              The PIs will examine the fitness consequences of light-induced phenotypic
              changes by studying traits known to respond to different light levels and/or to
              be closely related to fitness (e.g., germination date, size at overwintering,
              leaf size and shape, plant size and branching pattern, date of first flowering,
              number of flowers, number of seeds, and seed size).   Human activity is causing
              unprecedented environmental change at all scales from local habitat
              fragmentation to global climate change, with far reaching consequences for
              earth's biodiversity.  The results of this research will contribute to our
              understanding of many important questions about biodiversity and it s
              management:  What are the determinants of species ranges?  What constitutes a
              stressful environment for a species?  How do individuals and species respond to
              novel and changing environments?  When can species be reasonably expected to
              adapt to change, as opposed to going extinct?  By assessing the adaptive nature
              of phenotypic responses to light, and by quantifying the potential for the
              further change in plastic traits, this study will make an important
              contribution to our understanding natural selection in heterogeneous or
              changing environments.
