Title       : Collective Mode Dynamics in Superfluid 3He
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9701710

Award Number: 9701710
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Lee dml20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9701710  Lee 
                This  experimental project is related to the internal degrees  of  freedom 
              of  Cooper  pairs in superfluid 3He, which  are  largely  resonsible for the
              fascinating behavior of this liquid  including  the occurrence of collective
              modes. The collective modes observed  in  ultrasound  experiments are sometimes
              known  as  Cooper  Pair  Vibrations. The experiments in this project mainly
              deal with  the  non-linear excitations of two well characterized collective
              modes  of  3He B, namely the real squashing mode and the squashing mode.  The 
              studies will take advantage of the fact that the line widths  of  these modes
              become very narrow at low temperatures where  the  quasi-particle   scattering 
              rates   are   small.   The   planned  investigations will emphasize saturation
              studies and a search for  phonon  echoes,  in analogy to pulsed nuclear
              magnetic  resonance  effects.  Pulse  time  of flight studies  with  large 
              excitation  pulses  will  be  employed. In addition,  a  search  for  soliton 
              behavior  and  in  particular self induced transparency  will  be  undertaken 
              using  similar  techniques.  Because  of  the   large  coupling  between  the 
              squashing  mode  and  ultrasound,  it  is  expected that it will be more
              advantageous to study the squashing  collective  mode. In addition, an
              experimental approach  to  find  magnetic  resonance  signals corresponding to
              transition  between  Zeeman  sublevels  of  both  the  squashing  and  real 
              squashing  collective modes in magnetic fields.  %%%%  This  experimental
              project is devoted to the superfluid  behavior  present  in the liquid formed
              by cooling helium atoms of  isotope  mass  three, at low temperatures. Liquid
              helium when cooled below  4.2  Kelvin degrees (about -270 Centigrade) becomes a
              superfluid,  which  flows  with  no  viscosity,  permitting  persistent   flow 
              patterns  such  as  rotating inside a container.  The  superfluid  formed  by 
              the  isotope  o f helium  of  mass  3  is  even   more  interesting  in  its
              properties, which are the  subject  of  this  experimental  project. In liquid
              helium three the  superfluid  is  associated with "pairing" of the helium
              atoms, and the  pairs  of  helium  atoms have a characteristic rotational
              motion about  each  other,  in  contrast  to  pairing of  electrons  in 
              conventional  superconductors  in which the pairs do not have "orbital  angular
               momentum". The consequences of this unconventional pairing in the  helium 
              three  superfluid  include  collective  modes,  known  as  squashing and real
              squashing modes, which are the subject of this  research,  which  will  be 
              carried out  in  part  using  nuclear  magnetic  resonance  methods. Liquid
              helium  three,  one  of  the  simplest  liquids  known, is a testing ground 
              for  developing  a  thorough  understanding of the properties  of  condensed 
              matter.  Even with its simplicity it offers complex behavior which may, if 
              correctly understood, provide insight into the behavior  of  very  different 
              materials, including high temperature superconductors,  in  which
              unconventional pairing may also occur in the superfluid  (superconducting)
              phase.  This experimental work is  carried  out  in  part  by  graduate and
              postdoctoral students who  receive  an  excellent  training in physics and in
              other areas  also,  in  the  pursuit  of  the  cryogenic measurements using 
              nuclear  magnetic  resonance  and other sophisticated methods. This is an 
              excellent  preparation  for  a  career  in industrial  research,  government 
              laboratories or in academia.  ****
