Title       : CAREER: New Methods of Creating Artifical Receptors for Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9701975

Award Number: 9701975
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanku Mallik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of North Dakota
	      University Station
	      Grand Forks, ND  58202    701/777-2121

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9181,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Mallik's research focuses on the design, synthesis and   evaluation of
              liposome based receptors for protein surfaces.   Mixed   liposomes derived from
              metal containing lipids, polymerizable ionic   lipids, and polymerizable
              hydrogen bonding lipids are equilibrated with   the template protein carbonic
              anhydrase to create a three-dimensional,   complementary replica of the protein
              surface.   Synthetic targets include   lipids containing differing head groups
              and photopolymerizable diene or   diyne tails that, after equilibration, are
              photochemically polymerized to   achieve a semi-rigid, protein-specific
              receptor. Efficacy of the   photopolymerized template synthesis is quantified
              by measuring the   protein-replica binding constants.  Educational activities
              include   introducing a graduate bio-organic course and addressing
              undergraduate   needs by establishing a Virtual Organic Chemistry classroom on
              the Web to   facilitate student-teacher communication.     With this CAREER
              award, the Organic Dynamics Program supports the   research and educational
              activities of Professor Sanku Mallik of the   Department of Chemistry at the
              University of North Dakota.   Professor   Mallik's research is focused on the
              creation of a three-dimensional   protein recognition surface by using a
              specific protein to direct the   formation of a collection of molecules with
              which it interacts.    Subsequent chemical linking of these molecules into a
              polymer effectively   leaves a footprint of the protein in the resulting
              polymer.   In contrast   to the considerable synthetic effort involved in other
              approaches to   molecular recognition, this approach is expected to generate
              simply and   rapidly a highly specific binding site for the target protein.    
              Professor Mallik's educational activities include developing a graduate  
              curriculum targeting the interface between organic and biological   chemistry
              and facilitating student-teacher communication through a   Virtual Classroom on
              the Web.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
