Title       : Mid-America Earthquake Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  2002 
File        : a9701785

Award Number: 9701785
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Aspasia Zerva                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Abrams d-abrams@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1483      EARTHQUAKE ENGINEER RESRCH CTR
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9701785  Abrams  The primary objective of the Mid-America Earthquake (MAE) 
              Center is to reduce potential earthquake losses in the  central and eastern
              United States by concentrating on  problems associated with low-frequency
              seismic events and  the consequences these have for the people, economy, and 
              civil infrastructure.  Research and implementation projects  are in two focus
              areas:  (a) identification and evaluation  of possible seismic hazards; and (b)
              development of loss  reduction strategies for the built environment.  Research 
              projects address seismic source modeling, ground motions  (i.e., synthesis,
              instrumentation, catalogs), site  characterization and response, ground
              failures,  soil-structure interaction, assessment and strengthening of 
              foundations and structures, risk and reliability, societal  response, and
              economic impact.  The initial focus is on  essential facilities (i.e.,
              buildings that support functions  related to post-earthquake emergency response
              and disaster  management) and transportation networks (i.e., highways, 
              railroad systems, major waterways and shipping facilities,  and airports). 
              Research teams will use recent advances in  networking technology to interact. 
              The MAE Center's World  Wide Web communications link the core institutions, as
              well  as earthquake research centers around the world, and include  public
              education features.  Center goals include educating  the next generation of
              seismologists and earthquake  engineers, attracting under-represented
              minorities and women  to these technical disciplines, and implementing research
               results in practice.  The MAE Center will be one of three  EERC's networked
              with an overarching governing board to  provide synergism in creating new
              knowledge, educating the  next generation of earthquake engineers and
              scientists, and  providing outreach to industry, government, pre-college 
              schools and potential user groups.
