Title       : Magnons, Domain Resonances and Elastic Waves in Giant Magneto-Resistive
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9701685

Award Number: 9701685
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $274500             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. Sooryakumar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701685  Sooryakumar    This  renewal project will support the study, via
              inelastic light  scattering  methods,  of  exchange  coupling  mechanisms  
              across  magnetic  interfaces  separated by an ultra  thin  spacer  layer. 
              Special tri-layer structures with the ability to tune the  Stoner  exchange
              parameter will allow details of the spacer magnetic  and  electronic  structure
               that  directly  controls  the  inter-layer  exchange   to   be   probed  and 
              provide  information   on   the  antiferromagnetic properties of ultra thin
              metallic films. Domain  wall  excitations  will also be exploited  to  study 
              inter-layer  coupling over microscopic length scales. In addition, the  strong 
              spin-lattice  and charge-lattice couplings in the  mixed  valence  manganites
              will be investigated by light scattering. This  effort  will  allow  for the
              unusual, but decidedly important,  interplay  between magnetic and structural
              effects in these materials to  be  studied.  %%%  This renewal project will
              support a laser spectroscopic study  of  magnetism  in layered structures that
              are likely to underlie  the  next  generation  magnetic  data storage  and 
              magneto-electronic  devices.   The  study  focuses on understanding  the 
              interaction  between  magnetic films separated by a few atomic layers  and  to 
              develop an experimental technique to probe this interaction  over  length
              scales not realized by other methods.  In addition,  since  the  electrical
              resistance of special manganite compounds can  be  tuned  by a magnetic field,
              these materials open new perspectives  into  novel  devices  based  on the spin
               of  an  electron.   The  underlying  physics  associated with  the  coupling 
              between  the  electron  spin and crystal structure of these materials  will  be
               investigated by laser light scattering methodologies.  ***
