Title       : Dissertation Research: Size-Refugia, Alternative States andTrophic Cascades in
               Pond Benthic Food Webs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1997        
File        : a9701120

Award Number: 9701120
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9023               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mathew A. Leibold mleibold@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Wootton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701120  Leibold  Several factors can influence the impacts of consumers in food
              webs. In simple food chains, the impact of predators increases with
              productivity. If prey can attain a refuge from predation due to size at some
              point in its life history, however, the food web interactions become more
              complex. In this proposal, the investigators will examine how size-structured
              prey populations may influence the strength of interactions of predators, and
              how initial conditions, species composition, and environmental factors (e.g.,
              productivity) may greatly determine the degree to which predators can control
              the food web. An ongoing modeling effort shows how all of these factors can
              influence the effects of predators in food webs, with particular reference to
              potential alternative stable states depending on initial conditions. The
              salient features of the model were developed for, and appear to be upheld in
              small pond benthic food webs of southern Michigan, where the snail, Helisoma
              trivolis, is only susceptible to predators (primarily the Hemipteran, Belostoma
              flumineum, leeches, and predatory beetles) when small, whereas another common
              snail, Physella gyrina, is susceptible at all sizes. A large mesocosm
              experiment will examine the predictions of the model based on prey species
              identity and diversity, initial densities, and productivity. Biotic and abiotic
              surveys of a wide range of ponds, and enclosure/exclosure experiments m situ
              will be employed to further elucidate these effects. Results from this study
              should shed light into a variety of questions in ecology concerning the
              strength of species interactions in relation to morphological, environmental,
              and initial conditions.
