Title       : Dissertation Research: Ontogeny and Evolution of Frog Hind Limb Bone & Muscle
               Morphology & Material Properties: Effects of Varying Developmental Duration on
               Jumping Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9701121

Award Number: 9701121
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Biewener   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biewener  9701121           The effects of developmental duration on the
              ontogeny of  musculo-skeletal morphology and bone material properties in frogs 
              will be evaluated, expanding knowledge of these features to a broader  range of
              vertebrate species. Variation in developmental duration is  hypothesized to
              affect the morphology and material properties of the  hind limb bones and
              muscles and, consequently, the locomotor  performance of newlymetamorphosed
              frogs. The effects of variations in  developmental duration on the
              musculoskeletal system will be compared  in field collected frogs and
              experimental frogs raised at two  temperatures. Analysis of high speed videos
              of jumps from  field-collected and laboratory-raised frogs will be used to
              correlate  performance with musculo-skeletal morphology and bone material 
              properties. Musculo-skeletal characteristics will be examined through  a
              combination of histological sectioning, radiographs, four-point  bending, and
              asking. Ontogenetic and phylogenetic scaling of all  parameters will be used to
              understand the influence of age and size.         This study will assess
              potential trade-offs in the evolution of  developmental durations in frogs.
              Though rapid, larval development is  often ecologically advantageous, this
              study will evaluated its cost  to locomotor performance in terms of the
              morphological and  physiological capabilities of the musculo-skeletal system.
