Title       : CPMSA: Project SMASH-Science and Mathematics Alliance for Successful Habitude
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a9701798

Award Number: 9701798
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Highton thighton@union-city.k12.nj.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adriana Birne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard Kimmel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Silvia T. Correa-Abbato  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Union City Board of Educat
	      3912 Bergen Turnpike
	      Union City, NJ  070872507    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: Highton, Thomas    The   Union  City  School  District,  a  special  needs 
              district  (Enterprise  Zone) with a total enrollment of 9,017 students  94%  of
                which  are  minorities,  proposes  a  multi-year  effort  in  collaboration
              with Institutions of Higher Education,  which  will  increase the numbers of
              underrepresented minorities prepared  and  motivated  to  enroll in precollege
              SEM classes and  to  consider  SMETE   (Science,   Mathematics,   Engineering  
              and   Technology  Education)  by  enhancing teaching effectiveness in  science 
              and  mathematics  across  K-12  grade  levels.   The  proposed   pilot 
              project,  Science  and  Math Alliance for a  Successful  Habitude  (SMASH),  
              will   be  a  five  year  comprehensive   professional  development and
              assistance program for 315 elementary/middle  (K-  8)  and  50  secondary
              teachers, counselors, students  and  their  parents  with  a particular focus
              on: standards based  curriculum  implementation,    teachers    enhancement   
              and    professional  development, and raising counselors and parents knowledge
              of  the  bridging mechanisms that Facilitate educational transitions  from  one
              level to the next.  The  five  year systemic project will involve several
              components:  1)  a  needs  assessment to give direction  to  the  project;  2) 
              teacher  enhancement  to  develop  teaching  skills  and  content  mastery;  3)
               standard  based curriculum implementation;  and  4)  teaching assistants
              component.  Through  the  meeting, brainstorming, discussion and decision  of 
              teacher-led  curriculum  sequencing and articulation  committees,  the  
              teaching  process  will  be  examined  and  new  strategies  deployed.   All 
              efforts will include full teacher participation.  In-service    training  
              workshops   will   be    provided    for  elementary/middle  (K-8) and
              secondary grade  level  teachers  to  continue   content  knowledge  and  to 
              explore  the   curriculum  standards.   The  project will facilitate a 
              continuing  dialogue  among K- 12 faculty throughout the grant period.  The
              university personnel will work with the classroom teacher  in  the introduction
              of hands-on activities and management strategies  and   provide  guidance  in 
              the  content  areas.   In  addition,  counselors  and parents will be also
              trained in hands-on  science  and  math  activities, and will be provided with 
              information  on  SMETE  precollege  initiatives and SMET career opportunities. 
               A  "Tutorial Assistance" program will be implemented.  A  summative  and
              formative evaluation process will  be  used  to  assure  project improvement
              from the date of initial activity  to  the  conclusion of our efforts. 
              Methodologies will provide rapid  feedback  to  assist in timely management
              intervention,  planning  and  decision making, especially to eliminate
              unnecessary student  failures.  This proposed project will build upon existing
              reform initiatives  already  taking place in the Union City school district 
              and  its  partner  sites.   Mr.  Henry  Cisneros,  Secretary  of  HUD,  has 
              designated  Union City as New Jersey's "Campus of learners",  one  of
              twenty-four nationwide.  Union City is a Thrust H district for  NJSSI  and has
              been funded for a NSF/NIIE project entitled "Union  City On-Line".  Its
              statewide -partner site, NJIT has several NSF  funded  initiatives such as
              Young Scholars Programs,  Females  in  Engineering Programs, Science and Math
              Education for the  Special  Education Population.  Upon  completion of the
              project grant period, the  district  will  have  developed an unique and
              meaningful curriculum not  only  on  the elementary, middle, and secondary
              levels, but will possess  a  standard  based  curriculum that relates to
              outstanding  post-  secondary education at prestigious universities.
