Title       : Problems in Graph Structure Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9701317

Award Number: 9701317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145095             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil Robertson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          Robertson  9701317    This award will provide funds to develop
              several projects in structural graph theory associated with the graph minor
              relation.  Much of the work involves ongoing joint projects with Paul Seymour,
              Robin Thomas and others; and the research of graduate students supervised by
              the principal investigator.  The main topics of this proposal are summarized
              below.  These topics  cover a large part of graph structure theory as it
              relates to the graph minor inclusion relation.  In fact, each topic contains
              major problems, often well known and difficult, and so significant progress in
              any direction is likely  to absorb a great deal of time.  There are at present
              serious attacks (which our group welcomes) being made on many of these problems
              elsewhere in the graph theoretical community. The main topics are as follows:  
              (1) To continue the attack on the open problems in explicit finite graph minor
              structure.  (2) To continue the attack on the open problems in general finite
              graph minor structure.  (3) To attack coloring problems made accessible by the
              improved proof of the four-color theorem and structure theory results.  (4) To
              continue to study connectivity at the levels exhibited by the graphs of the
              Platonic solids and the toroidal regular lattices; in particular chains of
              minors or types of minors at a given level.  (5) To continue to detelop surface
              embedding structure theory by studying questions about how nontrivial closed
              curves on the surface meet an embedded graph.  (6) To extend graph minor theory
              to binary matroids.   (7) To attack some problems in algorithmical graph theory
              and matroid theory.          This research is in the general area of
              Combinatorics. One of the goals of  Combinatorics is to find efficient methods
              of studying how discrete collections  of objects can be arranged. The behavior
              of discrete systems is extremely  important to modern communications. For
              example, the design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone
              systems, and the d esign of algorithms in  computer science deal with discrete
              sets of objects, and this makes use of  combinatorial research.
