Title       : Studies of Nonstoichiometry, Transport, and Interface Characteristics of
               Pr(x)Ce(1-x)O(2-y) with Applications to Gas Sensors with Enhanced Selectivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2001      
File        : a9701699

Award Number: 9701699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry L. Tuller tuller@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1374,1504,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701699  Tuller    Semiconducting gas sensors presently lack sensitivity and 
              selectivity to specific types of gases including hydrocarbons and  NOx
              important for automotive systems.  The Crystal Physics and  Electroceramics
              laboratory at M.I.T. and the Ford Research  Laboratory have teamed up to
              explore the praseodymium-cerium-  oxygen system that exhibits a number of
              features attractive for  the design of a versatile multi-component chemical
              sensor.  The  proposed research will examine the relationships between 
              composition, temperature and partial pressure of oxygen, as well  as the
              nonstoichiometry, phase stability and transport properties  (electronic and
              ionic).   Key features to be studied are: (1)  control of the n- and p-type
              character corresponding to the  position of the Fermi energy and relevant
              sensitivity and  selectivity to various HC and NOx molecules;  (2) the chemical
               diffusivity important with respect to aging of the "bulk"  properties; (3)
              surface reaction kinetics relevant to selectivity  and response times. 
              Fundamental project studies will be carried  out at the Massachusetts Institute
              of Technology; sensor response  and characterization studies are to be
              performed at Ford Research  Labs.  The participants of this GOALI project view
              their feedback  and exchange on materials, data, models, and concepts essential
               to the success of this project.  The project is jointly funded by  the
              Ceramics Program of the Division of Materials Research and  the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical  and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.  %%%  Semiconducting gas sensors presently lack sensitivity and 
              selectivity to specific types of gases including hydrocarbons and  nitrogen
              oxides important for automotive systems.  The Crystal  Physics and
              Electroceramics laboratory at M.I.T. and the Ford  Research Laboratory have
              teamed up to explore the praseodymium-  cerium-oxygen system that exhibits a
              number of features  attractive for the design of a versatile multi-component
              chem ical  sensor.  This collaborative research project is jointly funded by 
              the Ceramics Program of the Division of Materials Research and  the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical  and Physical Sciences
              Directorate.  ***
