Title       : CPMSA: THE GARY INITIATIVE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 3,  2002    
File        : a9701970

Award Number: 9701970
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2689397            (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Guinn meguinn@garycsc.k12.in.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Hawkins  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Gary Community Sch Corp
	      
	      Gary, IN  46402    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                PI: Hawkins, James    The GARY INITIATIVE is a plan to improve the quality and
               quantity of science and mathematics education received by  all students in
              Gary.  It brings together the Gary Community  School Corporation, five higher
              education institutions, the  business community, parents, and the Gary Accord. 
                The  Gary  Community  School Corporation is  a  minority-  majority urban
              system located in Gary, Indiana, a city of  116,500 persons. Gary  is  located 
              at the southern tip of  Lake  Michigan  and  is surrounded   by   resources 
              from  the  Indiana  Dunes   National Lakeshore,  steel mills, and  those of the
              greater  Chicago  area. Three  aspects of Gary  community demographics which
              are important in  this project  are ethnic composition of the community, the
              out migration  of  people, and the economics of the  Gary  community. The 
              population of Lake County is 32 percent African-American;  the school 
              population of Gary is approximately 96  percent  AfricanAmerican.    Gary 
              graduates  have  low SAT scores and test  below  state  and national norms in
              science and  mathematics.  This project is specifically intended  to  increase
              performances in science and mathematics.    This  comprehensive and systemic
              plan is a system-wide  initiative that  will impact all students.  The school 
              system currently  has 20,600  students  in 22 elementary  schools, 6 middle 
              schools,  6 high  schools,  an  alternative middle school, an adult  education
              center,  and  a  career center.  The plan supports  the  district  objectives
              to increase the number of minority students  enrolling in  and  successfully
              completing pre-college  courses  which  will lead   them   to  pursue 
              undergraduate  programs   in   Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and 
              Technology (SMET).    The objectives are:  1 .   To  align the PreK-12 science
              and mathematics     curricula  to national standards, state proficiencies and  
                competencies.  2. To   enhance  PreK-12  teachers'  knowledge  of  science   
               and mathematics and e nhance their use of instructional     strategies which
              insure student success.  3. To  increase to 30% the proportion of students who 
                 enroll  in and successfully complete Algebra I by grade     B.  4. To 
              increase  to 50% the proportion of students who     currently enroll  in  and
              successfully complete three or     more  years  in both science and mathematics
              starting     with the gateway courses of Algebra I and Biology 1.  5. To
              increase the proportion of students who meet the     standards of the state
              proficiency tests.  6. To increase the proportion of students who meet national
                  norms on citywide subject specific tests in science and     mathematics. 
              7. To provide opportunities for student enrichment in     science and
              mathematics within and outside of the school     environment.  8. To establish
              a parent network which will facilitate a     partnership of parents, teachers,
              and students.  9.  To extend and enhance partnerships with community, 
              business, and educational agencies.    We will meet these objectives by:    
              Revising  the  PreK-1 2 science and mathematics     curricula  to meet  the 
              National Council of Teachers of     Mathematics  (NCTM) Standards,  National
              Science     Education Standards  (NSES),  and state proficiencies and    
              competencies.          Providing staff development to align instruction with 
              national  standards for teaching science and mathematics.  Implementing 
              instructional models in science and  mathematics that  incorporate unit
              planning, performance-based activities, assessment,  and cooperative learning. 
                Upgrading  PreK-12  science and mathematics  departments  with  equipment,
              materials, supplies, and other resources needed for  inquiry-based science and
              mathematics teaching.    Expanding  student enrichment activities, for  grades 
              PreK-12 for  after-school, weekend and summer programs such as science and 
              mathematics  clubs,  Family  Science/Math  Nights,   and academic 
              competitions.    Providing and strengthening partnerships and mentorsh ips 
              with  community, business, and education.    Providing  parent  and community
              networks  to  facilitate  the  objectives of this proposal.
