Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nonverbal Behaviors in Social Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  1997     
File        : a9701587

Award Number: 9701587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5701               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynn Smith-Lovin smithlov@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701587  Smith-Lovin    Within the field of Social Psychology, Affect Control
              Theory (ACT) has been used to understand the ways in which people perceive
              events generally (i.e., cognitions, emotions, and behaviors emerging from an
              event).  ACT conceptualizes situations as consisting of actor-behavior-other
              and quantifies the definitions of actors and behaviors on three dimensions: 
              Evaluation, Potency and Activity which have been shown to be human universals
              for responding to stimuli.  However,  nonverbal behaviors have an impact on how
              people perceive the situations in which they find themselves everyday.  This
              Doctoral Dissertation Improvement  proposes to extend ACT to include nonverbal
              behavioral that modify actions, with nonverbal behaviors being defined as
              "those aspects of a person's demeanor which communicate additional information
              about the behavior being performed. For example, nonverbal behaviors tell
              others whether a subject is performing an action enthusiastically (with a
              smile) or reluctantly (with a roll of the eyes).  A four-phase research design
              will be used.  The first phase entails collecting information on nonverbal
              behaviors independent of an event context.  Phase two will pair nonverbal
              behaviors with other behaviors to see how they combine in people's perceptions.
               The third and four phases involves performing two experiments (one on paper
              and one via videotape) to see what effects the inclusion of nonverbal behaviors
              has on impressions people form of events.   Data will be collected from
              undergraduate students at a major U.S. university.  This research has the
              potential to increase our understanding of the relationship between nonverbal
              behaviors and impressions.  In addition, it will increase the utility of Affect
              Control Theory in predicting event perception and will allow for more accurate
              understanding of the complex situations in which people interact.  ****
