Title       : Ultrahigh Pressure Studies of Hydrogen and Its Isotopes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2001   
File        : a9701500

Award Number: 9701500
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Isaac F. Silvera silvera@physics.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701500  Silvera    This  is  a  new  proposal to study solid hydrogen and  its 
              isotopes,  deuterium and HD in  the   multimegabar pressure range.  Pressures
              will be extended  beyond  300  GPa, where it is believed that the dissociative
              transition to atomic  metallic  hydrogen  will take place.  This will be
              accomplished  using  high  quality,  small  culet  diamonds in newly designed 
              precision  diamond  anvil  cells.  Transitions will be searched for by studying
              the strong IR  absorption, as well as the Raman scattering from vibron modes,
              in  the  A-phase  which  is believed to precede the transformation to the
              atomic  solid.  A detected phase  transition will then be studied by optical
              techniques to observe Drude  free-electron   behavior,  or  dc  electrical 
              conductivity   at   low  temperature,  in  order  to  determine the conductive
              state.  NMR will  be  used  to  determine  ortho-para conversion rates. 
              Optical techniques will be developed to  determine the index or refraction and
              the equation of state.  %%%  This  is  a  new  proposal to study solid hydrogen
              and  its  isotopes,  deuterium and HD in  the   multimegabar  pressure range. 
              Solid hydrogen and  its  isotopes  have fascinating high  pressure  phase 
              diagrams.  These molecular solids  are  predicted  to  become  molecular 
              metals  at pressures between 1.5 and 3 megabar  and  atomic  metals  at higher
              pressures.  The molecular and atomic metals are predicted to  be  possible room
              temperature  superconductors.  A transition to  a  phase  called  the  A-phase 
              at  about  1.5 megabars is still not  understood.  These  solids  will  be 
              studied  at  multimegabar  pressures  using  newly  designed  precision 
              diamond anvil cells.  IR absorption, as well as Raman scattering  will  be 
              used to search for new phases.  These will then be studied by optical 
              techniques or dc electrical conductivity at low temperature to observe 
              possible metallic behavior.  NMR will be used to determine ortho-para 
              conversion  rates.   Optical  techniqu es will  also  be  developed  to 
              determine  the index of refraction and the equation of state.  ***
