Title       : Neutron Scattering Techniques Applied to the Investigation of Prototypical
               Magnetic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9701339

Award Number: 9701339
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $405000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey W. Lynn jl70@umail.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701339  Lynn    This project will explore three general avenues of research. 
              The  first  involves  the  structure  and  dynamics  of  the  magnetoresistive 
              oxides.   This  work  will   employ   both  polarized  and unpolarized neutron
              scattering techniques  to  study  the  magnetic and crystal structures, nature 
              of  the  coupling  between  these  two, and  the  sping  and  lattice 
              dynamical excitations.  The second area concerns the  nature  of  the  vortex
              state in superconductors, when  the  lattice  becomes   disordered,  and  when 
              the  rare  earth  magnetic  ordering  occurs.  The final area of interest 
              involves  the  study  of  the  spin  dynamics of isotropic  ferromagnetics. 
              Polarized  beam  techniques will be  used  to  separate  the  longitudinal  and
              transverse spin dynamics of  materials  in  anomalous  systems  such  as Invar 
              alloys.   We  will  also  continue   our   investigations  of  the 
              longitudinal   and  transverse   fluctuation  spectra  just  below   the  
              Curie  temperature,  and  their behavior as a function  of  applied  field. 
              %%%  This project will explore three general avenues of materials  research 
              using  neutron scattering techniques.   The  first  involves  the fundamental
              structural and magnetic properties  of  the  colossal magnetoresistive oxides,
              in an  effort  to  establish  the origins of the metal insulator transition  in
               these   novel   systems.   The  second  aspect  concerns   a  determination
              and understanding of the materials  properties  which  control  the 
              superconducting parameters  of  central  importanceto commercial applications,
              such as vortex pinning  to  produce high critical current materials.  The final
              area  concerns  the fundamental and practical properties  of  soft  magnetic 
              materials, which are of commercial importance  for  transformer  cores, 
              magnetic  shielding,  etc.   Particular  emphasis  will be placed on the Invar
              class of soft magnets,  as  these are of  technical importance because their
              density  does   not  chan ge  with temperature, in  contrast  to  most  metals
              which expand upon heating.  ***
