Title       : CAREER: Investigations of Novel Low Temperature Behavior in Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9701548

Award Number: 9701548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schiffer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701548  Schiffer    This is a CAREER proposal on magnetic materials that are
              employed  in all facets of modern technology from computer discs to  automobile
              engines.  In these materials, the magnetic moments  (which can be thought of as
              microscopic quantum mechanical bar  magnets) interact with each other, and the
              nature of the  interactions has a profound impact on the material properties. 
              The proposed research will investigate two classes of magnetic  materials:
              geometrically frustrated magnets in which the  geometrical placement of the
              magnetic moments results in a  precisely balanced competition between
              interactions and colossal  magnetoresistance manganites in which the
              interaction between the  magnetic moments is closely tied the conduction of
              electrical  current.  The proposed educational initiative will be the 
              development of a seminar course in modern condensed matter  physics.  Since
              standard condensed matter physics courses  typically do not cover the
              developments of the past three  decades, this course will give students a broad
              overview of  research areas of current interest.  %%%  The proposed CAREER
              research will investigate the properties of  novel magnetic materials at low
              temperatures.  One subject of  research will be geometrically frustrated
              magnets, in which the  magnetic ions interact antiferromagnetically, but the 
              interactions are frustrated by the lattice geometry.  Thermodynamic
              measurements on these systems are planned as a  function of magnetic field,
              temperature, and non-magnetic  impurity concentration in order to elucidate
              their novel low  temperature behavior.  A second area of research will be 
              investigations of the rare-earth manganites which have been  recently shown to
              display large magnetoresistance.  In particular  the compositional phase
              diagrams of these materials will be  examined to understand the observed
              transitions between various  magnetic and electronic phases.  The development
              of a new course  in modern condensed matter physics is also planned.   The
              intent  of the course is to expose graduate students and advanced 
              undergraduates to modern research topics (such as spin glasses,  liquid helium,
              and high temperature superconductors) which are  typically excluded from
              standard courses on condensed matter  physics.  ***
