Title       : Scanning Hall Probe Microscopy of Superconducting Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9701532

Award Number: 9701532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269494             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart B. Field field@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9701532 
              Field    This  experimental research project focuses on  unusual  magnetic 
              properties  of Type II superconductors using a state of  the  art  cryogenic
              scanning Hall probe microscope, with high spatial  (one  micrometer)  and 
              temporal resolutions. The first  system  to  be  studied is a large array of
              mesoscopic superconducting rings. The  magnetic     moments     in     such    
              rings     can     couple  "antiferromagnetically", via purely magnetic
              interactions,  which  have  been  observed in preliminary experiments.  Cleaner
               arrays  will  be  studied  in  a search for true long  range  order.  The 
              microscope  will  also be used to study the  static  and  dynamic  properties 
              of vortices in superconductors with both  random  and  periodic pinning. In the
              random case the primary interest  is  in  spatially-resolved   dynamics  of 
              vortices   in   a   disordered  potential,  when  strongly driven by either 
              magnetic  fields  or  applied currents, with the expectation of getting new
              information  on  the depinning transition.  With periodic pinning, experiments 
              will probe the consequences of variations of two competing length  scales:  the
               vortex-vortex  spacing  and  the  distance  between  pinning sites.  %%%  This
                experimental  research  project  explores   the   magnetic  properties of
              superconductors, with particular attention  to  how  magnetic  flux moves
              through a superconductur when pushed  by  an  external  magnetic  field, or by
              a current  passing  through  the  superconductor.  Since  it is this flux 
              motion  which  generally  results  in  the  loss  of  perfect conductivity, 
              which  is  the  hallmark  of  superconductors, a deeper  understanding  of 
              these  issues  may  lead  to  improved  technological  applications   of 
              superconductors,  as  in power generation and  transmission.  The  flux  motion
               will be imaged using the powerful new technique  of  scanning Hall probe
              microscopy. The further deve lopment  of  this  instrument, which may find use
              in many fields (such as hard  disk  technologies) where the local structure of
              the magnetic field  is  of  interest,  is an integral part of the project. 
              Results  from  this  research may include unusual new effects or materials
              which  may find new application in technology. This research project  is 
              interdisciplinary  in nature and involves graduate  students  who  will  be 
              excellently  trained to enter  positions  in  industry,  government or
              education.  ***
