Title       : Dissertation Research: Origin and Evolutionary Relationshipsof the Cultivated
               Passion Fruit (Passiflora)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9701092

Award Number: 9701092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Jansen rjansen@utxvms.cc.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence E. Gilbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9701092  Jansen   Graduate student Anne Hansen, under the direction of
              Profs. Robert Jansen and Lawrence Gilbert at the University of Texas, is
              studying plants of the tropical passion flower genus, Passiflora, in South
              America. The genus is large and taxonomically difficult, with over 475 species;
              the subgenus Passiflora with an estimated 100 species is the main target for
              study. Field work in Brazil will augment materials collected from other regions
              of the neotropics, complementing herbarium holdings. The general goals include
              improved species classification, with description of reliable and stable
              characters for identification, and the construction of a phylogeny for the
              group, from new molecular data derived from restriction site mapping of the
              chloroplast genome and from DNA sequencing of nuclear ribosomal genes. The
              widely cultivated edible passion fruit, Passiflora edulis, is a member of this
              subgenus, and a related goal is determination of the closest relatives of the
              cultivated species and the likely area of origin in South America.  
              Considerable ecological work has been done on the interactions between
              Passiflora host plants and herbivorous insects of the butterfly genus
              Heliconius, in the American tropics. Many insects are specific to particular
              Passiflora species, and some are thought to sequester noxious plant compounds
              from their host plants (alkaloids, cyanogenic compounds) as potential chemical
              defenses of their own. Further research on this ecological interaction is
              limited by the lack of a phylogeny of the Passiflora species; it is not known
              whether closely related insect species feed on closely related plant species,
              or whether host switching is unconstrained by genealogical relationship. The
              project will improve the taxonomy of Passiflora species, and facilitate future
              ecological research by providing a reliable phylogeny for the plants.
