Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolution and Systematics of a Widespread Polyploid Fern
               Complex, Dryopteris filix-mas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9701318

Award Number: 9701318
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Werth CNCRW@TTACS1.TTU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701318  Werth   Graduate student Lilin Xiang, under the direction of Prof.
              Charles Werth at Texas Tech University, is studying the origin and
              diversification of the so-called male fern, Dryopteris filix-mas, over its wide
              northern-hemisphere distributional range. A polyploid plant, the male fern is
              thought to combine sets of chromosomes from two or possibly more parental
              diploid fern species that hybridized to produce doubled-chromosome offspring.
              Suspected diploid parents are Eurasian Dryopteris species, but American and
              Chinese taxa will also be studied. One goal is to distinguish between a single
              origin followed by dispersal, or multiple origins over the range of
              distribution, possibly from different parental species on the different
              continents. New evidence from molecular biology will help solve the problem,
              including electrophoretic analysis of protein variation (an indirect measure of
              genetic variability, sampling mostly nuclear genes) and direct DNA sequencing
              of a chloroplast gene. Population samples from North America, Europe, Turkey,
              and China are being gathered to provide extensive coverage of the morphological
              diversity known in this group of ferns.   Polyploidy, or multiple sets of
              chromosomes (which sometimes restores fertility to otherwise sterile plant
              hybrids), is widespread in land plants, especially in ferns. As in the male
              fern, Dryopteris filix-mas, it is often associated with a widespread, almost
              weedy distribution, accompanied by minor morphological variation. Whether the
              polyploid arose once and dispersed widely to its present range, or arose
              through repeated hybridization events in various parts of the current
              distribution, is a question difficult to answer with only traditional taxonomic
              characters of morphology and anatomy. New molecular evidence from allozyme
              analyses and DNA sequencing, drawn from extensive population samples across the
              range and including several putative parent taxa, will help resolve the matter.
              In turn, the Dryopteris case will add to the small  number of rigorous studies
              that analyze the historical biogeography of polyploid plant taxa.
