Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Quantum Tunneling Between Topologies in 2+1 Gravity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1999       
File        : a9701752

Award Number: 9701752
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Ashworth mikea@landau.usdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Ashworth  9701752    This award supports a 12 month Hapan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Michael Ashworth
              at the Tokyo Institute for Technology,  Okayama, Japan.  Dr. Ashworth will be
              working with Dr. Akio  Hosoya, Professor in the Department of Physics, on a 
              research project entitled, "Quantum Tunneling between  Different Topologies."  
               Over the past several decades scholars have attempted to  unite two
              fundamental theories of current physics - quantum  mechanics and general
              relativity - in that although they  describe two different extremes of the
              universe, there are  indications that they should be considered limiting cases
              of  a broader theory.  One of the analytical areas that these  two theories
              have equal footing is in the early universe.  Research suggests that if the
              universe was exclusively a  quantum object it would have a complicated topology
              with  wormholes - something like a sponge.  A research question  that arises
              is: why has the universe not frozen into one of  these exotic typologies? One
              likely explanation suggests  that a process of "quantum tunneling" occurs
              between  different topologies, similar to that which occurs as  electrons
              tunnel through a potential energy barrier.  The  proposed research will focus
              on the process of quantum  tunneling, the goals being: 1) a more complete
              understanding  of  quantum gravity theory and universal topologies,  and;  2) 
              an attempt to consolidate currently competing theories.  ***
