Title       : Reliability Enhancement of Power Systems via Condition Assessment and Early
               Failure Detection of Polymeric Equipment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  1997 
File        : a9701539

Award Number: 9701539
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Momoh                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291617             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravindranath S. Gorur gorur@asuvax.eas.asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Norma F. Hubele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ECS-9701539  Gorur     Power system reliability is dependent on efficient and
              accurate characterization of network components.  This proposal addresses the
              critical need for condition assessment and early failure detection in polymeric
              outdoor equipment, key elements in the power delivery system.  The present use
              of polymeric insulation in power systems is estimated at US $ 2 billion per
              year and increasing, with USA being the single largest user.  Flashover, or the
              inability of the device to maintain the service voltage, and housing material
              degradation, which can lead to disastrous consequences such as dropping of the
              line, are the principles failure modes experienced in service. Until now, there
              is no reliable method available to predict when failure of the insulation,
              which is one of the weakest link in the system, will occur.  Our
              interdisciplinary team of insulation systems expertise and statistical analysis
              expertise proposes to focus on making significant breakthroughs to enable
              condition assessment and early failure detection by demonstrating that: (1) It
              is possible to quantify electrical discharge activity that initiates material
              degradation, (2) Statistically efficient designed experiments and models can be
              used to create a predictive model linking device characteristics and service
              conditions to material degradation and flashover, and (3) A computer model
              which incorporates detailed device design can reliably predict flashover
              occurrence, and consequently can be used for preventive maintenance in the
              system.    Advancements in the understanding of aging phenomena of polymers,
              electric field calculation, flashover mechanism, data acquisition, signal
              processing related to electrical discharges, material characterization and high
              speed photography will be utilized in this project.  The failure criteria will
              be translated into parameters that are easy to use and in industry standard
              terms.  Failures will be detected from measurements of discharge current, arc
              dynamics, discharge tempera ture and chemical detection process.  Each of these
              criteria has potential for development as a practical sensor device that can be
              used for preventive and predictive maintenance.
