Title       : Dissertation Research: Adaptation and Differentiation Among Serpentine
               Populations of Platystemon californicus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1997        
File        : a9701323

Award Number: 9701323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4685               (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald A. Stratton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                  9701323  STRATTON   The chemistry of serpentine soil is such as to preclude
              the growth of most species of plants.  This project investigates the nature of
              traits underlying the ability of some populations of the plant species
              Platystemon californicus to tolerate serpentine soil.  First, the tolerance of
              populations growing on serpentine soil is being compared with that of
              populations native to other habitats.  Second, the levels of nutrients and
              heavy metals in each of the soils are being assayed along with the
              physiological responses of plants from each population to variations in those
              same chemical factors.  Third, a DNA geneaology of the populations is being
              produced to determine whether serpentine habitat has been colonized multiple
              times independently.  And fourth, artificial hybridizations among serpentine
              populations are being performed to determine whether the genetic basis of
              serpentine tolerance differs among populations.   Serpentine tolerance in P.
              Californicus appears to represent a case where natural selection is acting
              independently, but more or less in parallel, in geographically isolated
              serpentine populations.  It is currently unknown whether such parallel
              selection pressures retard or accelerate genetic divergence among populations. 
              That is, does parallel selection hmmogenize a species or cause it to diversify?
               The resolution of this issue is relevant to a number of theoretical and
              applied population biology problems - from the conservation of geographically
              fragmented species to the coordinated control of agricultural pests and human
              diseases.
