Title       : Spin and Pseudospin Degeneracies in Interacting Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9701958

Award Number: 9701958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bennett B. Goldberg goldberg@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701958  Goldberg    This experimental research project focuses on conducting
              systems  formed by the "edge states" that lie near the perimeter of quasi-  two
              dimensional electron gases in the quantum Hall effect (QHE).  Fundamentally new
              transport behavior is predicted for sample  geometries that bring multiple edge
              states into communication.  Two sample geometries will be employed in this
              project.  These  are a GaAs/AlGaAs superlattice pillar with edge states 
              communicating on a 2D surface sheath; and a gated GaAs/AlGaAs  heterojunction
              with edge states communicating across a long,  narrow "line gate" barrier. 
              Existing theoretical predictions in  these cases will be tested with
              measurements to be made using a  high-field (19Tesla), low temperature (20mK)
              apparatus on samples  fabricated from MBE-grown GaAs/AlGaAs heterostructures. 
              It is  expected that the results will advance general understanding of 
              electronic transport in quasi-1D- and in anisotropic 3D-  materials.  %%%  This
              research program examines ways in which electrons interact  with each other to
              create ordered or collective structures.  In  many materials systems magnetism
              is driven by electronic  interactions and in many technologically important
              areas like  mass storage devices and computer memory, magnetism plays a 
              fundamental role.  Our program is an experimental effort to  develop and
              examine model systems of magnetism.  Only by using  very pure model systems can
              the electronic interaction effects be  isolated and studied.  Our preliminary
              results have shown that  when you have all electrons magnetically aligned, then
              forcing  one to flip its orientation cause all its neighbors and their 
              neighbors to turn to partially flip, creating a kind of swirl or  vortex. 
              These swirls of electrons, called Skyrmions, determine  the magnetic properties
              of the material.  To study Skyrmions, our  group has built collaborations with
              Lucent Technology, the Kepler  University in Austria, the Institute of High
              Pressure Physics in  Russia, and  the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
              in  Florida.  The group encompasses students from high-school summer  interns,
              to undergraduate and graduate students who will work  together using novel
              techniques of light transmission to "see"  these electron swirls and study
              their most fundamental  properties.  New microscopes are being developed, which
              will have  eventual application in biology and DNA sequencing, extending 
              beyond the materials science of this program.  New materials  systems combining
              silicon technology with optical properties will  be used, which again will have
              application in future generations  of optoelectronics.  ***
