Title       : Dissertation Research: Breeding Systems in Gaertnera (Rubiaceae): A Phylogenetic
               Approach to the Evolution of Dioecy from Distyly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9701008

Award Number: 9701008
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Raven   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701008  Raven   Graduate student Simon Malcombep, under the direction of Dr.
              Peter Raven at the Missouri Botanical Garden, is studying the several species
              of the Old World tropical shrub Gaertnera (madder family, Rubiaceae) for the
              evolution of pollination and floral features. Along with several related
              genera, these plants are considered ancestrally to possess hermaphroditic
              flowers with two different style lengths (said to be distylous), a condition
              hypothesized to promote outbreeding. Within the genus, several species have
              changed to the dioecious condition, with separate male (pollen) and female
              (ovule or seed) flowers on separate plants, a condition obligately enforcing
              outbreeding. The relative roles of pollinator effectiveness (the flowers are
              insect pollinated) and genetic inbreeding depression have been impossible to
              disentangle, in trying to determine what ecological or genetic factors drive
              the evolution toward dioecy. A well supported phylogeny for the 48 or so
              species of Gaertnera is one major goal of this project, to be reached by
              combining extensive morphological studies with new DNA sequence data generated
              from all the species. Then, field-based studies of pollination and seed set can
              be targeted to species pairs or groups where contrasting distylous and
              dioecious conditions coexist.   Field collecting in the Old World tropics and
              observational work on pollinators and seed set will provide necessary materials
              for morphological and molecular analyses of the phylogenetic relationships
              among the species of Gaertnera shrubs, leading to improved classification of
              these plants and reliable markers for identification. In addition, tests will
              be made of ecological conditions pertaining to pollinator effectiveness and
              seed set in various species pairs and groups, to assess factors that promote
              the evolution of dioecy in plants.
