Title       : Dissertation Research: Experimental Tests of the Parental Investment in Care
               Hypothesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9701222

Award Number: 9701222
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5375               (Estimated)
Investigator: Justin D. Congdon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701222  Congdon  Reptiles such as turtles lack behavioral parental care, such
              as birds feeding their young and mammals providing milk.  In contrast, female
              turtles lay eggs in nests in the ground and subsequently return to their
              aquatic habitats.  Nests are left unprotected and once hatchlings emerge from
              the nest they are on their own to find not only a suitable aquatic habitat but
              their own food as well.  However, hatchling turtles do not leave the nests
              totally empty handed; they carry within their bodies some reserve yolk. 
              Hatchlings may metabolize this yolk as fuel during their early life.  The time
              that elapses before hatchlings feed can be surprisingly long.  In some species
              of turtles, the hatchlings develop completely but then remain in the nest to
              overwinter.  They may remain in the nest over 200 days before emerging in early
              spring.  In other species, such as sea turtles, hatchlings emerge immediately
              after developing, race down the beach and then must swim out to seal until they
              reach offshore currents where they spend their first months of life.  Sea
              turtle hatchlings may swim for several days without feeding.    Evolutionary
              ecologists have hypothesized that providing the 'yolk' is one way females can
              increase the chances of their offspring surviving a critical period.  Whether
              hatchlings with larger reserves perform better than hatchlings with smaller
              ones is unknown.  The importance of the yolk reserves will be experimentally
              tested so that the ecological and evolutionary significance of varying amounts
              of yolk reserves can be better understood.  Yolk reserves in hatchlings can be
              manipulated by removing a small amount of yolk.  After the yolk reserves are
              reduced, the experimental animals can be compared to control animals in which
              the yolk reserves were not manipulated.  Four questions will be addressed.  How
              will reduced yolks affect the ability of the hatchling to overwinter in the
              nest?  How will the reduced yolks affect the ability of the hatchlings to
              capture prey such a s small tadpoles?  What will the growth and survival of the
              experimental animals be compared to the control group?  And how will the
              ability to disperse overland to a home pond be affected?  The last question
              will be answered by releasing hatchlings in areas used by nesting females.  The
              shell and hind legs of the hatchlings will be coated with a color-coded dust
              that can be seen at night using a UV light.  Each turtle will be followed to
              determine if it successfully reaches a pond.  In combination these tests will
              demonstrate if and in what ways yolk sac reserves affect hatchling turtles.
