Title       : Molecular Structure and Dynamics Beyond the Born-Oppenheimer Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9701480

Award Number: 9701480
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $439150             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward R. Grant   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Edward Grant of Purdue University is supported by the Experimental   Physical
              Chemistry Program to continue his research on state-to-state   photoionization
              and dynamics of intramolecular relaxation in highly   excited states of small
              molecules.  The main objective of this work is to   accumulate, for a number of
              polyatomic systems, state-detailed   spectroscopic information of sufficient
              resolution to support full-scale   Multichannel Quantum Defect Theory
              calculations.  Systems to be studied   include hydrocarbon and metal-centered
              free radicals that form   closed-shell cations.  The PI will use multiresonant
              excitation   techniques to make high-resolution spectroscopic measurements of
              resonant   lineshapes and energies associated with transitions to states which
              are   coupled to ionization and dissociation continua, and photoselection with 
               specialized detection methods to study rovibrational structure in the  
              electronic ground states of cations and precursor free radicals.    The effort
              to describe energy flow in isolated molecules has added   considerably to our
              understanding of chemical reactivity, and served for   many years as an
              important focus of research in chemical physics.  The   study of intramolecular
              relaxation remains today a vital point of contact   between experimental and
              theoretical molecular dynamics.  Particularly   important is the transfer of
              energy between electronic and internuclear   degrees of freedom.  The detailed
              dynamics of such processes can give   rise to significant chemical
              consequences.  For example, issues   associated with the dynamics of energy
              transfer between electronic   coordinates and internuclear ones underlie
              contemporary efforts to direct   the outcomes of chemical transformations.     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
