Title       : CAREER: Research and Education Program Based on a Novel Microplasma Source
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9701916

Award Number: 9701916
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199720             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey A. Hopwood hopwood@ece.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number:                ECS-9701916   Principal Investigator:        
              Jeffrey Hopwood    Title:  CAREER:  Research and Education Program Based on a
              Novel Microplasma Source    The fabrication, physical characterization,
              modeling and  applications of a novel microplasma source will be investigated
              and developed.  The microplasma generator is fabricated on a wafer, in much the
              same way as an integrated circuit, and therefore is a significant addition to
              the new and important class of devices known as microelectronic mechanical
              systems (MEMS).  The plasma source itself is based on the principle of an
              inductively coupled plasma (ICP) reactor in which an antenna, through inductive
              coupling, becomes a source of rf energy for a neutral gas contained in a
              reactor region, thereby ionizing it and creating a plasma state. The planer ICP
              geometry is well-suited for scaled down fabrication on wafers using
              conventional integrated circuit and micromachining techniques. The  small scale
              of the device will push its operation into a wholly new and unexplored area in
              plasma science.  In this new small scale regime, the skin depth is greater than
              the radius of the plasma  itself, therefore shielding properties may be
              expected to be very different.  This work is therefore very fundamental, as
              well as adding a new dimension to MEMS with many potential applications.    The
              education plan involves projects in environmental monitoring  based on the
              small, lower power ICP devices for undergraduates, with some high school
              outreach also planned.  The projects also involve multidisciplinary training in
              optical emission spectroscopy, electronic design of voltage controlled power
              oscillators, and non-linear control systems, in addition to training in MEMS
              fabrication methods. The research projects also make an education in plasma
              science much more accessible to a much wider range of students.  The usual ICP
              reactor is a large piece of equipment which can only be accessed by a few
              competently trained operators.  It als o involves high currents and high fields
              which limit its accessibility for safety reasons.  That there is a critical
              need for more education in plasma science is documented by the National
              Research Council Report: Plasma Science: From Fundamental Science to
              Technological Applications.  The semiconductor industry and the burgeoning
              plasma aided manufacturing and environmental waste treatment industries face a
              critical shortage of people with training specifically in plasma science and
              engineering.  These hands-on plasma projects will provide training in an area
              of national importance.    ***
