Title       : Fundamental Studies in Nonlinear Chromatography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9701680

Award Number: 9701680
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $562516             (Estimated)
Investigator: Georges A. Guiochon Guiochon@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1974      ANALYTICAL SEPARATIONS & MEAS.
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This is a renewal award for the work of Professor Georges Guiochon at the  
              University of Tennessee-Knoxville for his on-going research in non-linear  
              chromatography.  The work, supported by a grant from the Analytical and  
              Surface Chemistry Program, will investigate theoretical and experimental  
              aspects of the operation of chromatographic columns in an overload   condition.
               Working mainly on problems involving the separation of pairs   of enantiomers
              and of protein mixtures, research on the fundamentals of   preparative
              chromatography will be performed.  Techniques such as   simulated moving bed
              separations (SMB) will be evaluated.  Central to the   work is the prediction
              and optimization of individual band profiles of   multicomponent mixtures
              through insights gained from the thermodynamic   behavior and kinetics of mass
              transfer of these components measured under   various conditions.  Calculated
              and experimental band profiles will be   compared.  The main experimental
              studies will involve determinations of   competitive isotherms, enantiomeric
              separations by SMB and the   determination of mass transfer resistances in
              protein purifications.  This work is in the area of separations science and is
              concerned with the   theoretical and practical operation of chromatographic
              columns for   preparative chemistry.  The work will greatly improve our
              understanding   in this area and is of major potential impact on many
              industries which   produce pure compounds such as fine chemicals and
              pharmaceuticals.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                         
