Title       : CAREER: Defining the Chemical Basis of RNA Function by Nucleotide Analog
               Interference Mapping
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 14,  2000  
File        : a9701787

Award Number: 9701787
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $347000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott A. Strobel strobel@csb.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9183,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Strobel's research focuses on establishing a new methodology to  
              determine structure-activity relationships in structurally and   catalytically
              important RNA molecules.  Target molecules include a series   of nucleotide
              analogues with oxidatively labile 5'-O-(1-thio)triphosphate   substituents. 
              Individual analogues will be incorporated into RNA by in   vitro transcription
              to create a library of mutant RNA's, where individual   nucleotides have been
              randomly replaced by an analogue.   Individual RNA   mutants that exhibit
              activity in a particular biological system are   distinguished from those that
              do not.  Subsequent oxidative cleavage at   the thiophosphate group under mild
              conditions with iodine, and   comparative analysis of the active and nonactive
              analogues on sequencing   gels offers a straightforward means to identify the
              active chemical   group.   This methodology, called Nucleotide Analogue
              Interference   Mapping (NAIM), will be used to identify the chemical groups in
              RNA   relating to: (1) the interaction of 5S rRNA with ribosomal protein L25;  
              (2) the role of U6 snRNA in pre-mRNA splicing; (3) the autocatalytic VS  
              ribozyme from Neurospora; and (4) the interaction of alpha operon mRNA   with
              S4 protein.    Educational activities include developing a   bioorganic course
              emphasizing synthetic organic design and macromolecular   function, and
              involving both local undergraduates and minority students   in the research
              program.    With this CAREER award, the Organic Dynamics Program supports the  
              research and educational activities of Professor Scott Strobel of the  
              Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry at Yale University.    
              Professor Strobel's research is focused on developing a methodology,   called
              Nucleotide Analogue Interference Mapping, that will significantly   accelerate
              the process of identifying structure-activity relationships in   structurally
              and catalytically important RNA molecules.  Professor   Strobel's educational
              activities include developing a multidepartmental   course which will explore
              the use of organic chemical synthesis to   investigate and understand
              biological systems, and promoting an interest   in chemical research by
              involving both local and minority undergraduates   in the research program.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
