Title       : CAREER: New Methods for Systems Analysis of Environmental Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9701502

Award Number: 9701502
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235000             (Estimated)
Investigator: H. Christopher Frey frey@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1179      ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0118000   Pollution Control                       
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701502  Frey  This research program features several major activities: (1) the 
              development of detailed engineering-economic models of clean  technologies for
              the purpose of understanding trade-offs among  process performance, emissions
              and cost; (2) the development of  new methods for quantitative analysis of
              uncertainty and  variability in environmental technologies; (3) the combination
              of  probabilistic analysis with optimization capabilities to yield  approaches
              for optimizing technologies in the face of  uncertainties; and (4) detailed
              case studies to illustrate the  use of systems models and the benefits of the
              probabilistic and  optimization methodologies.    The detailed case studies
              will focus on selected innovative  gasification technologies.  These
              technologies offer promise for  low environmental discharges, waste
              utilization, and efficient  use of fossil fuels.  For example, coal
              gasification technologies  represent a rich area of study regarding process
              optimization,  uncertainty analysis, and pollution prevention because of the 
              wide range of possible process configurations.  These  technologies are
              emerging as the preferred alternative for the  next generation of coal-based
              power generation, with nearly a  dozen demonstration plants underway in the
              U.S. and Europe.  By  failing to rigorously quantify the risks of new
              technology,  traditional approaches to estimating their performance, 
              emissions, and cost have been misleading, exposing decision  makers to
              unnecessary costs and risks.  The billions of dollars  now being spent on the
              development of coal gasification  technologies should be targeted to those
              systems that offer the  greatest potential for emissions reduction and
              favorable costs.  Therefore, there is a critical need for systems modeling of
              these  technologies.  Opportunities to extend the methodology to  evaluation of
              other types of technologies will be considered as  part of collaborative work. 
                The educational program will include the development of modular  inst
              ructional materials in air pollution control, air quality  engineering, systems
              engineering, and related topics.  These  modules will be adaptable for use in
              courses in transportation  engineering, chemical engineering, and textiles. 
              Modular  materials are amenable to systematic evaluation and targeted 
              refinement through pre- and post-testing.  Modular materials will  also
              facilitate distance-learning course offerings.  A key focus  in the development
              of instructional materials will be the  development of multi-media pedagogical
              computer models of major  emission sources that transfer the research results
              into the  classroom.  Such models will enable students to explore the 
              sensitivity of model predictions to different mechanistic  assumptions
              regarding mass and energy balances, chemical  equilibrium, chemical kinetics,
              and empirical approaches to  estimating pollutant formation and control, and to
              deal with  uncertainty in model structure and input parameters.  ***
