Title       : After the Genome 2: Towards a Predictive Functional Genomics"
               Conference/November 9-13, 1996, Santa Fe, NM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  1996   
File        : a9701360

Award Number: 9701360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Philip Harriman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1996   
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger Brent   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mass General Hospital
	      Research Management
	      Boston, MA  02114    617/724-2722

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Brent   9701360  Many contemporary biologists now recognize the need to
              understand two aspects of gene function:  to determine the function of
              individual gene products, and to determine how those products act together in
              pathways to control gene expression, to sense environmental signals, and to
              execute cellular processes.  This need has become more pressing because of the
              large numbers of genes of unknown function that are being identified by genome
              projects.  The vast increase in the number of sequenced genes has made it
              important for pharmaceutical companies to seek methods to decide which proteins
              to target for their drug discovery efforts, and has made biologists aware that
              they will need better handles on gene function to understand biology in its
              fundamentals.  The purpose of the second annual "After the Genome" meeting is
              to bring together leaders in technological development, technological use, and
              technological funding to discuss the state of information acquisition and its
              use in genomics.  Participants will discuss what new developments are still
              necessary to address current limitations on the cost and availability of
              information and tools.  The result of this focused, open exchange will be
              disseminated via the internet with the purpose of engaging community, funding
              organizations, and academic and commercial concerns in this discussion.  As we
              move towards the 21st century, the challenge of genomics will be to utilize the
              information contained in the vast amount of sequence, positional, and
              functional information to create new research, diagnostic, and therapeutic
              tools to enhance  our understanding of biological processes.  Three current
              research areas are relevant to these tasks.  One is the recently-christened
              field of  "functional genomics", which takes as its goal the global assignment
              of function to genes.  Another is the older discipline that develops tools and
              models to predict biological outcomes.  The third is the development of methods
              and instrumentation to underpin the  first and the second.  This meeting
              examines how recent developments such as the yeast two-hybrid system,. High
              density arrays, and footprinting can  be combined to facilitate the
              identification of the function of a gene.  A section of the meeting will also
              be devoted to the current and future state of data analysis and information
              systems in genomics.  This conference will brings together people working in
              these areas.  It emphasizes new approaches and cross-disciplinary
              communication.
