Title       : Combinatorics and Algebraic Geometry -- Macdonald Polynomials, Hilbert Schemes,
               and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1997     
File        : a9701218

Award Number: 9701218
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140367             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Haiman mhaiman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Haiman  9701218  Haiman has been working on a project of several years duration
              to prove conjectures of Garsia and Haiman giving a combinatorial model for
              Macdonald polynomials, along with a series of conjectures of Haiman on diagonal
              harmonics, using sheaf-cohomological methods applied to the Hilbert scheme of
              points in the plane and related algebraic varieties. Once that is done, it will
              be possible to apply the resulting tools to seek unified geometric explanations
              of the Macdonald polynomials' many remarkable properties.  This constitutes the
              first part mf the planned research.  Haiman and his student W. Brockman,
              seeking to apply recent work of Broer to certain aspects of the above study,
              have discovered new connections linking other algebraic varieties to the one-
              and two-parameter Kostka polynomials.  These discoveries have led to a
              geometric explanation of Lascoux's atoms and to tantalizing conjectures whose
              further study will form the second part of the planned research.  As a third
              and final part of the planned research, Haiman will resume his earlier work on
              Hecke algebras and Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials, motivated by his still unsolved
              conjectures on Hecke algebra characters, and the related problem of finding a
              satisfactory combinatorial interpretation of Kazhdan-Lusztig polynomials.  This
              research concerns the interplay between combinatorics and algebraic geometry.
              One of the goals of  combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how
              discrete collections  of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete
              systems is extremely  important to modern communications. For example, the
              design of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the
              design of algorithms in  computer science deal with discrete sets of objects,
              and this makes use of  combinatorial research. Algebraic  geometry is one of
              the oldest parts of modern mathematics, but  one which has had a revolutionary
              flowering in the past quarter-century. In its origin, it treated figures that
              could  be defined  in the plane by the simplest equations, namely polynomials.
              Nowadays the field makes use of methods not only from algebra,  but from
              analysis, topology, and combinatorics, and conversely is finding  application
              in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical  computer science, and
              robotics.
