Title       : Geometry - Groups and Lattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9701444

Award Number: 9701444
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Conway conway@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9180,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                    Conway  9701444      This award funds the research of Professor John
              Conway on knots, groups, and quadratic forms. (1) Knots are of increasing
              interest to a wide variety of scientists, and are intimately connected with
              3-manifolds. Conway has two students who are studying them computationally in
              terms of his new naming system. One of the students is trying to prove a
              classification proof for  simplex knots  using Thurston?s geometrical
              techniques, and the other plans to apply similar ideas to the computational
              study of 3-mainfolds. (2) Groups, and the  Monster Group , in particular, form
              the second topic of study.  Conway plans to develop practical algorithms for
              computing in the Monster and other large groups using a new and simplified
              construction for it. Conway?s student Chris Simons is studying the Monster
              using a different technique (hyperbolic reflections), and they plan to  marry 
              the techniques. (3) Lattices and Quadratic Forms are closely related. Conway?s
              student W. Schneeberger is working on a proof of their conjecture that an
              integer positive-definite quadratic form that represents the numbers from 1 to
              290 will represent all numbers. Conway intends to continue the work (mostly
              geometrical and algebraic) that he and Sloane have been doing over the last
              decade.  The proposed work on (1) and (3) should produce tables of information
              of great value to many workers in those fields. The work on (2) is more
              speculative but more fundamental.      This project involves research in
              Algebra, Number Theory, and Knot Theory. Algebra can be though of as the study
              of symmetry in the abstract. As such, Algebra has direct applications to areas
              of physics and chemistry. In particular, the modern theory of gauge fields in
              physics uses algebra extensively.  Number Theory has its historical roots in
              the study of the whole numbers,  addressing such questions as those dealing
              with the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among the oldest
              branches of mathematics and was pursued for many  centuries for purely
              aesthetic reasons. Within the last half century, it has become indispensable
              tools in diverse applications in areas such as data transmission, data
              processing, and communication systems. Knot Theory deals with the mathematical
              theory of knots. This branch of mathematics has applications in biology and
              chemistry. In particular,  biologists and mathematicians have joined forces to
              understand what type of knotting allows DNA to replicate so easily.
