Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Evidence for the Origin ofthe Hawaiian
               Drosophilidae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9701251

Award Number: 9701251
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert DeSalle desalle@amnh.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Museum of Nat Hist
	      Central Park West at 79th St
	      New York, NY  10024    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701251  DESALLE    Much of what scientists know about the genetics and
              molecular biology of living organisms has been learned from a single species of
              insect, the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster.  The genus Drosophila contains
              thousands of species.  Continuing research on the biology of D. melanogaster
              will benefit from comparisons with other species, especially if the
              phylogenetic history of these species is known.  Understanding the phylogenetic
              history of this large group of species is a complex task, as no single source
              of information (e.g. the sequence of a single gene obtained from all species)
              is powerful enough to answer all questions about the relationships among
              species.    In this research, Rob DeSalle and doctoral candidate James Remson
              will reconstruct the phylogenetic history for the closest relatives of
              Drosophila melanogaster using a large amount of information, especially from
              the DNA sequences of several different genes.  The study will concentrate on
              species that live in the Hawaiian Islands, where a large number of Drosophila
              species are found.  A major question to be answered is whether the Hawaiian
              Drosophila species arose from one, or more than one, OfounderO species.  The
              use of multiple sets of data should provide a more robust reconstruction of the
              phylogenetic history of Drosophila than has been available previously.
