Title       : Dissertation Research: Molecular Phylogenetics and Interfamilial Relationships
               in the Portulacaceous Alliance of the Order Caryophyllales
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9701125

Award Number: 9701125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9950               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Wallace rwallace@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701125  Wallace   Graduate student Wendy Applequist, under the guidance of Dr.
              Robert Wallace at Iowa State University, is studying the phylogenetic or
              genealogical relationships of plants in the four caryophyllalean families of
              Basellaceae, Cactaceae, Didiereaceae, and Portulacaceae, making use of
              botanical garden materials and field collections amassed over the years at Iowa
              State. The morphological features of flowers and fruits used traditionally in
              the classification of these plants, especially the c. 500 species of purslanes
              (Portulacaceae), are suspected to be unreliable in marking evolutionary groups,
              perhaps due to repeated, convergent adaptations in arid or desert habitats. New
              evidence from DNA sequences of the chloroplast genome is being sought to
              provide a large number of variable yet informative characters (mutations or
              nucleotide substitutions) that can be used to measure genetic divergences among
              these plants. In turn, a reliable phylogenetic framework for these plants will
              enable the study of their historical biogeography and patterns of adaptation to
              various desert regions of the world.   The plants traditionally treated in the
              four caryophyllalean families listed above present interesting problems of
              evolution, biogeography, and adaptation, mostly in arid or desert habitats of
              the world, and primarily on the southern continents of South America, Africa,
              and Australia. Disentangling patterns caused by ancient continental drift from
              more recent dispersals and migrations has been impossible without a reliable
              phylogeny for the group, based on genetic features not directly affected by
              habitat conditions. This project is a focused effort to construct a
              phylogenetic framework for these plants from DNA sequence information,
              augmented by the morphological, chromosomal, and anatomical data in hand.
