Title       : CAREER: Teams, Task and Technology in High-Technology Manufacturing Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9701913

Award Number: 9701913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: George A. Hazelrigg                     
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane E. Bailey   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9102,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the proper matching between social and technical systems
              within high-technology manufacturing industries.  A central theme of the
              research concerns employee teams:  their design, implementation, and
              management.  Of special concern are the infrastructural requirements necessary
              to facilitate the successful integration of an organization's production,
              engineering, marketing, and research and development departments via
              cross-functional teams.  The project is broken down into three interrelated
              areas, each addressing a unique set of research questions: (1) How will prior
              models of work team effectiveness (developed in low-technology and service
              industries) be transformed in higher technology workplaces?  (2)  What is the
              long-term interaction between autonomy and communication on white-collar or
              `knowledge worker` project teams?  (3)  What advanced communication
              technologies can aid virtual teams in overcoming the handicap of distance?  The
              objectives of the proposed research are to develop and test, via extensive
              field investigation and experimental work, models of team performance for both
              white-collar and shop-floor employees.  The proposed research will contribute
              significantly to the understanding of work organization within high-technology
              manufacturing industries.  The creation of predictive models for both
              shop-floor work teams and white-collar project teams will add to our knowledge
              of team effectiveness while providing the basis for the creation of design
              principles.  These principles, in part pertaining to the integration of
              production, engineering, marketing, and research and development departments
              and in total addressing questions of team design, implementation, and
              management, will be of considerable benefit to manufacturers as they seek to
              improve organizational performance.  The translation of research results into
              case studies for classroom teaching will enhance engineering education by
              guiding students in solution approaches to complex, unstructured problems
              involving the union of social and technical manufacturing systems in dynamic
              high-technology industries.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
