Title       : Research in Algebraic Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1997    
File        : a9701407

Award Number: 9701407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michelle Wachs wachs@math.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Miami
	      University Station
	      Coral Gables, FL  33124    305/284-2210

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        Wachs  9701407      The PI intends to continue her current research in
              algebraic combinatorics, focusing on  topological and algebraic properties of
              partially ordered sets.  The theory of poset topology, which grew out of the
              famous 1964  paper of  Rota on the Moebius function of a partially ordered set,
               provides a deep and fundamental link between  combinatorics and other branches
              of mathematics such as topology, algebra and geometry. One major impetus for
              this study  has come from Stanley's consideration of group actions on the
              homology of posets in a seminal 1982 paper,  another comes from Bjorner's
              pioneering paper on shellable posets and still another comes from its
              fundamental connection with the theory of hyperplane arrangements as developed
              by Orlik and Solomon. A more recent and extremely important development in the
              theory of poset topology is Goresky and MacPherson's  link to the theory of
              subspace arrangements. This has lead to applications in complexity theory due
              to Bjorner, Lovasz and Yao. These recent developments have lead Bjorner and the
              PI to  extend the theory of shellability from pure to nonpure simplicial
              complexes and posets.   Shellability is a combinatorial tool for establishing
              certain topological and algebraic properties of simplicial complexes and
              posets. The nonpure setting provides for a richer and more powerful theory that
              the PI plans to continue to explore and develop.          This research is in
              the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to find
              efficient methods of studying how discrete collections  of objects can be
              arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely  important to modern
              communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as those
              occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in  computer
              science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of 
              combinatorial research.
