Title       : "Career" Integrated Programming in Science, Mathematics, andAgricultural Science
               Teacher Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a9701828

Award Number: 9701828
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210372             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carol A. Conroy cac29@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University State
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701828  Conroy    The Department of Education at Cornell offers programs in
              educational psychology, foundations, and policy, as well as teacher education
              in agriculture, science, and mathematics. The applicant was hired in July,
              1996, to facilitate a process of reform in agricultural education encompassing
              several areas: (1) integration of science and mathematics teacher education in
              agriculture, (2) technical and pedagogical update for secondary agricultural
              educators in New York, and (3) course/curriculum development to support
              utilization of agriculture content as applied subject matter for under served
              populations. This project will provide support for research and educational
              activities for development of essential elements of reform in the evolution of
              agricultural education to agricultural science: (1) the development of a
              unique, integrated program of teacher education in science, mathematics, and
              agricultural science and (2) the development of an interdisciplinary graduate
              program to prepare individuals as faculty in agricultural science. A secondary
              purpose is the development and implementation of research-based inservice
              programming to improve science and mathematics competencies of practicing
              vocational agriculture teachers. Specific research and educational objectives
              and methods required to fulfill these purposes are to:  1. Determine technical
              agriculture, science and mathematics cmntent as well as pedagogical
              competencies required for certification to teach agriculture as a science
              through development of a process to identify areas of overlap which exist
              between courses offered separately to the two teacher education groups.  2.
              Revise and/or develop core curriculum and coursets) for the program in teacher
              education in agriculture to include enhanced science and mathematics skills and
              pedagogy for teaching science and mathematics.  3. Assess technical update, and
              science and mathematics skills inservice needs of New York State secondary
              agriculture teachers.  4. Develop and impl ement a sustained inservice program
              to enhance the science and mathematics skills of New York State agricultural
              educators. The integration of academic and vocational content and alternate
              assessment will be emphasized.  5. Develop core curriculum and course(s) for a
              graduate program to prepare individuals for faculty positions as teacher
              educators in agricultural science. Emphasis will be placed on constructivist
              theories of learning to include aspects related to applied academics as a
              philosophy of delivery, experiential learning, and reflective practices.  The
              results of this study will be presented on a regional and national level in an
              attempt to begin discussion on a national agenda for teacher education reform.
              Information on progressive programmatic changes will be reviewed and considered
              as Cornell University and New York State begin the process of restructuring
              agricultural education. The results of this project, however, will reach beyond
              New York State. Since there has been no comprehensive national review of
              teacher education in agriculture programs the results will be useful to
              individuals in other states as they struggle with the same issues faced by New
              York. Successful development and implementation of a reform effort moving
              towards agricultural science will require sustained and integrated research and
              instructional activities. The applicant is poised to make significant
              contributions to the field of agricultural science education as well as
              providing a role model for younger women wishing to assume a leadership role.
              The implementation of this project would have national impact on how faculty
              and teachers of agricultural education are prepared as well as significant
              impact on efforts to intezrate academic and vocational content.
