Title       : Arithmetic of Cohomological Modular Forms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1999   
File        : a9701017

Award Number: 9701017
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Haruzo Hida hida@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9701017  Hida  After several years of basic research on the Arithmetic of
              modular L-values,p-adic Hecke algebras, Galois representations and their Selmer
              groups, number theorists can now start building up the theory in a little more
              sophisticated way.  After the proof of the Shimura-Taniyama conjecture by A.
              Wiles and R. Taylor, which include the proof of  Mazur's conjecture on Hecke
              algebras and deformation rings of modular Galois representations, there are now
              effective tools to deal with non-abelian Selmer groups; in particular, those of
              adjoint modular Galois representations. This award will support research into
              five projects connected to Selmer groups. From the view point of Iwasawa's
              theory, number theorists need to construct p-adic analytic L-functions on the
              spectrum of the Hecke algebra to supply tools to describe such Selmer
              groups(Project II).  Since adjoint L-values are often non-critical, one needs
              to find out how to compute the algebraic part of the L-values in an automorphic
              way feasible enough to connect them directly to Selmer groups even in
              non-critical case (Project I).Since the work of Taylor and Wiles is now
              generalized to the Hilbert modular case by K. Fujiwara, one can try to attack
              the two variable main conjecture for the adjoint Selmer groups (Project III). 
              Two key tools in studying this problem are: (i) analysis of base change via
              Hecke algebras and deformation rings, and (ii) theory of p-adic nearly ordinary
              Hecke algebras for symplectic groups constructed by J. Tilouine and E. Urban. 
              Thus it is natural to study how functorial operations on Galois representations
              are reflected by deformation rings and Hecke algebras (Project IV) and to
              generalize the theory to more general groups, perhaps unitary groups (Project
              V).      This project falls into the general area of arithmetic geometry -a
              subject that blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and
              geometry.  This combination has proved extraordinarily fruitful - having
              recently solved problems that w ithstood generations.  Among its many
              consequences are new error correcting codes.  Such codes are essential for both
              modern computers (hard disks) and compact disks.
