Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolutionary and Ecological Determinants of Incubation
               Strategies in Three Sympatric Nuthatches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9701116

Award Number: 9701116
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7670               (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Martin tmartin@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Martin  9701116    Evolution of parental care strategies is thought to be
              determined by  fitness costs and benefits associated with providing care. Avian
               incubation is a form of parental care and energetic constraints are  thought
              to underlie intra- and interspecific variation in incubation  strategies.
              However, these conclusions are based almost exclusively  on single species
              studies which may reflect phenotypic rather than  genetic differences. Nest
              predation is an alternative explanation  that has been proposed as a potential
              selection pressure leading to  different incubation strategies, but critical
              tests are lacking. The  PIs propose to experimentally test the energetic
              constraint and nest  predation risk hypotheses in three sympatric species in
              the genus  Sitta. These species provide a model system to test these hypotheses
               because they differ in opposite directions with respect to energetic 
              constraints and nest predation risk. The energetic constraint  hypothesis will
              be tested by experimentally modifying the nest  microclimate using warm and
              cold air pumped into nests. The nest  predation risk hypothesis will be tested
              through predator  presentation experiments. This experimental and comparative
              field  work advances understanding of the factors responsible for intra and 
              interspecific variation in parental care.    l                                
              J
