Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: Norms, Laws and the Provision of Social Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1997     
File        : a9701518

Award Number: 9701518
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Hechter hechter@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701518  Hechter    A society can use two kinds of control (legal and normative)
              to ensure that individuals comply with its rules.  Legal control refers to
              punishment of deviant behavior by a legal institution that is supported by
              taxes.  Normative control refers to punishment by individuals themselves who
              personally take action against a person who commits a deviant act.  This
              Doctoral Dissertation research will investigate the relationship between these
              two types of control -- specifically, how change in the strength of one control
              institution affects the strength of the other.  The two hypotheses that will be
              tested are:  1) cohesive communities with strong normative controls facilitate
              the growth of strong legal systems; and 2) investment in the legal system, for
              example in the police and prisons, will weaken normative controls and thus the
              ability of communities to address social problems like crime in more informal
              ways.  In other words, strong communities contribute to the growth of the legal
              system which in turn weakens the communities upon which it depends.  An
              experimental design will be employed where subjects will interact with each
              other using computers.  They will make decisions about sanctioning (i.e., how
              best to sanction a thief) and about responding to the sanctioning decisions of
              others (i.e., provide data  through the assignment of points on subjects'
              reactions to the sanctioning decisions of others).  Resulting changes in the
              strengths of the two types of control will be measured.  Analysis of variance
              will be used to determine the effects of variation in the initial strength of
              one control institution on the later strength of the other.
