Title       : Dissertation Research: The Effects of Cortisol on Home- Steam Water Imprinting
               and Recall in Kokanee Salmon
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1997      
File        : a9701027

Award Number: 9701027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4849               (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Jones jonese@stripe.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701027  Jones  Pacific salmon (genus Oncorhynchus) have a life-history pattern
              in which individuals hatch in cold, freshwater streams, migrate as juveniles
              (smolts) to the ocean to feed for a few years, and then return as adults to
              their natal stream to spawn and die.  During both smoltification (the
              physiological process preparing young salmon to leave freshwater for the ocean)
              and the return migration to the natal spawning grounds, salmon exhibit an
              increase in stress hormones in their blood plasma.  The latter increase has
              been implicated in the subsequent death of the adults shortly after spawning. 
              During periods of stress, all vertebrates secrete stress hormones.  After
              reduction of the stressor, stress hormone concentrations generally decrease,
              but after periods of prolonged stress these hormones can remain elevated. 
              Increased and prolonged secretion of stress hormones, and the actions of these
              hormones, can have degenerative effects on the body.  However, it is known that
              in mammals an increase in stress hormone levels can also facilitate the recall
              of long-term memory.  Before and/or during smoltification, young Pacific salmon
              imprint on the chemical make-up of their home-stream water.  this imprinted
              "memory" is vital in directing the adult salmon back to their natal stream bed
              several years later.  This study tests the hypothesis that the increase in
              plasma stress hormones during recall and homing aids the recognition of the
              home-stream water and that this increase in plasma cortisol primes the brain
              regions to recall the imprinted chemical composition of the salmon's home
              stream.  Using immunohistochemistry to determine the location of cortisol
              receptors in the brain, as well as electrophysiological recordings from
              olfactory brain regions, the research will test the involvement of cortisol in
              home-stream water imprinting and recall in Pacific salmon.  This project could
              have important implications not only for understanding the life-history of an
              endangered genus of salmonid fish,  but more broadly the general role of stress
              hormones in memory.
