Title       : Research in One-Dimensional and Complex Dynamics and Thermodynamical Formalism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 20,  1999   
File        : a9701145

Award Number: 9701145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yunping Jiang yunqc@forbin.qc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Jiang    The goal of the first part of this project is to develop
              new results by combining knowledge and techniques from both Thermodynamical
              Formalism and Teichmuller Theory and apply them to the study of one-dimensional
              and complex dynamics. A generalized Fredholm Determinant Theory on the space of
              Zygmund functions on the circle is investigated. Notice that the space of
              Zygmund functions on the circle can be treated as the tangent space of the
              universal Teichmuller space. It is hoped that the knowledge of the spectral
              properties of transfer operators may be applied to the study of Teichmuller
              theory and vice versa. An especially interesting case is when a transfer
              operator is the tangent map of a non-linear map of the universal Teichmuller
              space. A technique called Yoccoz puzzles is also investigated as a replacement
              of the Markov partitions in the study of the thermodynamical properties of a
              non-renormalizable quadratic polynomial. In the second part of the project, the
              Mandelbrot set at infinitely renormalizable points and the   topological
              properties of the Julia sets of infinitely renormalizable quadratic polynomials
              are investigated because these are the only remaining points to prove that the
              Mandelbrolt set is locally connected. A generalized Feigenbaum conjecture for
              folding mappings with arbitrary exponent and asymmetry is investigated in the
              project.    The study of one-dimensional dynamics has lead to the discovery of
              many physical laws. One recent discovery is the universal law in chaotic
              phenomena: in a one-parameterized system like the family of quadratic
              polynomials (such a system appears in fluid and celestial mechanics, in
              chemistry and biology, and in social sciences), regular motions evolving into a
              chaotic motion can be characterized by a universal number. This new paradigm
              provides a rich supply of mathematical problems. In return, the study of these
              problems gives a deeper understanding of concepts connected with universality
              and develops some new tools to ma ke further progress. The goal of the first
              part of this project is to attack some unsolved problems and to develop new
              results concerned with universality. More specifically, some thermodynamical
              and geometric properties of one-dimensional and complex dynamical systems are
              investigated. The discovery of the Mandelbrot set, which was one of the direct
              important results from the development of a fast computer, breaks the barrier
              to develop some traditional geometric concepts. Traditionally, the mathematical
              study of geometry concentrates on smooth objects like circles, lines, and
              spheres. But in the real world, most geometric objects are more fractal in  
              shape when one looks into the microscope at a geometric object. The Mandelbrot
              set not only breaks the visual and psychological barrier of the study of
              fractal geometry but also carries the universal fractal structure in a large
              class of systems. However, a complete understanding of the geometric structure
              of the Mandelbrot set is far from being finished.   The goal of the second part
              of the project is to study the topological structure of the Mandelbrot set, and
              also to investigate the topological structure of the Julia set for a
              corresponding infinitely renormalizable point.
