Title       : Algebraic Cycles and Arithmetic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1997    
File        : a9701302

Award Number: 9701302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60341              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Goncharov   (Principal Investigator current)
              Caterina Consani  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          Goncharov  9701302      This award funds research of Dr. Caterina
              Consani, a postdoctoral associate of Professor Goncharov.  The project
              describes a number of ideas relating algebraic cycles with  arithmetic. There
              are three main themes in the project.   The first theme deals with an
              interpretation of   the local Euler factor of a projective, smooth variety over
              a number field   at a finite prime of semistable reduction. Consani gave in her
              Ph.D Thesis a description of the local factor at an Archimedean place as a
              characteristic polynomial of an operator playing the role of the geometric 
              Frobenius at infinity. The Frobenius acts on an infinite dimensional real 
              vector space of invariants for the action of an arithmetic monodromy. 
              Supported by this description and by the fact that an Archimedean fiber  of an
              arithmetic variety should be thought as completly degenerate,  Consani hopes to
              show a corresponding description also at a place of semistable reduction. 
              Consani intends to better understand the analogy between the Archimedean and
              non Archimedean fibers by studying, in a quite concrete  way, the pole of the
              L-function of a product variety XxX at a non Archimedean semistable reduction
              prime of X, associated to the monodromy  map N. This represents the second main
              theme of the project. The operator  N can be interpreted as a cocycle into the
              middle dimensional cohomology  group of XxX correctly twisted. Via the spectral
              sequence of the nearby  cycles one should be able to read that element as a
              cocycle and eventually as an algebraic cycle, into the disjoint union of the
              3-fold intersections of the components of the special fiber of a resolution of
              the model of XxX. The last theme reported in the project describes a closer
              relation between algebraic cycles and differential forms over the fiber at
              infinity of an arithmetic variety. Consani hopes to introduce a higher Arakelov
              theory and a higher arithmetic Riemann Roch theorem.    This project falls into
              the general area of arithme tic geometry - a subject that blends two of the
              oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry.  This combination has
              proved extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved problems that
              withstood generations.  Among its many consequences are new error correcting
              codes.  Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard disks) and
              compact disks.
