Title       : Dynamics of Mesoscopic Structures in Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2001       
File        : a9701740

Award Number: 9701740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph V. Chamberlin ralph.chamberlin@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Scheinfein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701740  Chamberlin    This is a new proposal in which two novel experimental
              techniques will  be utilized to investigate  the  dynamics  of  nanoscopic 
              domains in  various  ferromagnetic  and  random  magnetic  systems. Nonresonant
              spectral hole  burning  (NSHB),  where large magnetic field oscillations are
              used to selectively  study  the   intrinsic  local  response,  will  provide 
              insight   into   the  constituents  that  comprise the net spectrum of 
              response  from  bulk  samples. Electron holography, using scanning transmission
              electron  microscopy  (STEM) combined with a small oscillating  magnetic 
              field,  will provide images of magnetization dynamics in thin films and  small 
              structures with a resolution of 2-5 nm and sensitivity of  10-15-10-16emu.  
              Questions  to  be  addressed   include:   how   does  microscopic   structure 
              influence  mesoscopic  dynamics,   how   does  transient  local  structure 
              evolve, and how  do  mesoscopic  magnetic  domains govern macroscopic response?
               %%%  This  is  a new proposal that aims at the  central goal of information 
              technology  in  trying  to  improve  high-density   magnetic  storage. 
              Someday,  the physical size of stored bits of information will  shrink  into 
              the  submicron  realm  where thermal fluctuations  significantly  limit the
              lifetime of the memory.  Magnetization dynamics involves a complex combination
              of  microscopic,  mesoscopic  (medium-sized),  and  macroscopic  processes. 
              Two   novel  experimental techniques will be used to investigate these 
              magnetization  processes.  Nonresonant spectral  hole  burning  (NSHB)  will 
              provide information about the intrinsic local response  of  bulk  samples and
              electron holography, using scanning transmission electron  microscopy (STEM),
              will provide direct magnetic imaging of thin  films  and  small  structures 
              with  unmatched  resolution  and  sensitivity.  Questions  to  be  addressed
              include: how does  microscopic  structure  influence  mesoscopic  dynamics, how
              does  transient  local   structure  evolve,  and  how  do  mesoscopic magnetic
              domains govern  macroscopic  response?  ***
