Title       : Nonlinear Mechanics for Energy Transfer in the Atmosphere and the Ocean
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9701751

Award Number: 9701751
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Esteban G. Tabak tabak@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1324,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Tabak  9701751       In this CAREER grant, the investigator pursues two lines of
               research on the nonlinear dynamics of the Atmosphere and the  Ocean: one
              focused on turbulent cascades in dispersive systems,  particularly the
              Munk-Garret scale distribution of energy in the  Ocean, and the other focused
              on equatorial dynamics.  Both  projects study resonance among geophysical
              waves, in very  different scales: the former considers energy transfer through 
              the self-similar inertial range, from the long waves beyond which  the system
              is forced, to the short waves below which dissipative  mechanisms take over,
              and the latter concentrates on the very  long waves, comparable to the radius
              of the Earth, where forcing  plays an important role.  In fact, the resonance
              between long  equatorial waves could be considered as a starting point for the 
              resonant energy transfer toward shorter waves.  Once the scales  become
              relatively small, detailed information on the nature of  the forces is lost,
              and a statistically self-similar regime  arises, further carrying the energy
              through a wide range of  scales toward the very short waves.  The educational
              component of  this proposal involves developing a curriculum which blends 
              applied mathematics and geophysical fluid dynamics.  Particular  efforts are
              devoted to integrate experimental and numerical work  into both graduate and
              undergraduate education.  This is  facilitated by the building of a Laboratory
              for Fluid Dynamics at  the Courant Institute, scheduled to open in the Spring
              of 1997.  Two new graduate courses in the mathematical modeling of  geophysical
              waves are developed, one introductory and the other  more advanced, the latter
              focused on nonlinear mechanisms of  energy transfer among geophysical waves. 
              Numerical modeling and  desk-top experimentation are integrated into advanced 
              undergraduate mathematical courses, with the goal of introducing  undergraduate
              students to the lure and potential of  interdisciplinary work.       The Ocean
              and Atmospheric  Sciences have reached a degree of  maturity such that the
              accurate prediction of the weather and  even of longer term climatological
              changes appears to be within  reach.  A basic understanding of many of the
              fundamental processes  underlying the prevailing winds and currents has been
              developed  over the last few decades; and the computational power brought 
              about by the computer revolution makes it possible to run global  models with
              relatively fine grids.  However, the dynamics of the  weather and climate has a
              tremendous complexity, with phenomena  taking place in a wide range of spatial
              and temporal scales.  This  complexity makes it hopeless to resolve all the
              relevant  phenomena without appealing to strong simplifying assumptions. 
              Applied Mathematics provides powerful tools that may help clarify  the validity
              of the various assumptions and shed light on many  phenomena not yet fully
              understood.  The two proposed subjects of  this research are examples of fields
              where this contribution  should be particularly fruitful.  The dynamics of
              equatorial waves  is known to strongly affect the global weather and climate; 
              phenomena such as the El Nino Southern Oscillation and its global  effects
              exemplify this.  In order to study phenomena of this kind,  one needs to go
              beyond the time scale of the order of days of the  waves, to the months or
              years where small effects accumulate to  yield substantial changes in the
              amplitude and behavior of the  waves.  Asymptotic multiple-scale analysis is an
              ideal applied  mathematical tool to achieve this.  As for the other line of 
              research, understanding the transfer of energy among scales in  the Ocean and
              Atmosphere is fundamental to predict the long-time  effects that a change in
              forcing, such as the one brought about  by the release of chemicals in the
              Atmosphere and the Ocean, may  produce on our weather.  Involving students in
              these lines of  research, and bringing research-related results and methods
              into  their classroom education, also helps develop a  generation of 
              scientists better equipped to understand the difficult and  important problems
              of atmosphere and ocean interactions.
