Title       : Novel Phases and Quantum Phase Transitions in Quantum Hall Effect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1999     
File        : a9701426

Award Number: 9701426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. Tsui tsui@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701426  Tsui    This research is in the area of semiconductor physics,  probing
              the behavior of electrons forming a 2-D gas in  extremely high mobility
              semiconductor devices.  The research  is in the area of the Quantum Hall Effect
              (QHE) and the  Fractional Quantum Hall Effect.  The PI in recent research  has
              contributed to dicovery of a duality symmetry.  The  proposed research aims to
              explore the duality symmetry  between the QHE liquid phase and the newly
              discovered  insulating phase.  Another topic to be studied is the  universal
              relation between the longitudinal and transverse  conductivity in QHE liquid to
              insulator transition.  Another  class of transitions is proposed in extremely
              low mobility  samples.  %%%  This research project experimentally studies the
              behavior of  conduction electrons in state-of-the-art semiconductor  devices. 
              It is found that conduction electrons n extremely  pure semiconductor samples,
              when confined to move in a  nearly two dimensional planar region, at low
              temperatures  and high transverse magnetic field, behave in unique ways.  These
              previously observed effects are known as the Quantum  Hall Effect and the
              Fractional Quantum Hall Effect.  They  are basic effects resulting  from the
              laws of quantum  mechanics applied to a dense gas of electrons interacting 
              with each other by Coulomb repulsion.  New behaviors are  expected, described
              as new phases of the electron gas, and  this research is devoted to finding and
              describing these new  behaviors.  The understanding gained can be expected to 
              contribute to improvements in microelectronic device  technology.  ***
