Title       : Experimental Studies of Diffuse Ultrasonics and Materials Characterizations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9701142

Award Number: 9701142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $193787             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard L. Weaver r-weaver@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                   9701142       Weaver       A   project   is  to  be  undertaken  to 
              further   our    understanding  of  linear stochastic  wave  fields,  waves   
              which have suffered sufficient randomizing scatterings  or    reflections  as
              to lose most coherence.  Such  fields  are    present  in  applications of
              ultrasonics  in  many  modern    heterogeneous  materials.   The  proposed 
              work  primarily    concerns   the   diffuse  ultrasonics  of  polycrystalline  
               materials  with  a view towards ultimate  applications  in    robust
              ultrasonic characterization of microstructures  and    flaw  detection  in the
              midst of grain  noise.   The  main    focus   will  be  towards  the 
              validation  of  ultrasonic    radiative   transfer  formulations  of  multiple 
               diffuse    scattering in polycrystals.  Of particular interest is the   
              transition  from the simple single scattering limit  model    used  by  many, 
              through the complicated regime  in  which    typical rays have scattered a few
              times, to the once again    simple   diffusion  limit  in  which  typical  rays
                have    scattered many times.       Broad industrial Interest in materials
              characterization    where  conventional attenuation and velocity  measurements 
                are  difficult or fail, and where therefore  the  proposed    project  will 
              have application, includes grain  size  and    texture  characterization 
              through  rough  surfaces  (with    associated inferences in regard to fracture
              toughness  and    formability),  detection  of low  levels  of  porosity  in   
              acoustically  (grain-)noisy materials with thick  sections    (i.e. porosity in
              powder metallurgical iron), detection of    microcracking   and  monitoring  of
               microcracking   after    service,   detection   and   monitoring   of  
              embrittling    conditions,   detection   of   residual   stresses,    and   
              characterization of highly inhomogeneous materials such as    sintered
              materials or metallic foams.       While  the  primary  concern and  envisioned
               Immediate    application i s in diffuse ultrasonics, fields of this kind   
              are  also  present  on sufficiently long  time  scales  In    seismology,  in
              reverberation rooms, In the vibrations  of    large  Irregular built
              structures, In the  electronics  of    mesoscale  devices  and for optics in
              turbid  media.   The    project  Is  also,  therefore, expected to  contribute 
              to    these other fields.       The  proposed project consists of theory,
              numerics, and    experiments.    The  equations  of  ultrasonic   radiative   
              transfer will be extended where necessary.  They  will  be    applied  to  the
              specific experimental configurations  and    samples   to  be  studied  in  the
               lab.   The   resulting    numerically  generated predictions for diffuse 
              ultrasonic    intensity  will  be compared with laboratory  measurements    and
               with  direct numerical simulations of two-dimensional    heterogeneous  
              elastic   media.    Extensive   ultrasonic    Immersion  testing of metal
              samples with  well  controlled    polycrystalline microstructures will be
              carried out  in  a    variety  of  configurations designed  to  be  optimal 
              for    illustrating and testing the main predictions of radiative    transfer. 
                   Two  secondary but related thrusts will be carried  out    also.   One  on
               ultrasound  in materials  with  extremely    strongly scattering
              microstructures will contribute  to  a    basic  understanding  of 
              fluctuations  and  transport  in    materials  with attenuations of the order
              of  wavenumbers.    The  other  on reverberant ultrasound at very  late  times 
                will study fields which are potentially very sensitive  to    global  
              properties   of  the  samples   in   which   they    reverberate.  The proposed
              methods are expected to  reveal    material   properties  that  are  not  
              otherwise   easily    obtained.       This is a collaborative project In which
              the theory and    numerics will be conducted primarily at the University  of   
              Illinois,  and the experiments will be conducted primarily    at the Uni
              versity of Missouri.
