Title       : High Risk Exploratory Research: Late Mousterian Caves at Almonda, Portugal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9701531

Award Number: 9701531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17181              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony E. Marks amarks@mail.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Anthony Marks and his colleagues
              will conduct test archaeological excavations in the mouths of collapsed caves
              at Almonda, Portugal. These form several of many entrances to an extensive case
              system which has been mapped and explored. On the basis of archaeological
              materials recovered from surface contexts within the caves themselves it is
              likely that the entrances to these systems contained buried cultural deposits
              of Middle Paleolithic age. Prehistoric peoples most often lived in the well
              lighted and ventilated entrances of caves rather than their interiors.
              Exploration has revealed the surface position of several entrances. In a brief
              field season Dr. Marks and colleagues will excavate from an exterior cliff face
              to remove large blocks of limestone roof-fall as well as sediment which has
              washed into the openings to expose in situ deposit. Test excavations will then
              be conducted to determine whether they contain Middle Paleolithic industries.
              This exploratory work will, if successful, provide the basis for a larger,
              longer term research project.  Archaeological evidence indicates that
              approximately 40,000 years ago Neanderthal peoples who inhabited Western Europe
              were replaced by anatomically modern humans. However the process by which they
              occurred is unclear. Relatively late in the Neanderthal period changes in
              material culture foreshadow adaptations which characterized the succeeding
              modern humans. Archaeologists do not know whether these represent borrowings or
              an independent development. The question is difficult to resolve because it is
              likely that ca. 40,000 years ago the two groups were in potential contact
              across much of Europe. Portugal is important because modern humans enter this
              region relatively late and thus Neanderthal peoples survived for at least
              10,000 years longer here than elsewhere. Because of this isolation Portugal
              provides an excellent arena to examine the issue of Neanderthal adaptation, and
              what this may reflect about underlying behavioral abilities.  This research is
              important for several reasons. It will, if successful, provide data of interest
              to many archaeologists and shed new light on the prehistoric human record. It
              will also set the stage for a more extensive research project.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
