Title       : Kloosterman Sums and Related Exponential Sums
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9701225

Award Number: 9701225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yangbo Ye yey@math.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Ye  9701225      This award funds research of Professor Ye, who works on
              Kloosterman sums. The classical Kloosterman sum has important applications in
              number theory. An example is Kuznetsov's estimate of a weighted sum of
              Kloosterman sums which is a step toward the Linnik--Selberg conjecture; the
              proof is based on the Kuznetsov trace formula. Generalized Kloosterman sums
              appear in various relative trace formulas; such a relative trace formula is
              indeed an equality between a generalized Kuznetsov trace formula and one of its
              relative versions. The above appearances of the Kloosterman sums suggest their
              central role in number theory and group representation theory. This research
              project is centered at Kloosterman sums and related exponential sums, their
              generalizations, and their applications. The objectives are listed below.  (i)
              The Langlands functoriality conjecture predicts functorial relationships
              between representations of different groups. If a functorial lifting can be
              studied by a relative trace formula, its fundamental lemma may be reduced to an
              identity of exponential sums of the Kloosterman type. The first objective is to
              study specific lifting problems and deduce the corresponding identities of
              exponential sums.  (ii) Conversely, such an identity not only will imply the
              fundamental lemma of the relative trace formula, but also might be used to
              deduce the whole relative trace formula, based on recent results on Shalika
              germ expansions and exponential sum expansions of local orbital integrals of
              relative trace formulas. The second objective is to deduce a relative trace
              formula from its identity of exponential sums.  (iii) Important applications of
              the classical Kloosterman sum are usually based on estimation of its values and
              weighted sums. The last objective is to estimate certain weighted sums of
              generalized Kloosterman sums and related high ranking exponential sums.       
              This proposal is in the part of mathematics known as the Langlands program.
              This program represents a fus ion of Number Theory and Representation Theory ,
              and it has been a stimulus to a great deal of recent research in both fields.
              Number Theory is one of the oldest branches of mathematics and is concerned
              with the most basic of mathematical objects, the ordinary whole numbers. 
              However, it turns out that in order to express many of the patterns and
              relations discovered by mathematicians, it is necessary to use some of the 
              most advanced and technical theories of twentieth century mathematics. On the
              other hand, the problems of number theory have provided a powerful stimulus to
              research in other  diverse parts of the discipline.  The Langland's program
              provides a framework for investigating and vastly generalizing the so-called
              reciprocity laws of number theory using the tools of infinite-dimensional
              representation theory.  Although very technical and deep, this program  has
              found astonishing applications in areas like theoretical computer science
              (construction of expanding graphs) and coding theory (finding optimal Goppa
              codes).  It has also played a role in some of the recent spectacular
              developments in number theory itself, such as the proof of Fermat's Last
              Theorem.
