Title       : CAREER: Computationally Efficient Error-Correcting Codes and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9701304

Award Number: 9701304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Spielman spielman@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                The goals of this research are to improve the computational  efficiency of
              error-correcting codes and to apply techniques  from this effort to other
              problems of computation and  information theory.  Error-correcting codes are
              essential  components of all electronic communication systems.  New 
              constructions for error-correcting codes that could be  encoded and decoded
              very efficiently have recently been  developed.  The objectives of this
              research are to extend  this initial work by: Improving the error-tolerance and
               speed of the explicit constructions of error-correcting  codes based upon
              previously developed codes. Developing  algorithms that can certify the quality
              of the randomized  constructions. Using related techniques to improve the 
              computational efficiency of other tasks vital to information  theory and
              electronic communication. Developing quality  implementations of the codes that
              will make it easier for  engineers to test how these codes would perform in
              their own  application areas. The educational goals of the proposed 
              investigation are broader in scope.  They involve the design  of classes that
              teach graduate students about the larger  mathematical framework on which this
              research rests.  These  classes should attract students from mathematics as
              well as  computer science to learn about the new fascinating ways in  which
              ideas from mathematics can be applied to solve  important problems in computer
              science.  These classes are  designed to teach how connections in research are
              made as  well as provide them with many areas ripe for connection.  Eventually,
              these classes will teach the students another  essential element of the
              principal investigator's research  methodology:  that of using computational
              experiments in  mathematical research.  They will learn how one can use 
              computer experiments to make and test combinatorial  conjectures.  As they
              begin to see the computer as a tool  that can aid them in their own research,
              they will  inevitably become concerned with the efficie ncy of  computational
              algorithms and gain intuition for which  mathematical ideas might result in
              practical algorithms.***
