Title       : CAREER: Wavelet-Based Nonlinear Digital Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1997   
File        : a9701692

Award Number: 9701692
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212681             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert D. Nowak   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,2891,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The application of Digital Signal Processing (DSP) has been driven by the rapid 
              growth of digital computing power and the need for fast, reliable computer 
              processing techniques for communication, biomedical, manufacturing, seismic, 
              radar, and a wide variety of other signals for commercial and scientific 
              interest.  Despite the great success of traditional DSP techniques, many real- 
              world problems remain unsolved due to the nonlinearities and non-Gaussian
              noises  often encountered in these applications.  Solving these more complex
              problems  requires the development of new, more flexible, nonlinear DSP theory
              and tools.   The objectives of this project are to develop these new tools and
              theory, and to  transfer them directly into practice and into the engineering
              classroom.    A new framework for nonlinear DSP based on the wavelet transform
              is currently  under study.  The desirable properties of the wavelet transform,
              such as time-  frequency localization and signal compression, are being
              exploited to develop  sophisticated, yet tractable, nonlinear processing
              techniques.  Key elements of  the work include the development of statistical
              re-sampling methods and data-  adaptive wavelet analyses for nonlinear DSP. 
              Applications of the new framework  to cross-disciplinary problems in imaging
              and communications are being  investigated.  The principal investigator is
              concurrently developing innovative  approaches to engineering education
              including Internet-based tutorials and  documentation of new research,
              cross-disciplinary student design projects, and  tools for curriculum
              assessment.
