Title       : CAREER: Optimization Under Property Prediction Uncertainity in Molecular Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2000     
File        : a9701771

Award Number: 9701771
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Costas D. Maranas costas@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1045,9146,9163,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Maranas - 9701771    The purpose of this project is to design
              molecular products which optimally meet a set of design objectives while
              accounting for inaccuracies in the employed structure-property relations. 
              Existing approaches for computer-aided molecular design suffer from two
              limitations: (1) they may or may not converge to the best molecular design
              depending on their initialization and the adopted search strategy; and (2) even
              if by chance the mathematically best molecular design is found, it is still
              unclear if the best molecular is truly at hand due to the uncertainty in the
              structure-property expressions.  This research aims at overcoming these
              shortcoming.  To this end, a blend of chance-constrained programming,
              statistical analysis, mixed-integer linear and nonlinear programming
              algorithms, and deterministic global optimization will be utilized.  By
              eliminating the pitfall of unknowingly converging to suboptimal molecular
              designs and quantifying the effect of property prediction uncertainty on
              obtained molecular designs, the PI expects to improve the chances and expedite
              the identification of molecular products.  This will permit experimental
              efforts to be concentrated on only the most promising molecular candidate
              products.    The educational initiatives planned in this CAREER grant are
              two-fold: (a) course development, and (b) student mentoring, advising and
              introduction to research.  By taking advantage of the planned research on
              optimization in molecular design and prior work on molecular structure
              identification, a course on molecular design (which currently does not exist at
              Penn State) is planned to be offered in two years.  A course on advanced
              process synthesis and optimization will shortly be submitted for approval by
              the Faculty Senate to fill a vacancy in advanced process synthesis courses in
              the Chemical Engineering curriculum at Penn State.  The course will follow a
              preliminary version taught over the summer semester and will borrow heavily
              from the PI's resea rch work in optimization.
