Title       : Spin Coherence and Quantum Transport in Magnetic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9701484

Award Number: 9701484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nitin Samarth nsamarth@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701484  Samarth    This experimental effort is aimed at understanding
              fundamental  aspects of coherent electronic spin dynamics and spin-related 
              transport in artificial quantum structures.  Such investigations  form the
              basis for the exploitation of coherent spin transport in  future generations of
              magneto-electronic devices.  The  experiments focus on model nanostructures
              fabricated from II-VI  magnetic semiconductors (MS), allowing one to
              systematically  tailor spin interactions between confined electronic states and
               low dimensional distributions of local moments.  The project is  comprised of
              highly interactive efforts that combine the  concurrent development of
              sophisticated MS nanostructures  (digital magnetic heterostructures, magnetic
              two-dimensional  electron gases (2DEGs), and quantum spin dots) with
              state-of-the-  art spin dynamical probes having high temporal (~100 fs) and 
              spatial  (~100 nm) resolution (femtosecond Faraday rotation and  time-resolved
              near-field scanning optical microscopy) and low-  temperature magnetotransport.
               %%%  Recent decades have witnessed the development of sophisticated  solid
              state fabrication techniques that enable the construction  of artificial atomic
              architectures ("nanostructures") in which  one or more dimensions are at the
              nanoscale (a billionth the  diameter of a human hair). There has also been a
              concurrent  development of optical measurement techniques that allow one to 
              record physical phenomena at unprecedently high speeds (ultrafast 
              spectroscopy) and with very high spatial definition (near field  microscopy). 
              In this highly interactive project, we employ a  powerful combination of
              state-of-the-art fabrication and  measurement techniques to study the dynamic
              motion of electrons  in new classes of "magnetic nanostructures," wherein
              magnetic  atoms are embedded within an engineered semiconductor.  These 
              fundamental investigations lay the groundwork for future  generations of
              magneto-electronic devices that would exploit the  quantum mechani cal
              interactions between electrons and magnetic  atoms for high-speed communication
              devices and ultra-high density  memories.  ***
