Title       : CAREER: Algorithmic Methods for Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2000      
File        : a9701399

Award Number: 9701399
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert Sloan                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jon M. Kleinberg kleinberg@cs.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 2860      THEORY OF COMPUTING
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The research program is centered around the design and  analysis of algorithms
              in combinatorial optimization, with  an emphasis in two major directions: the
              development of  efficient approximation algorithms to provide near-optimal 
              solutions to intractable problems in combinatorial  optimization; and the use
              of these techniques in the design  of algorithms for large-scale networks. A
              fundamental goal  is the development of general methods for approximating the 
              optimal solutions to intractable optimization problems. The  study of linear
              programming methods has proved to be a  valuable way to gain insight into the
              structure of such  problems. The approach in this work involves the development
               of techniques based on linear programming and some of its  generalizations, in
              conjunction with probabilistic methods  and randomized algorithms. A related
              issue is the behavior  of local-search methods for optimization, as a means of 
              understanding the ``landscape'' of feasible solutions on  which they operate;
              there are close connections between this  issue at a general level and some
              concrete optimization  questions in the area of biomolecular structure. A rich 
              application area for these algorithmic techniques, and the  focus of much of
              this research, is in the area of network  optimization problems.  One basic
              issue is the problem of  routing traffic streams so as to minimize congestion
              in  communication networks. This involves techniques from  network flows,
              adapted to the framework of virtual circuit  routing. Another on-going issue in
              this research is the  development of tools to analyze network traffic as a
              dynamic  phenomenon, which arrives continuously over time. Some  fundamental
              issues here are {\em stability} --- determining  whether delays in the network
              remain bounded over long  durations --- and the probabilistic analysis of
              traffic  whose rate can fluctuate greatly over time. The education  component
              of the program is focused on the planned  development of a course designed to
              link curren t  developments in algorithms with work in the biological 
              sciences.  In particular, there is an emerging opportunity  here to bring
              together students from computer science, and  those in biology and chemistry,
              around the set of  fundamental computational problems that have arisen in 
              molecular biology.  Related to this is a plan for increased  coverage of
              certain topics in the core undergraduate  algorithms course: in particular, the
              general area of  heuristic and local-search methods in optimization, which  has
              figured prominently in much of the computational work  currently being done in
              molecular biology and related  areas.***
