Title       : CAREER: Annulation Reactions of a-Substituted Allylsilanes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a9701622

Award Number: 9701622
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith A. Woerpel kwoerpel@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9146,9178,MANU,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Woerpel's research focuses on the development of new   methodologies
              for the construction of carbocyclic and heterocyclic   compounds through the
              (3+2) annulation reactions of functionalized   allylsilanes.  Use of
              allylsilanes with strategically-placed   electron-donating substituents permits
              rapid 1,2-silyl migration in the   initially formed beta-silyl carbocations,
              leading to more stable   carbocations which then undergo annulation with a
              variety of reactive   functionalities.  In addition to providing synthetic
              access to a variety   of cyclic structures, these studies also permit the
              assessment of the   role of electronic factors in these annulation reactions. 
              Portions of   the research program are particularly designed to encourage
              participation   by undergraduate research students.  Professor Woerpel will
              also examine   the effectiveness of new pedagogical tools for improving student
                comprehension of organic chemistry, focusing on three central themes,  
              stereochemistry, conformational analysis and inductive effects in   determining
              acidity.  With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program supports the  
              research and educational activities of Professor Keith A. Woerpel of the  
              Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Irvine.    Professor
              Woerpel's research efforts are focused on the development of   new approaches
              for the synthesis of cyclic compounds.  These studies,   exploiting unique
              reactions of silicon-containing molecules, promise   access to a variety of
              carbocyclic (containing only carbon) and   heterocyclic compounds (containing
              elements such as nitrogen in addition   to carbon).  Such cyclic structures
              form the basis of numerous   pharmaceutical compounds and other important
              products.  Professor   Woerpel's educational activities include the involvement
              of   undergraduates, recruited both from his home campus and through outreach  
              programs, in his research program.   Professor Woerpel will also   incorporate
              new laboratory- and computer-based approaches and implement a   learning cycle
              approach to the teaching of undergraduate organic   chemistry.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
