Title       : CAREER: Transition Metal Initiators for the Synthesis of Well-Defined
               Polypeptides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 5,  2000      
File        : a9701969

Award Number: 9701969
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Deming tdeming@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9178,9181,BIOT,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Deming's research focuses on the use of transition metal   complexes
              as initiators for the synthesis of well-defined polypeptides.    Polymerization
              of alpha-amino acid N-carboxyanhydrides using various Cu,   Ni, Pd and Zn
              complexes provides a nonbiological alternative for the   preparation of
              polypeptides, including block co-polymers expected to   display properties
              rivaling those of naturally occurring structural   proteins.  Light scattering,
              viscometry, and x-ray diffraction, as well   as mechanical testing and
              processing, will permit characterization and   evaluation of the materials
              produced.  Professor Deming will introduce a   biomaterials curriculum at the
              undergraduate and graduate levels,   presenting core macromolecular courses and
              covering biopolymer synthesis   and the structure, dynamics, and processing of
              biomaterials.  With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program supports
              the   research and educational activities of Professor Timothy J. Deming of the
                Materials and Chemistry Departments at the University of California,   Santa
              Barbara.  Professor Deming's research focuses on the use of   transition metal
              complexes as initiators for the formation of   well-defined polypeptides,
              specifically targeting materials which are   expected to mimic naturally
              occurring structural polypeptides such as   spider silk and collagen.  These
              materials are of particular interest   because of their excellent physical
              properties, biocompatability,   biodegradability, and potential for biomedical
              applications.  Professor   Deming's educational activities are focused on the
              development of a new   curriculum that consists of a core sequence of courses
              covering the   science of large molecules and additional courses focused on
              biological   materials.  This training, at both the undergraduate and graduate
              levels,   will be complemented by student involvement in biomaterials research 
               programs, affording a unique opportunity to participate in   multidisciplinary
              research and laying the groundwork for effective future   collaborative
              research efforts.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
