Title       : Dissertation Research: Interspecific Interactions and Life History in the
               Maintenance of Gynodioecy in Sidalcea malviflora (Malvaceae)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1997       
File        : a9701311

Award Number: 9701311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6764               (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter H. Raven   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701311  Raven        Gynodioecy is the co-occurrence of female and
              hermaphrodite individuals in a population of a given species. There has been
              much debate about the factors influencing the maintenance of this breeding
              system in plants. The aim of this study is to understand how various ecological
                 processes and growth habits may act as constraints or releases on the
              maintenance of females in populations. In particular, the PIs are looking at
              how plant-insect interactions including pollen limitation and floral herbivory
              may differentially affect females and hermaphrodites. In addition, we are
              studying how clonal spread and the spatial distribution of females and
              hermaphrodites in a population may affect pollen limitation. The PIs' study
              species is Sidalcea malviflora, a gynodioecious perennial with 2 contrasting
              and sympatric clonal and aclonal subspecies (ssp. laciniata and ssp.
              malviflora, respectively). A combination of field observations, experimental
              manipulations and genetical greenhouse studies will be used to look at the
              above processes.   Gynodioecy is often considered to be an intermediate step in
              the development of dioecy, or completely separate male and female individuals
              within plant species. Because of this, investigation into the factors
              influencing the maintenance of females in gynodioecious plant populations is
              crucial to our broader understanding of the development of breeding systems
              throughout the flowering plants. Though many studies have investigated genetic
              mechanisms and aspects of resource allocation which act to maintain females in
              gynodioecious populations, very few studies have looked at the roles of
              ecological factors or clonal growth in selecting for females. This study is
              important because it investigates the effects of several interacting ecological
              factors and will thus enable us to evaluate the overall importance of ecology
              and growth form in the maintenance of gynodioecy in Sidalcea malviflora.
