Title       : Dissertation Research: Geographic Variation in Life History Traits of Myrmeleon
               immaculatus
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9701122

Award Number: 9701122
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Gotelli ngotelli@zoo.uvm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  9701122  Gotelli  This research focuses on geographic variation in body size
              of the ant lion, Myrmeleon immaculatus.   Ant lions are larval insects common
              throughout the eastern and southern United States. They live for 1 to 3 years
              as larvae, and are effective sit-and-wait predators on arthropods.  Collections
              of larvae from 37 populations, ranging from Oklahoma to New York, revealed that
              M. immaculatus body size increased with latitude: northern ant lions were
              larger than southern ant lionq.  This research addresses whether this pattern
              is due to nature versus nurture.  In other words, is ant lion body size
              variation due to genetic or environmental influences?  This question will be
              answered by raising first-instar larvae in environmentally controlled growth
              chambers.  This experiment removes environmental influences and reveals genetic
              determinants of growth.  To complement this study, larvae will be reared in the
              field in a reciprocal transplant experiment between sites in Oklahoma and
              Connecticut. The results from these two experiments will reveal whether growth
              rates and adult  body size of ant lions are determined primarily by individuals
              genes or by the environment in which they are raised.   Other factors that may
              influence insect body size at different latitudes are temperature and prey
              abundance and distribution.  The effects of food and temperature on growth rate
              will be tested by raising larvae from northern and southern populations at
              different temperatures and food levels.  Prey body sizes will be determined by
              pitfall-trapping at 25 different sites between Georgia and Vermont.  These data
              will reveal whether there is a correlation between ant lion body size and prey
              body size and abundance.   This study will enhance our understanding of the
              environmental and genetic components of body size, and reveal the nature of
              life history variation on a large geographic scale.
