Title       : Dissertation Research: Thirteen-Lined Ground Squirrel Antipredator Vigilance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1997       
File        : a9701137

Award Number: 9701137
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1695               (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel W. Leger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701137  Leger  Studies of the decision-making capabilities of animals while
              they are under the risk of being eaten by predators can reveal the complex
              process by which animals evaluate optimal trade-offs.  A simple example of an
              optimal trade-off is where an animal is faced with two conflicting choices,
              e.g., foraging versus scanning for predators (antipredator vigilance). 
              Foraging reduces starvation risk while antipredator vigilance reduces predation
              risk.  The animal is unable to maximize the benefit from one without incurring
              serious risk from the other.  An optimal trade-off is where the animal's choice
              is the joint maximum of both feeding and antipredator vigilance. 
              Decision-making is the framework within which this research is based.    A very
              common observation is that a group size increases, prey animal vigilance
              decreases.  This decrease in vigilance could result in the animal having more
              time to feed and could be a significant force in the evolution of sociality. 
              Although visual obstruction is a common contextual variable in many prey
              animals' environment, this variable has not been given much empirical
              attention.    Thirteen-lined ground squirrels are burrowing rodents that occur
              across the Great Plains.  They are preyed upon by birds, terrestrial mammals,
              and reptiles such as snakes.  It has been shown that thirteen-lined ground
              squirrels increase their antipredator vigilance only when their long-range
              (greater than 20m), lateral field of view is obstructed.  Considering how many
              animals prey upon these ground squirrels, it is quite surprising that they do
              not react with increased vigilance when their 'overhead' view is obstructed. 
              To test hypotheses about antipredator vigilance and visual obstruction,
              thirteen-lined ground squirrels are allowed to feed inside plexiglass boxes
              that differentially obstruct the squirrels' filled of view, and detect the
              approaching threat.  This is an important test since ground squirrel
              antipredator vigilance behavior indicates that they do not co nsider certain
              positions of visual obstruction to be important.  Therefore, even without
              increasing their vigilance, ground squirrels should be able to detect predator
              attacks with 'overhead' visual obstruction as when there is no visual
              obstruction.
