Title       : Magnetic Properties of Quasi-One Dimensional Molecular Conductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1998       
File        : a9701597

Award Number: 9701597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Naughton   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              97-01597  Naughton  This  is  a  renewal proposal to study superconducting, 
              metallic  and  dielectric properties of the quasi-one  dimensional molecular
              conductors TMTSF at low temperatures  and  large  magnetic  fields.  Recent 
              transport studies  to  B=7T  of  the  upper  critical field  Phys. Rev. Lett.
              78, 3555 (1997)  provide strong  evidence  for unconventional spin-triplet
              pairing, and a novel  field-  induced   dimensional   crossover.    These   and
                similar   magnetic  measurements  will  be  extended to higher  fields  in  a
               search  for  reentrant superconductivity which has been predicted for such
              quasi-1-  d superconductors.  In the normal state, the origin of a new series
              of  angular magnetoresistance oscillations, which map the curvature of the 
              Fermi  surface,  will  be  investigated.  A search  for  corresponding  angular
                magnetic  oscillations  via  torque  magnetometry  will   be  initiated.   In
               the  dielectric  state,  the  origin  of  the   "fast  oscillations" will be
              investigated via torque and transport in  pulsed  fields to 100T.  %%%  This 
              is  a  renewal proposal to study superconducting,  metallic  and  dielectric
              properties of the quasi-one  dimensional molecular conductors TMTSF at low
              temperatures  and  large  magnetic  fields Superconductivity arises when two
              negatively  charged  electrons become attracted to each other and become
              "paired", in spite  of  the  fact  that  "opposites attract while likes 
              repel".   In  all  conventional  superconductors, these paired electrons have
              opposite spin, such  that  the  total  spin of the pair is zero, a fact which
              plays an  important  role in the explanation of the superconducting state.  A
              recent theory  has  predicted, however, that in certain materials in which 
              electrons  are confined to move mostly in one direction, electrons with the
              same,  rather  than  opposite, spin, can form pairs, and  superconduct.   One 
              consequence  of  this  pairing would be that a  magnetic  field  could 
              enhance, rather than destroy , the  superconducting   state,  opening  the 
              interesting   possibility   of  superconductivity  reappearing in very  high 
              magnetic  fields.   This  project involves a search for high field
              superconductivity in  a  one-  dimensional  molecular conductor, where initial
              studies are strongly suggestive  of  equal spin pairing and reentrant
              superconductivity.  ***
