Title       : Three-Wave Mixing Spectroscopy of Buried Solid Interfaces and Thin Film
               Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1997      
File        : a9701657

Award Number: 9701657
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arjun G. Yodh yodh@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701657  Yodh    The proposed work seeks to employ second-order nonlinear 
              optical  techniques to study buried solid interfaces.  The  nonlinear optical
              method is particularly attractive because  it possesses the long penetration
              depths characteristic of  most optical probes, and the intrinsic interface
              sensitivity  characteristic of all second-order optical processes.  The 
              research will vigorously apply our nonlinear tools to new  classes of
              scientifically interesting solid-solid interface  systems including hererofilm
              structures such as SiC/Si and  SiC/SiO2, metal/GaAs,metal/ZnSe,ZnSe/GaAs,
              II-VI-based  Quaternary thin films on InP,and III-N nitride-based thin  film
              structures.  Loosely speaking, high quality films of  these materials are
              required for the next generation of  electro-optic devices such as blue light
              emitters and  photodetectros.  The proposed investigations will encompass  a
              range of open ended polarization and frequency-dependent  investigations.  The
              polarization studies have the potential  to identify gross structural problems
              associated with the  growth of these thin films such as mixed phases, and 
              misorientation.  The frequency-dependent studies of the  solid interfaces, and
              in many cases of the bulk thin films  as well, will provide unique
              spectroscopic information about  these systems with the potential to reveal new
              information  about defects, band profiles, and strain in these systems.   %%% 
              When dissimilar crystals are abruptly adjoined, an  interfacial region is
              formed with physical properties that  are fundamentally different from those of
              the neighboring  bulk materials.  Since the microscopic characteristics of  the
              junction often play a prominent role in determining the  macroscopic properties
              of the material, the junction is  important to understand.  At the most basic
              level we would  like to understand how specific interfacial stoichiometries 
              bring about particular interfacial energy level structures,  band offsets, band
              profiles, and morphologies.  On a mo re  technological level, "interface
              quality" is known to affect  the properties of injection lasers and LED's, as
              well as  charge transport in photodetectors and microelectronic  circuits.  A
              roblem of great fundamental and practical  importance then, is to elucidate the
              role played by various  interfacial properties such as level structure in
              affecting  the properties of the material as a whole.  Unfortunately  the
              buried solid interface is difficult to probe by  conventional means because
              traditional optical  spectroscopies lack interface specificity, and traditional
               surface diagnostics have a limited penetration depth.  The  proposed work
              seeks to employ second-order nonlinear optical  techniques to study these
              interfaces.  The nonlinear optical  method is particularly attractive because
              it possesses the  long penetration depths characteristic of most optical 
              probes, and the intrinsic interface sensitivity  characteristic of all
              second-order optical processes.  ***
