Title       : Stiffness Threshold in Network Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1997    
File        : a9701289

Award Number: 9701289
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Punit Boolchand pboolcha@ececs.uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701289  Boolchand    This  is  a  renewal  project  to study the  physical 
              nature  of  the  stiffness  threshold  in chalcogenide and chalcohalide 
              glasses  using  Raman  scattering, M ssbauer spectroscopy and T-Modulated
              Differential  Scanning  Calorimetry measurements (MDSC).  Specifically,  Raman 
              mode  frequency   shifts  and  Lamb-M ssbauer  factors  will   be   measured 
              systematically  as a function of glass composition  to  establish  the  mean
              coordination number dependence of local elastic constant, C,  and  the 
              first-inverse moment of the vibrational density of  states,  w-1.  Random
              network model simulations of both C and w-1 in glasses are  now  available 
              from numerical experiments, provide a convenient  guide  to  compare   with 
              laboratory  experiments.   The  nature  of  structural  relaxation   at  the 
              glass  transition  will  be  studied   in   MDSC  measurements  to establish
              the non-reversing heat-flow DHnr  variation  with  composition.   Preliminary
              experiments on  chalcogenide  glasses  reveal  that DHnr also displays a
              minimum at the stiffness  threshold,  c=2.4   suggesting  that  only  minuscule
              enthalpy  changes  accompany  structural  relaxation  of a glassy liquid  when 
              it  is  mechanically  critical.  Mean-field constraint counting procedures also
              reveal  that  for  networks  possessing terminal atoms such as one-fold 
              coordinated  atoms (halogens) the stiffness transition in general shifts to a
              lower  mean  coordination c < 2.4.  These ideas will be put to a quantitative 
              experimental test in suitable Raman, M ssbauer and MDSC experiments in 
              chalcohalide glasses.  %%%  This  is  a  renewal  project  to study the 
              physical  nature  of  the  stiffness  threshold in chalcogenide and
              chalcohalide  glasses.   Many  glasses  containing the elements S or Se or Te
              are viewed as  networks  composed of atomic-chain fragments (with a mean atomic
              coordination of  2).  These  chain-fragments  can  be  progressively 
              cross-linked   by  alloying other atoms.  Mechanical ri gidity of such alloyed
              networks is  found  to  increase  progressively with  degree  of  cross-linking
               as  measured  by  the  mean coordination number of a  network.   When  the 
              coordination reaches 2.4, theoretical calculations predict a floppy to  rigid 
              transition  and  stiffening of the  network  beyond  2.40.   We  propose  to
              carry out an experimental study on specific glass  systems  to  decode the
              physical nature of the underlying stiffness transition.  This  transition,
              which corresponds to a magic composition in a  glass  system,  is of general
              interest in glass science because some  of  the  best glass formers occur near
              this magic composition.  Furthermore, an  understanding of this transition will
              also help unravel the mysterious  and  elusive  nature  of structural arrest
              that occurs  at  the  glass  transition.   Such  information will also assist
              in tuning  the  glass  composition   for   optical,   thermal,  electronic  
              and   mechanical  applications.  ***
