Title       : Singular Hermitian Metrics on Vector Bundles and Codimension Two Subvarieties of
               Quadrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1997       
File        : a9701779

Award Number: 9701779
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Andrea de Cataldo   (Principal Investigator current)
              Neithalath M. Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9701779  de Cataldo    This project is concerned with two problems: (1) the
              study of singular hermitian metrics on vector bundles and (2) codimension two
              subvarieties of quadrics.  For the first problem, the principal investigator
              will determine a theory of singular hermitian metrics for holomorphic vector
              bundles on complex manifolds.  The aim is to develop a basic understanding of
              them with special regards to positivity. For the second problem, the principal
              investigator will study codimension two subvarieties of dimension at least
              five.  He will work on the classification of low degree submanifolds; the
              classification of submanifolds which carry special structure; the role of
              vector bundles in the above classification; the size of the Hilbert scheme of
              codimension two submanifolds not of general type; the rationality and
              unirationality of the earlier mentioned varieties; and the adjunction theoretic
              properties of these submanifolds.    This is research in the field of algebraic
              geometry.  Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics,
              but one which has had a revolutionary flowering in the past quarter-century. 
              In its origin, it treated figures that could be defined in the plane by the
              simplest equations, namely polynomials.  Nowadays the field makes use of
              methods not only from algebra, but from analysis and topology, and conversely
              is finding application in those fields as well as in physics, theoretical
              computer science, and robotics.
