Title       : Fundamental Properties of Superconductors and Mesoscopic Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2000      
File        : a9701487

Award Number: 9701487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $543000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Tinkham tinkham@rsj.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                     w:\awards\awards96\num.doc  9701487 
              Tinkham    Experimental and theoretical work will be performed to  elucidate 
              the  physical  properties  of  superconducting  and  normal-metal  devices
              fabricated on micron and nanometer length scales. In such  mesoscopic 
              structures, the Coulomb charging energy of  a  single  electron  exceeds 
              thermal energies below  1K,  allowing  one  to  control  the  number of
              electrons one-by-one on the island  in  a  single-electron   transistor  
              (SET).   If    the    island    is  superconducting,   the  PI's previous work 
              has  shown  that  the  pairing  energy  leads to even-odd electron number 
              effects.  One  ongoing  project will utilize this even-odd effect as  the 
              basis  for  developing  a  microwave detector  device  of  unprecedented 
              sensitivity,  in which each individual microwave photon  absorbed  in  enabling
               the photon-assisted tunneling of a single  electron  will trigger a
              microsecond long current pulse containing hundreds  of   electrons.  The  SET 
              electrometers  coupled  to   wide-band  cryogenic amplifiers developed for this
              experiment will also make  possible new types of experiments monitoring the
              motion of single  electronic  charges  with  microsecond time  resolution.  If 
              the  mesoscopic island is as small as 5nm, the PI's previous work  has  shown 
              that individual electronic energy levels can be  resolved,  and  that  a 
              spectroscopic even-odd effect exists  even  in  the  normal  state  because  of
               the two-fold  spin  degeneracy.  Such  measurements will be extended to new
              types of mesoscopic  systems  such  as  chemically prepared metallic
              nanospheres of  controlled  size  (which should allow more systematic probing
              of energy level  statistics  than  is possible with random sized  grains), 
              carbon  nanotubes,  and possibly even individual large organic molecules. 
              Another experiment in preparation seeks to observe the change  in  the spectrum
              of a superconducting nanograin when it is doped with   0,1,2  or  more magnetic
              impurities, to compare with  theoretical  predictions.  %%%  There  is  a 
              practical need to understand better the  new  basic  physics  which will govern
              attempts to devise ever  more  compact  computers  and  memories.  With  this 
              general  motivation,   the  research  which will be performed under this grant
              will focus  on  various forms of the single-electron transistor, or SET.  An 
              SET  device   consists  of  a  small  conducting  island  coupled   to 
              electrical  leads by ultramall tunnel junctions and  capacitively  coupled  to 
              a  gate  electrode  which  controls  the  number  of  electrons  on  the
              island. Such SET devices can easily  detect  a  single  excess electron charge,
              in principle making  possible  an  ultracompact memory element in which the
              binary "zero" and  "one"  are  represented  by the presence or absence of  a 
              single  extra  electron.  Development  of  a technology  from  this  concept 
              is  complicated  by  the  sensitivity of the  devices  to  background  charge 
              noise and the difficulty of reliable fabrication of  such  small  devices.  The
              proposed research may lead  to  progress  in  overcoming these difficulties. A
              possible approach which will  be  explored  involves joining the fabrication
              technology of physics,  for making connections, with the molecular engineering
              of organic  chemistry,  to make small charge storage elements. At such  small 
              length  scales,  classical physics must be  replaced  by  quantum  physics,  in
               which  the  wave  properties  of  electrons  become  important  in 
              understanding  the electrical  properties  of  the  device.  The  research to
              be performed will  probe  the  relation  between  the  discrete set of quantum
              energy levels  in  a  small  conducing   grain  with  the  charging  energies  
              of   classical  electrostatics. Special attention will be paid to phenomena
              which  arise  from  the  pairing energy of electrons  if  the  grain  is 
              superconducting, and to the coupling of the electron  spins  with  d
              eliberately introduced magnetic impurity atoms.  ***
