Title       : CAREER: Research and Education in Microsensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2000        
File        : a9701513

Award Number: 9701513
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rajinder P. Khosla                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David W. Galipeau david_galipeau@sdstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : South Dakota State Univ
	      Box 2201, Admin 130
	      Brookings, SD  570071998    605/688-4181

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1045,1187,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9701513  Galipeau  This project is a four-year early career development plan
              that integrates microsensor research with educational activities in
              microelectronic devices, sensors and materials.  The goals of this plan are to
              significantly strengthen the research and educational programs in microsensors
              at South Dakota State University.  This will be done by expanding current
              research into new and interdisciplinary areas, integrating this research into
              undergraduate and graduate curriculums, and significantly increasing the design
              component of courses being taught in the microelectronic devices and materials
              areas.  Four areas that are important to chemical sensor development will be
              the primary focus: The development of a novel technique for measuring the
              effects of surface properties on sensor response and sensing film adhesion; The
              development of novel bio-sensors for the detection of airborne endotoxins; The
              optimization of hazardous gas sensors; and The characterization of electronic
              polymer films.  The novel technique for measuring surface properties is of high
              importance in the sensor area and also has wide applicatiols in the fields of
              biomaterials, microelectronics and adhesives, therefore it will be the prime
              focus area of the scientific part of this plan.  The three remaining areas
              involve the application of sensing science and form the engineering design part
              of this plan.    The activities described in this proposal are expected to
              advance sensing science, engineering, and education.  The science will be
              advanced by providing a new method for surface characterization that has high
              sensitivity to surface free energy, wettability, and contamination, and high
              degrees of correlation with biological interactions.  This work is also
              expected to provide a better understanding of the gas sorption processes in
              chemical sensing and aid in the optimization of thin films used as chemical
              sensing elements.  Other important applications in microelectronics include the
              analysis of surface treatments  designed to improve film adhesion and the
              attachment of analities to a sensor surface and measurements of surface
              cleanliness prior to encapsulation.  Important applications in biomaterials
              include: insuring surface reproducibility in biomaterial investigations and
              commercial medical devices, establishing correlations between surface tension
              of materials and biocompatability, and bioadhesion.  Engineering design will be
              advanced by new chemical sensor designs and applications that will be
              investigated.  The proposed educational activities will advance engineering
              education by providing instructional and research opportunities in
              microsensors.  In addition, a comprehensive program which is designed to better
              prepare students for the workplace, reduce student attrition, and encourage
              students to pursue graduate studies is proposed.  The activities include
              incorporating significant engineering design components in all courses with an
              emphasis on microsensors; integration of industrial, cross disciplinary, and
              research activities into the curriculum; laboratory development; the
              incorporation of new ideas in learning styles and assessment in the classroom;
              and by outreach activities directed toward underrepresented groups.  ***
