Title       : Orthogonal Laurent Polynomials, Moment Theory, Pade Approximants and Continued
               Fractions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  1998   
File        : a9701028

Award Number: 9701028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $32553              (Estimated)
Investigator: William B. Jones yocum@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jones    Abstract    Jones proposes research in four closely related areas:  (1)
              Strong   Moment Theory, (2) Orthogonal Laurent Polynomial Sequences (OLPS's),  
              (3) Applications of Szego Polynomials, and (4) Computation of Special 
              Functions.  Following are brief descriptions of the proposed research.   
              (1)Research on strong moment problems will be focused on determining   all
              solutions of a given problem when more than one solution is   known to exist. 
              For certain classes of problems we propose to show   that there are infinitely
              many solutions in the form of step-functions.    For the infinite family of
              moment problems associated with   bi-sequences of log-normal moments, we
              propose to obtain explicit   expressions for all solutions of the moment
              problems, by using the   Nevanlinna parametrization.  (2) A primary goal for
              research in this   area is the determination of explicit formulas for OLPS's 
              that are   analogues of the classical orthogonal polynomials of Jacobi, Hermite
                and Laguerre. Explicit formulas will also be sought for recurrence  
              formulas, Rodrigues' formulas, differential equations, quadrature   formulas
              and other known properties of the classical polynomials.    For areas (3) and
              (4) our primary goal is to investigate computational   methods for use in
              applying recently obtained Theoretical results to   problems of science and
              technology.    Orthogonal functions are used as building blocks to describe in 
               mathematical language a large number of  physical phenomena; for   example: 
              (a) the magnetic field of the earth   (for navigation and   geophysical
              research), (b) musical tones, (c) motion   of ocean tides, (d) alternating
              electrical currents and   (e) force fields  due to gravitational attraction
              (orbiting planets   and satellites) and electrostatics.  Examples of orthogonal
              functions   that help form the basis of mathematical physics (and its
              engineering   applications) are spherical and cylindrical harmonics, Fourier
              series   and orthogonal polynomials.  OLPS's are r elatively new orthogonal  
              functions introduced in the 1980's by the principal investigator and  
              collaborators (Thron, Waadeland and Njastad).  Originally they were   used to
              solve strong moment problems.  Jones proposes their   application to quadrature
              formulas for efficient computation of   integrals that arise in science and
              engineering.  Szego polynomials are  applicable to frequency analysis problems
              that arise in such fields as  communication (digital transmission of radio,
              television and telephone  signals), radar, phonetics, speech processing, speech
              therapy, and  teaching the deaf to speak.  Our research will compare Szego
              polynomial  methods with other known methods, seeking to refine the Szego
              method  and exploit its application.
