Title       : Dissertation Research: Growth and Evolution of the Shell in Turtles: Patterns,
               Processes, and Consequences of Morphological Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 9,  1997        
File        : a9701119

Award Number: 9701119
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Zoe Eppley                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6040               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael C. LaBarbera mlabarbe@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              LaBarbera  9701119        The  authors will study patterns of dermal shell
              growth, function  and  evolution in turtles. The turtle shell represents a
              unique skeletal system  which is particularly amenable to growth studies
              because most ossification  and  development  occurs post-hatching. As one of
              few  sutured  vertebrate  skeletal  systems  other  than the skull, the turtle 
              shell  is  a  useful  comparative  model  for  exploring the growth of sutured 
              structures.  The  functional  consequences  of growth patterns  will  be 
              evaluated  in  the  context  of  morphological integration, mechanical
              integrity and  relative  shell mass.        Patterns of shell growth will be
              characterized for various species  of  cryptodiran  turtles  and  compared  in 
              a  phylogenetic  context.  Growth  trajectories   will  be  quantified  and 
              compared  using   landmark-based  morphometric methods. The role that sutures
              play in shell growth, and  the  relationship of that role to shell geometry,
              will be assessed in  a  study  using  fluorochrome  bone markers to quantify
              skeletal growth.  Functional  hypotheses  of  morphological integration, shell 
              strength,  and  relative  shell mass will be evaluated using a combination of
              statistical models and  mechanical testing.        This  study  contributes  to
               an  understanding  of  the  relationship  between  ontogenetic change and
              morphological evolution,  examines  tissue  level  processes which contribute
              to the gross development  of  form,  and  places these findings in a functional
              context.
