Title       : CAREER: Novel High Magnetoresistance Oxide Thin Film Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2000       
File        : a9701581

Award Number: 9701581
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318495             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yuri Suzuki   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9701581 Suzuki  This CAREER project addresses the role of structural
              distortions in magnetic properties of ferromagnetic perovskite materials. A
              major objective is to correlate structural distortions with magnetic properties
              to shed light on the origin of anomalously large magnetoresistance effects.
              Effects of lattice strain of cubic perovskite ferromagnets in thin films grown
              on prudently oriented substrates, in particular piezoelectrics, will be
              studied. In thin film samples on piezoelectric substrates, strain can be
              applied to the sample externally by applying a voltage to the substrate. These
              studies aim to elucidate the effect of structural distortion on the magnetic
              properties, including magnetoresistive response and Curie temperature, and thus
              identify appropriate theoretical interpretations. Conversely the effect of
              varying the strength of the magnetic interactions on the structural and
              magnetic properties will be studied in related layered ferromagnetic
              perovskites that have only recently been isolated in bulk and in
              heterostructures of ferromagnetic and paramagnetic cubic perovskites. This
              series of thin film samples is expected to uniquely allow systematic tuning of
              structural and magnetic properties.  An education program in which the
              magnetics research is integrated into undergraduate and graduate experiences
              will be developed. This includes a course on magnetics for advanced
              undergraduates and graduate students, and advanced magnetics lab course and
              undergraduate internships in the PI's lab. The aim is to provide a firm
              foundation in materials science, condensed matter physics and solid state
              chemistry, and especially to develop students' experimental and analytical
              skills. %%% The project addresses forefront research issues in a topical area
              of materials science having high technological relevance.  The research will
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to
              important aspects of magnetic materials and devices, in general.  Additionally,
              the fundamenta l knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
              expected to contribute to improving the performance of advanced devices and
              circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
              producing improved materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature
              of the program is the emphasis on education, and on the integration of research
              and education through the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically significant research area. ***
