Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Taxonomic Studies of Malesian
               Melastomataceae
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1997      
File        : a9701893

Award Number: 9701893
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacinto C. Regalado   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5948,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9701893  Regalado      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Jacinto C. Regalado, Jr. to work with Dr.
              Jan  F. Veldkamp at the Rijksherbarium in Leiden in the  Netherlands.    While
              at Leiden, Dr. Regalado will work with Dr. Veldkamp on  the taxonomic revision
              of Medinilla, a large and complex  genus from New Guinea.  This study will
              update our  understanding of the genus, which is based on scattered and 
              outdated papers published during the first half of the  century.  The taxonomic
              problems caused by the loss of type  specimens during the destruction of the
              Berlin herbarium  will be treated by assigning neotypes or lectotypes from 
              duplicate specimens found in the herbaria at Kew, Paris,  Geneva, Florence and
              Stockholm.  The revision will include  keys to species, species descriptions,
              illustrations,  habitat information, and geographic distributions.  In 
              addition, Dr. Regalado will work with other Melastomataceae  specialists in
              Europe, Dr. Roger Lundin of Sweden, Dr. Anton  Weber of Austria, and Ms. Gudron
              Clausing of Germany.  They  will produce a synoptic checklist of the family. 
              That  checklist, will serve as a precursor to a monographic  treatment of the
              family for the Flora Malesiana project  based at the Rijksherbarium.      ***
