Title       : Two-Dimensional Electrons on Helium
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9701428

Award Number: 9701428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $354500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arnold J. Dahm ajd3@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701428  Dahm    This is a renewal project covering four areas in the study of 
              electrons on liquid helium.  We propose a new route to the  ripplonic-polaron
              state, which consists of an electron self-  trapped in a surface dimple.  We
              suggest that ripplon-induced  weak localization of the electron occurs in the
              weak scattering  limit.  As the scattering, controlled by the holding electric 
              field, is increased, a transition to the bound polaron will occur  with
              possibly strong localization as a precursor to the bound  state.  The mobility
              of electrons in the low density limit will  be studied as a function of holding
              field, magnetic field, and  temperature.  We will attempt to observe weak
              localization by  thermal ripplons and the bound polaron state.  We further
              propose  to study plasma oscillations of quasi-one-dimensional electron  gas
              formed by confining electrons to helium filled grooves in an  insulating
              substrate.  We will also search for viscoelastic modes  in the electron fluid
              and study the pinned electron solid as a  function of coupling to pinning
              centers.  %%%  This a renewal project to study electrons bound to a liquid 
              helium surface.  In such a situation, the bound electrons form a  single layer
              which floats on the surface of helium.  This system  is the simplest
              two-dimensional system.  It has interesting  physical properties and some of
              its properties are analogs of  those which occur in three-dimensional (3D)
              systems.  The  parameters controlling these analogs can be varied through a 
              wider range and are more easily controlled than in three  dimensions.  We
              propose to study electrons on a helium surface in  an attempt to better
              understand the physics of systems of lower  dimensions and the physics of 3D
              systems which are difficult to  probe.  Our study will include the spatial
              localization of  electrons by random scattering, analogous to the localization
              of  electrons in some 3D semiconductors.  By increasing the  scattering rate we
              expect to find electrons trapped in surface   depressions, an analog of
              electrons trapped in a highly  compressible lattice in 3D.  We will study the
              pinned electron  crystal which is an analog of 3D sliding charge-density waves.
               We also propose to study sound in a single rows of electrons in  an attempt to
              understand the physics of one-dimensional systems.  ***
