Title       : Dissertation Research: Why Animals Form Groups: Predator Avoidance Versus
               Foraging Success in Fiddler Crabs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1997       
File        : a9701063

Award Number: 9701063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9100               (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Wethey wethey@biol.sc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of SC Columbia
	      Byrnes Building, Room 511
	      Columbia, SC  29208    803/777-7093

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9701063  Wethey  Why animals for groups is central question in the field of
              sociobiology.  Researchers have proposed five models to explain why social
              aggregations form.  Three of these suggest that groups form because they help
              protect group members from predators.  Mathematically, group membership should
              lower the risk of predation to each individual at the expense of its neighbors.
               Conversely, many experiments have demonstrated that rapid scattering of a
              group during a predator's attack can decrease the risk of predation by
              confusing the predator and allowing the prey to escape.  Other work has shown
              that predation risk is decreased in groups because there are more sets of eyes
              to watch for possible danger.  The other two models that explain social
              aggregation suggest that group formation would increase each member's ability
              to find food.  Experiments have demonstrated that many animals are capable of
              watching each other's behavior and learning about good food sources from one
              another, and the opportunity for this would be higher in large groups than in
              small ones.  Additionally, larger groups of animals tend to move in straighter
              lines than smaller groups, and it has been shown mathematically that this will
              lead to an increased likelihood of entering pristine, un-foraged areas.  To
              test these five models, this study will examine group formation in
              burrow-building crustaceans that regularly form large flocks, and are extremely
              numerous in coastal marshes.  Use of field experiments, direct observations,
              and computer analysis of video recordings, will determine which model best
              explains why animals form groups.
