Title       : CAREER: Resource Sharing and Performance Analysis Algorithms for
               Integrated-Services Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  2002      
File        : a9701525

Award Number: 9701525
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rayadurgam Srikant rsrikant@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1045,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Integrated-services communication networks that carry multiple traffic classes
               with different Quality-of-Service (QoS) requirements such  as voice, video and
              data are becoming a reality.  Each traffic class is characterized by the amount
              of  bandwidth that it requests from the network, and the  statistics of its
              arrival process and holding time in the network.  A key feature of emerging
              high-speed networks is that these  characteristics for the various traffic
              classes tend to be  widely different.  We focus on two important issues in such
              networks:  (i) resource sharing for traffic with different bandwidth
              requirements  and (ii) performance analysis algorithms to evaluate  routing and
              admission control for such networks.  High bandwidth calls typically experience
               high blocking probabilities without some form of admission control that 
              reserves  a certain portion of the network's resources to handle these  calls.
              A goal of this research project would be to develop admission control  and
              routing schemes to improve the blocking performance of high bandwidth  calls 
              without adversely affecting the network utilization. The presence of a large 
              mixture of bandwidth classes also poses unique challenges in evaluating  the
              performance of such admission control and routing schemes.  We will develop a
              combination of  analytical and simulation techniques that would provide  fast
              and accurate estimates of the blocking probabilities  for all traffic classes
              in the network.
