Title       : Dissertation Research: Testing Hypotheses for Proximate Mechanisms Generating
               Spatial Segregation of the Sexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1997       
File        : a9701338

Award Number: 9701338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Lyons                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : November 30,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9326               (Estimated)
Investigator: Maureen L. Stanton mlstanton@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Grosberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              0521200   Salt Tolerant Plants                    
Program Ref : 9169,9179,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                9701338  Stanton  In some plant species, males and females live in different
              habitats. The goal of this project is to identify what ecological mechanisms
              are involved in creating such a pattern of spatial segregation of males and
              females in saltgrass, Distichlis spicata.  Saltgrass is a central component of
              salt marshes on the west and east coasts of the United States as well as inland
                in salty and alkaline areas. To determine what mechanisms could operate to
              create a pattern of spatial segregation of males and females in this species,
              the researchers have identified molecular markers capable of differentiating
              clones and identifying the gender of individuals before they flower.  With
              these tools, they can test for effects of differential germination requirements
                and differential seedling mortality by tracking seedlings grown from seeds in
              the field. Further use of molecular markers on plants in patches of known ages
              can determine whether differential adult mortality and differential vegetative
              growth contribute to the pattern in saltgrass. Also, the researchers will use
              transplant experiments to test for differential effects of environment on  
              vegetative growth between males and females and to examine male and female
              reproductive success. The long term goal of this research project is to fully
              understand how ecological and evolutionary mechanisms operate to create spatial
              segregation of males and females in saltgrass.   Spatial segregation of males
              and females is exhibited by more than eighteen plant species. In these species,
              males and females are found in environments that differ in water availability,
              salt levels, altitude, light levels, or nutrient levels. Strikingly, females
              are consistently   found in less stressful environments (wetter, less salty)
              than males. It is difficult to understand why this spatial separation of males
              and females would not decrease mating efficiency for these plants. Thus,
              scientists are interested in knowing what mechanisms lead to spatial
              segregation of  males and females and whether the pattern benefits individual
              plants. Only one study has directly addressed the question of spatial
              segregation of males and females as a benefit to plants, and no   studies have
              been published that demonstrate which mechanisms are working to create this
              pattern in species with genetic determination of gender.  It is particularly
              important to understand how such a pattern operates because many key wetland
              plant species are known to exhibit the pattern.   Wetland ecosystems have a
              central environmental and ecological role, and in order to preserve and restore
              wetlands, researchers need information on wetland ecosystems particularly the
              factors that cause them to be resistant to degradation and resilient to change.
              Genetic components of populations can greatly influence their stability and
              consequently the stability of the whole ecosystem of which they are a part.
              Spatial segregation of males and females is one aspect of the genetics of many
              plant populations for which almost nothing is known.
