Title       : The Galois Structure of DeRham Cohomology and Motives
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1997       
File        : a9701411

Award Number: 9701411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Brent Gordon                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ted C. Chinburg ted@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      9701411  Chinburg       This project concerns research on arithmetic
              geometry.  The primary goal of this research is to study the Galois structure
              of de Rham cohomology and motives.  Concerning de Rham cohomology, Professor
              Chinburg will continue the program developed in two papers in the Annals of
              Mathematics to establish the connection between equivariant de Rham Euler
              characteristics and root numbers. Applications to the theory of modular forms
              will also be considered.  Concerning motives, Professor Chinburg will use
              higher dimensional class field theory to develop a comprehensive theory of
              motivic Galois structure invariants.  He will also consider the relation
              between variants of the Main Conjecture of Iwasawa theory and the Galois
              structure of K-groups.  A second goal of this project is to complete earlier
              work by Professor Chinburg concerning on capacity theory, Arakelov theory and
              hyperbolic geometry.  This work has suggested new research projects concerning
              discriminants and the Lovasz conjecture in combinatorics.  Professor Chinburg's
              previous research concerning the relation between Mahler measures and
              regulators in K-theory will be reexamined in the light of recent work by C.
              Deninger concerning Mahler measures and periods of mixed motives.     This
              project falls into the general area of arithmetic geometry - a subject that
              blends two of the oldest areas of mathematics: number theory and geometry. 
              This combination has proved extraordinarily fruitful - having recently solved
              problems that withstood generations.  Among its many consequences are new error
              correcting codes.  Such codes are essential for both modern computers (hard
              disks) and compact disks.
