Title       : CAREER: The Polymerization of Small and Large Ring Propellanes and the
               Incorporation of Materials Science into the Hope College Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a9701800

Award Number: 9701800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth M. Sanford SANFORD@HOPE.CIT.HOPE.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hope College
	      41 Graves Place
	      Holland, MI  494239000    616/395-7190

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,9178,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Professor Sanford's research focuses on the synthesis of substituted   (1.1.1)
              propellanes and their polymerization to produce materials   displaying novel
              thermal and optical properties.  Introduction of   long-chain alkyl
              substituents will enhance the solubility of the targeted   homopolymers and
              alternating copolymers.  Polymerization of propellane   monomers with planar
              pi-substituents will create materials with novel   molecular architectures,
              while copolymerization with electron deficient   olefins will provide materials
              with unusual electronic properties.    Large-ring propellanes will provide
              access to polyamides with rigid   propellane structures in the main chain of
              the polymer.  In addition to   providing undergraduate research opportunities
              in these projects,   Professor Sanford will integrate materials issues into the
              curricula for   science and engineering students and will develop a
              collaborative,   interdisciplinary course for nonscience majors in which
              critical thinking   and understanding of science will be fostered through
              lecture and   laboratory investigations relating to science and technology in
              the   everyday world.  With this CAREER award, the Synthetic Organic Program
              supports the   research and educational activities of Dr. Elizabeth Sanford of
              the   Department of Chemistry of Hope College.  Professor Sanford's research  
              focuses on the synthesis of propeller-shaped molecules known as   propellanes. 
              These molecules are relatively unstable, and they readily   undergo reactions
              which relieve their strained polycyclic structures,   forming polymers
              comprised of long chains.  Professor Sanford introduces   various substructures
              into the propellane molecules, thereby permitting   the formation of polymers
              bearing these substructures, which are designed   to impart to the polymers
              better solubility, novel architectures, and   unusual electronic properties. 
              Professor Sanford is developing   educational programs for both science and
              nonscience majors.  A course   focusing on science and technology in the
              everyday world will be   developed for the nonscience majors, while curriculum
              changes and the   opportunity for undergraduate research in Professor Sanford's
              laboratory   will afford undergraduate science and engineering students a broad
              view   of current materials science issues.                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
