Title       : REU SITE: Research Experiences for Undergraduates at the Oklahoma Weather Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1997      
File        : a9701902

Award Number: 9701902
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79695              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark H. Palmer mpalmer@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kelvin K. Droegemeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9250,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701902  Palmer        An objective of the Research Experiences for
              Undergraduates (REU) Program  is to provide talented undergraduate students
              with the opportunity to obtain active  experience in research.  After a series
              of summer programs hosted by the National  Oceanic and Atmospheric
              Administration s (NOAA) National Severe Storm s  Laboratory (NSSL), scientists
              at various meteorological institutions Norman, OK   (collectively known as the
              Weather Center) met to discuss the summer program and  ways to improve it.  The
              result was a proposal to the NSF to establish a REU site at  the Weather
              Center.  The REU program proposed for 1991 addressed the concerns  identified
              by the hosts of the NOAA program with a plan to increase the number of 
              students, the number of mentors, and the variety of institutions participating,
              as well  as the level of financial support to be offered and an increased
              effort to recruit  students from underrepresented groups.  In addition to NSF,
              the NSSL continued its  support at about the same level as in 1990.  For ten
              weeks, from June 10 through  August 16, 1991, fourteen undergraduates from
              eight different states and nine  different undergraduate institutions
              participated in the program of lectures,  demonstrations, laboratory
              experiments, field trips, and individual research projects.   Their positive
              evaluations of their experience led to REU sites in the Summers of  1992 and
              1993.         Under the current award, this series will continue with
              approximately ten  undergraduate students participating in the late
              Spring/early Summer of 1998.  At  the Oklahoma Weather Center, students will
              participate in atmospheric research and  data analysis under the supervision of
              mentors from throughout the Oklahoma  Weather Center. The students' research
              experiences will be supplemented by tours of  Weather Center facilities and
              lectures to produce a well-rounded summer learning  experience.  This will give
              the students an opportunity to become more aware of  scientific ethics an d
              issues relating to gender and racial discrimination, and to judge  for
              themselves whether a scientific research career might be right for them.  The 
              students will prepare and present papers reporting the results of their
              research.         The students will be provided housing, transportation to and
              from the REU,  and a modest stipend to make the program accessible to
              economically disadvantaged  students who must work during summers to support
              their continuing education.  The  Principal Investigator will make recruiting
              trips to encourage underrepresented  minorities and women to apply to the
              program.  For example, the Principal  Investigator will travel to and work
              closely with the Department of Physics at Clark  Atlanta University (CAU), a
              historically African-American university, in recruiting  motivated students.   
                    The Principal Investigator also intends to perform  a follow-up
              evaluation of   students who have participated in these programs in the past in
              order to obtain some   measure of effectiveness.  ***
