Title       : Bioreporters of Genetic Expression Demonstrate Bioavailability of Metals During
               Biofilm Growth and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1997   
File        : a9701018

Award Number: 9701018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $217364             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. White dwhite1@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Palmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 9104,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              White  9701018  Bacteria that are growing in biofilms form a relatively stable
              community that may greatly affect bioremediation rate in situ, perhaps more
              than bacteria in the bulk phase.  However, microbial activity of biofilm
              bacteria, as well as the bioavaliability o metal contaminatants, remain
              difficult areas to study.  Biofilm communities are complex mixtures of many
              species, both culturable and non-culturable, and the composition of the biofilm
              communities to metal ions spatially and temporally.  We will study the response
              of biofilm communities to metal ions (mercury and chromium) by constructing
              bioeporter strains for these two metals.  Expression of the bioreporter genes
              indicates that the metal is bioavailable, and that the bacteria are actively
              producing gene products to detoxify.    We have produced bioreporter strains
              that bioluminesce in the presence of mercury.  We have further modified this
              strain to encode a gene for Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP), which is an
              extremely bright fluorescent molecule.  Individual cells expressing this
              protein can be found using our sensitive photodetection equipment.  We will use
              this strain in a flow cell biofilm formation apparatus, following the bacteria
              with both fluorescence and bioluminescence detectors.  The biofilm community
              will be established under laboratory conditions using groundwater from a
              contaminated site.  We will incorporate the bioreporter bacteria and track
              their establishment using their fluorescence.  The continued presence of the
              cells, and their number, will be established using the fluorescence
              bioreporter. The same technique will be applied to bacteria that reduce
              chromium.  The mercury reduction (mer) genes are highly conserved, and we will
              use tis advantage to detect mer genes in the biofilm population.  Sensitive
              molecular techniques, such as in situ PCR for detecting mercury reducers, and
              in situ Reverse Transcriptase PCR for detecting activity from mer reducers,
              will be employed for comparison to results form light  measurements.  The
              results of these experiments will give a more definite assessment of biofilm
              bioremediationrates under in situ conditions.
