Title       : AMP: The University of Texas System Alliance for Minority Participation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a9701775

Award Number: 9701775
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Dr. A. James Hicks                      
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3008656            (Estimated)
Investigator: Pablo Arenaz parenaz@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 9133      ALLIANCES-MINORITY PARTICIPAT.
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              HRD-9701775  Arenaz         The University of Texas System Alliance for Minority
              Participation (UT-System AMP)  brings together all nine academic components of
              The University of Texas System and ten  regional community college partners in
              an effort to increase the number of under-represented  minority students and
              students from other underserved populations enrolling in and graduating  from
              baccalaureate programs in science, mathematics, engineering, and technology and
              entering  graduate programs in SMET fields of UT-System universities.  The
              activities of the UT-System  AMP are supported by partnerships with industry
              and government agencies, particularly national  laboratories.  The educational
              institutions in the Alliance serve a rapidly growing region, where  by the
              decade's end minorities will comprise a majority of population.  Prominent
              among the  institutions are those in the U.S.-Mexico Border regions serving
              large numbers of Hispanic  students and those in metropolitan areas serving
              mainly commuter students, including many  minorities.  The UT-System places a
              high degree of importance, system-wide, on improving  retention among
              undergraduates and proving enhanced opportunities for these undergraduates  to
              enter graduate programs in SMET.  This proposal also emphasize the system-wide
              sharing  of resources to attain these goals.       In Phase II, the University
              of Texas System Alliance for Minority Participation is  committed to achieving
              the following objectives:  1) The UT-System AMP universities will  graduate a
              minimum of 1,500 under-represented minority and other underserved students with
               B.S. degrees in SMET by 2002, an increase of 70% over 1995-1996 baseline and
              2) the UT-  System AMP universities will enroll a minimum of 600
              under-represented minority and other  underserved student in the SMET graduate
              programs by the fall of 2002, an increase of about  40% over the fall 1995
              baseline.       AMP program activities will focus on three major areas:  (1)
              retention of students who   are SMET majors through the development of
              strategies of all partner institutions to address  retention of second year
              students in SMET; (2) mentoring and career development opportunities  for SMET
              majors interested in pursuing an advanced degree.  Activities include the
              development  of a joint graduate school application for UT-System institutions,
              GRE workshops and career  development/mentoring activities at each partner
              institution; and (3) stipend support, mentoring  and training for students
              participating in research and summer bridge activities.       The UT-System AMP
              is permanently changing the nature of SMET higher education in  Texas.  Through
              the UT-System AMP, the participating universities have raised the visibility 
              and increased the awareness of the chancellor, presidents and chief academic
              officers about  SMET program outcomes and the status of under-represented
              minority students.  Providing  leadership to the UT-System Alliance for
              Minority Participation will be a Governing Board,  chaired by James Duncan,
              Executive Vice Chancellor of The University of Texas System which  includes
              presidents, vice-presidents or provosts of UT-System member institutions and 
              participating community colleges as well as a selected number of experts from
              industry and the  national R&D community.  Meeting annually, the Governing
              Board will continue to provide  general oversight of the UT-System AMP.  The
              Academic Leadership Council (ALC), composed  of deans, chairs and distinguished
              faculty are involved in the implementation of AMP activities  at their
              institution.  The ALC meets twice yearly.
