Title       : CAREER: Characterization of Local Singularities: Self- focusing Wave Motion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9701980

Award Number: 9701980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Edward L. Wolf                          
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel P. Lathrop   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1187,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701980  Lathrop    This CAREER project is a study of free surface liquid 
              singularities performed in order to characterize nonlinear  self-focusing in
              liquid free surfaces.  This information  should assist in defining a class of
              systems exhibiting  singularities including turbulent dissipation fluctuations,
               self-focusing in nonlinear optical systems, cavitation  phenomena and
              sonoluminescence, and gravitational  singularities.  The experimental surface
              waves are produced  using a Faraday apparatus (vertically oscillated tank). 
              This proposal focuses on three aspects:  determination of  the threshold value
              for singularity formation, understanding  the time dynamics of states
              exhibiting singularities, and  finally pursuing local models for the structure
              of the  singularities.  The continued development of  undergraduate research
              and  improvement of the undergraduate course work are at the core  of the
              teaching plans.  The research investigating gree  surface singularities is
              integrated with a program of  involving undergraduate and graduate students in
              the  experiments.  %%%  This is a CAREER project to study local singularities
              or  local blow-up of some pare of a system.  Such singularities  play an
              important role in the behavior of a number of  physical systems such as
              turbulence, burn-out of lasers and  optical fibers, cavitation, and singular
              objects due to  gravity:  black holes.  Significant mysteries exist about  what
              classes of motion and what types of singularities arise  in physical systems. 
              The droplets, spray and foam produced  by breaking waves on a beach and in deep
              water are examples  of singularities on a liquid surface.  This project studies
               liquid surface singularities to aid in both the knowledge of  liquid motion,
              and the general understanding of physical  sysstems exhibiting singularities. 
              The continued development of undergraduate research and  improvement of the
              undergraduate course work are at the core  of the teaching plans.  The research
              investigating liquid  singula rities is integrated with a program of involving 
              undergraduate and graduate students in the experiments.  ***
