Title       : CPMSA -- Together, Educating All in Mathematics and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 16,  2002  
File        : a9701822

Award Number: 9701822
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Joseph Reed                             
	      ESR  DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM REFORM   
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Cruz pcruz@laredo.k12.tx.us  (Principal Investigator current)
              Graciela Ramirez  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Laredo Indep Sch Dist
	      1702 Houston Street
	      Laredo, TX  78040    /   -

NSF Program : 1547      COMP PART FOR MATH & SCI ACHIE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              PI: Ramirez, Graciela    Together, Educating All in Mathematics and Science
              (TEAMS)  is  a  project  of  the Laredo Independent School District supported 
              by  the   community's  two  institutions  of  higher   education,   a 
              professional organization and two local businesses to restructure  the 
              district's  Pre-K-12 mathematics, science and communications  program  aimed at
              significantly increasing minority participation  in  the  college-bound SEM
              pipeline.  TEAMS will restructure  the  district's elementary organization, the
              K-12 mathematics, science  and  communications curriculum, instruction and
              staff development  to produce a totally aligned educational system.    The 
              Laredo  Independent School District is  a  minority-majority  urban  system  in
               South Texas.  About 98% of  the  students  are  minority,  98%  Hispanic and
              0.1 Asian.  TEAMS will  address  the  current  low levels of Hispanic student
              participation and success  on  the SEM pipeline.  Hispanic students, on
              average, score  well  below   white  students  on  college  entrance  exams,  
              Advanced  Placement  exams and are much less likely to participate  and  be 
              successful  in  advanced level mathematics and  science  courses.  TEAMS  is a
              system-wide initiative which will involve the  23,200  students in the
              district's 21 elementary, four middle, three high  schools, and the Magnet
              School for Communications and Fine  Arts.  Consistent with the CPMSA goals, all
              the students in the district  will  benefit  from  an  enriched  curriculum, 
              upgraded  teacher  skills, and student enhancement activities.    This 
              comprehensive project will systematically reform Pre-K-1  2  mathematics, 
              science  and  communications  programs  to  upgrade  significantly  the 
              quality of education  in  order  to  increase  successful  minority (especially
              Hispanic) participation  in  the  SEM pipeline.
