Title       : Dissertation Research: Modeling the Consequences of Heterogeneous Light
               Environments for Seedling Perfomance in Tropical Wet Forests: A Multi-Scale
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9701053

Award Number: 9701053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Collins                           
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9578               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin L. Chazdon chazdon@uconnvm.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1128      ECOLOGICAL STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 1182,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9701053  Chazdon  This proposal addresses the critical need to create predictive
              models of seedling response to changing patterns of environmental
              heterogeneity. The PIs propose to develop mechanistic models of whole-plant
              carbon gain that will be coupled with studies of plant performance in relation
              to light heterogeneity in tropical forest environments. The PIs will examine
              levels of plant response to natural spatial and temporal variation of light to
              integrate leaf physiology with whole-plant architecture, leaf display, and
              biomass allocation.  The approach involves two components. First, known
              genotypes of three shade-tolerant tree species will be planted along a
              continuous gradient of light availability from the center of a gap, through gap
              edges, and into the forest understory. An architectural model will be used to
              scale from leaf-level measures of photosynthesis to whole-plant estimates of
              carbon gain. From these data the PIs will develop and parameterize a maximum
              likelihood model of whole-plant carbon gain and growth as a function of
              continuous variation in light availability. This model will then be used to
              predict growth of transplanted seedlings of the same family lines in secondary
              forest and native tree plantations, two habitat types differing in patterns of
              light availability. Since changing land use patterns can dramatically affect
              both spatial and temporal patterning of light, this information will help to
              understand and predict how plants may respond to current and future land use
              changes. Predicting the consequences of heterogeneous light environments for
              seedling populations in tropical forests requires an explicit characterization
              of the pattern of heterogeneity as well as patterns of plant response to this
              heterogeneity.
