Title       : CAREER: Atomic-Scale Optical Microscopy of Ferroelectric, Quantum Paraelectric
               and Ferromagnetic Films
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2000      
File        : a9701725

Award Number: 9701725
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeremy Levy jlevy@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1045,1775,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9701725 Levy  This CAREER project aims to develop high resolution spatially and
              temporally resolved near-field optical techniques to investigate
              nanometer-scale phenomena in two materials systems: (1) ferroelectrics, quantum
              paraelectrics, and (2) ultrathin magnetic films. The broad aim of this research
              is to probe dynamical processes at the short length and time scales, and to
              relate these observations to macroscopic properties. For ferroelectric thin
              films, domain reversal and domain wall dynamics will be imaged stroboscopically
              at MHz-THz frequencies, with the goal of understanding fundamental mechanisms
              for microwave dissipation and dielectric dispersion. Nonlinear interactions
              between impulsively generated coherent phonons, domain walls, charged
              impurities and grain boundaries will be studied with anticipated near-atomic
              spatial resolution, and time resolution below the phonon period. Time-resolved
              techniques will be used to probe order parameter fluctuations in order-disorder
              ferroelectrics, and to search for signatures of a macroscopically coherent
              ground state in quantum paraelectrics at low temperatures. For magnetic films,
              a newly proposed Kerr-effect near-field microscopy will be developed for the
              purpose of studying magnetization dynamics on fundamental length scales and
              time scales. The nature of biquadratic exchange in coupled ferromagnetic
              layers, and the role of dynamic versus thermodynamic fluctuations at the
              reorientation phase transition of ultrathin magnetic epilayers will also be
              addressed. %%% The project addresses forefront research issues in materials
              science.  The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
              fundamental atomic level to important aspects of ferroelectric and magnetic
              materials, in general.  An important feature of the program is a special
              emphasis on education, and on the integration of research and education through
              the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
              research area.  ***
