Title       : Multidisciplinary Center for Earthquake Engineering Research (MCEER)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  2002 
File        : a9701471

Award Number: 9701471
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Aspasia Zerva                           
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2006  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10000000           (Estimated)
Investigator: George C. Lee gclee@mceermail.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1483      EARTHQUAKE ENGINEER RESRCH CTR
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9701471  Lee  The Center for Advanced Technologies in Earthquake Loss- 
              Reduction (ATEL) is a nine-institution consortium, closely  linked under an
              integrated research and management framework  using modern communication
              networks. The thrust of this  center will be the development and application of
              advanced  and emerging technologies for design, construction, and  intelligent
              engineering renewal of buildings and civil  infrastructure in reducing
              earthquake losses.  An integral  part of the research is associated with
              loss-reduction:  removal of socio-economic barriers; and development of 
              incentives for new knowledge and technology.  This EERC will  carry out an
              integrated research, education and outreach  program that will be built on
              three major elements:  (a)  performance assessment of the built environment; 
              (b)  rehabilitation of critical facilities; and (c) response and  recovery 
              using new loss estimation methodologies and  advanced technologies. The
              technological foci of the  research are:  high-performance computing; site
              remediation;  structural control and monitoring; smart and high-  performance
              materials; condition assessment;  robotics  systems; and decision-making
              systems. A comprehensive  education plan for graduate and undergraduate
              students, K-  12, professionals and the public sector is integrated with  the
              research plan and is supported by two user networks  focused upon:  (a) 
              advanced computation; and (b)  experimental  facilities.  An innovative
              outreach program  will be implemented to promote and develop:  public 
              awareness; professional training and re-education; and  partnerships for
              knowledge/technology transfer and  utilization.   The Center for ATEL is one of
              three EERC's  networked with an overarching governing board to provide 
              synergism in creating new knowledge and technology,  educating the next
              generation of earthquake engineers and  scientists, and providing outreach to
              industry, government,  pre-college schools and potential user groups.
