Title       : Dissertation Research: Form and function of the strepsirhineprimate
               temporomandibular joint
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1997        
File        : a9701425

Award Number: 9701425
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11995              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew J. Ravosa m-ravosa@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                The temporomandibular joint (TMJ), the point of articulation of the lower jaw
              and the cranium, presents a model system for addressing form and function
              relationships in primate and mammalian skulls.  In the primate group
              Strepsirhini, the TMJ is highly suitable for consideration of form-function
              associations because of the marked variation in the TMJ, as well as in the
              entire jaw.  This research will test several functional hypotheses relating TMJ
              movements and mechanical loading to TMJ morphology in these previously
              unexamined primate species.  Additionally, TMJ form and function in
              strepsirhines will be compared to haplorhine primates, a second closely-related
              group of primates.  A combined approach using experimental data and comparative
              measurements will be implemented to assess a number of functional hypotheses.  
                 This study will provide the first comprehensive survey of how TMJ form
              relates to TMJ movements, loading and size-related factors in strepsirhines as
              well as between strepsirhines and haplorhines.  Integration of these new
              findings with previous research in other primates enables the documentation of
              evolutionary changes in the TMJ across primates.  These evolutionary changes in
              the TMJ will be compared to temporally correlated changes in the jaw, thus
              providing an historical perspective to the functional evolution of the primate
              jaw.  Finally, this research develops a protocol for the assessment of fossil
              primate TMJ functional diversity.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
