Title       : Magnetic Field Driven Transitions in Spin-Lattice Coupled Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1999       
File        : a9701991

Award Number: 9701991
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernhard Keimer keimer@pupgg.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9701991  Keimer  This  is  a  renewal  project  to study cooperative 
              magnetostructural  transitions in electronic materials,  especially
              spin-Peierls  systems  and magnetoresistive manganites using synchrotron x-ray
              diffraction in  intense  magnetic   fields. In spin-Peierls systems,  the 
              experiments  will  provide a detailed picture of the magnetic field induced
              soliton  lattice phase  as well as the critical behavior near the commensurate-
               incommensurate   transition. In the manganites, a recently  discovered 
              insulator-metal  transition that can be induced by a magnetic field as  well 
              as  exposure  to x-rays will be investigated, and its  potential  for 
              applications in x-ray lithography will be evaluated. In addition,  possible 
              magnetostructural   transitions  will  be  explored  in  new  materials,
              including charge density wave, spin density wave and  spin-  ladder systems. 
              %%%  This is a renewal project to  study  novel phases of solids induced by 
              magnetic fields in a unique facility designed for x-ray diffraction in  intense
              magnetic fields. These experiments are of fundamental as  well  as  long-term
              technological interest. From a fundamental  perspective,  our  understanding of
              magnetic interactions in metals and  insulators,  especially the roles of
              dimensionality and disorder, will be  advanced  by focusing on the coupling
              between the magnetic order and the crystal  structure in various materials. An
              improved understanding of  magnetic  field  induced transitions may also lead
              to a variety of applications,  for instance in high-density  magnetic storage;
              of particular interest  are  recently  discovered   insulator-metal transitions
               in  manganese  oxides that can be induced  by magnetic fields as well as
              exposure  to  x-rays.  ***
