Title       : Linear and Nonlinear Forecasting and Testing: Theory and Data Transformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 13,  1998     
File        : a9730102

Award Number: 9730102
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman R. Swanson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730102  Swanson    This project investigates linear and nonlinear forecasting
              and model specification using time series which may or may not be strictly
              stationary.  The research will build on the foundation of results obtained to
              date, and is meant to extend, broaden, and deepen our understanding of forecast
              model construction, data transformation, and artificial networks.  The research
              consists of two different but related areas: data transformation and
              forecasting; and nonlinear model specification, estimation, inference and
              forecasting.    Preliminary evidence shows that commonly and widely applied
              statistical tests are severely biased when data are assumed to follow a linear
              model in levels, but logs are taken, and vice - versa.  The part of the project
              on data transformation solves the problem of choosing appropriate data
              transformation in a way that is simple to implement, involving only least
              squares regression, unique, and does not require knowledge of whether the
              variables are stationary or nonstationary.  The research examines a wide
              variety of issues related to data transformation, including: (1) the effects of
              data transformation on commonly applied statistical tests; (2) testing
              procedures for addressing data transformation; and (3) theoretical and
              empirical implications of data transformation in forecast model specification
              and construction.    The part of the project on nonlinear forecast
              specification focuses on artificial neural network (ANN) sieves, and the
              resulting class of estimators called ANN sieve estimators.  The project (1)
              examines the use of alternative activation functions for forecasting; (2)
              obtains convergence rates and normality results for loss functions other than
              mean square error, which may be discontinuous; and (3) obtains pointwise
              asymptotic normality for ANN models.      ??
