Title       : Democracy, Conflict Management, and Militarized Interstate Disputes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2001   
File        : a9730505

Award Number: 9730505
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107502             (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Dixon dixonw@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This project is directed at improving our understanding of the interplay of
              democracy and third party intermediaries in shaping the contours an outcomes of
              international conflict.  Four empirically testable hypotheses are derived from
              an evolving theory of democratic norms positing that democratic leaders operate
              within certain normative constraints to regulate and resolve political conflict
              both at home and abroad.  These hypotheses contend that democracy, working
              through norms instilled in political leaders, will both influence states'
              acquiescence to third party conflict managers and condition the effectiveness
              of their management efforts.  The primary objective of the research is to
              systematically evaluate these hypothesized relationships against the historical
              record of militarized interstate disputes.  Because there were so few fully
              democratic states in existence prior to World War II, the temporal domain of
              the study begins in 1946 and extends through 1992, the last year of recorded
              interstate disputes.  Militarized interstate disputes provide a novel and
              important test bed for these hypotheses, not only because much of what is known
              about international conflict has been derived from studies of militarized
              disputes, but also because they constitute the most widely used and thoroughly
              investigated compilation of interstate conflict episodes currently available. 
              Empirically based answers to the questions raised by these hypotheses are
              expected to have both theoretical and practical implications for how we
              understand and deal with international conflict.  But this empirical evaluation
              cannot proceed without systematic identification and documentation of conflict
              management by third parties, information that does not now exist within the
              conceptual and operational context of militarized disputes.  This collection of
              new data constitutes a secondary objective of the research, but also entails a
              side-benefit in the form of a new data resource on international conflict
              management with potential application well beyond the present study.  Thus what
              is new and distinctive about this effort is that it extends explicit
              consideration of conflict management to the heretofore uncharted territory of
              militarized interstate disputes.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
