Title       : Fundamental Experimental Properties of Mesoscopic Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9730577

Award Number: 9730577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $380000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Webb rawebb@squid.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                       9730577  Webb    This is a condensed matter physics project that
              investigates  the  quantum  mechanical  properties  of  electron  transport 
              through  submicron conductors. In these very small structures the phase of  the
               wavelength  of  the  electron wave  function  are  important  variables  that 
              are  probed by a variety of subtle  experimental  arrangements. The project
              will systematically explore  the  phase  coherent transport properties of
              mesoscopic system on time scales  much shorter and much longer than the phase
              coherence time. State-  of-the-art   dc  superconducting  quantum  interference
                devices  (SQUIDs)  will  be  used  to study the  size  dependence  of  the 
              magnetic  response of both single and arrays of metal rings.  The  object  is 
              an  understanding of  why the persistent  current  in  phase  coherent loops
              appears to have quantum fluctuations  which  are  orders  of  magnitude  larger
              than  expected.  In  addition,  magnetic  and  transport properties of
              mesoscopic  systems  whose  size  approaches  that  of  the Kondo screening 
              length  will  be  studied.    The   project   provides   exceptional   
              educational  opportunities for graduate students and post-doctoral associates. 
              They  are involved in intellectually challenging research at  the  frontiers 
              of  condensed matter physics. The experiments  require  the  latest 
              fabrication and measurement methods and prepare  the  students for a wide range
              of scientific or technical careers.  %%%  This is a condensed matter physics
              project that employs state-of-  the-art   micro-fabrication  methods   to  
              prepare   ultra-small  structures.  Much  of  the work is focused on 
              understanding  how  electrons  flow  through  the nanoscale structures. 
              Conventional  ideas  of  current  flow  do not apply, and  the  wave-mechanical
               properties  of the electron dominate the response of currents  in  loops, 
              arrays  of  loops,  films,  etc.  The  project  addresses  currently unsolved
              problems in the quantum mechanical behav ior of  the nanostructures. These
              problems are relevant to those involved  in the microelectronics industry where
              the size of transistors is  steadily  decreasing  to  the so-called  mesoscopic
               realm  where  quantum mechanics becomes important. An additional project 
              deals  with  the  properties of nano-wires containing magnetic  impurity 
              atoms.  The  impurities  influence  the  electron  transport   in  surprising 
              and  poorly  understood ways.  The  project  provides  exceptional  educational
              opportunities for graduate students  and  post-doctoral  associates.  They are
              involved  in  intellectually  challenging  research  at  the  frontiers  of 
              condensed   matter  physics.  The  experiments  require the  latest 
              fabrication  and  measurement methods and prepare the students for a wide range
               of  scientific or technical careers.  ***
