Title       : Effect of Cosolvents on Solute Solubility in and Separability Between Liquid
               Phases in Liquid-liquid vapor Equilibrium Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9730853

Award Number: 9730853
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190308             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kraemer D. Luks kraemer-luks@utulsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Tulsa
	      600 South College Ave.
	      Tulsa, OK  741043189    918/631-3312

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9730853  K. Luks/U. of Tulsa    Support is sought for the
              experimental study of liquid-liquid-vapor (llg) equilibria of selected ternary
              mixtures of common gas solvents + solutes + cosolvents.  This research will
              contribute to the understanding of how cosolvents may enhance the capacity of
              the gas-solvent-rich liquid phase (l2) for extracting solutes from a
              solute-rich liquid phase (11) in an llg subcritical system.  Detailed studies
              of the llg regions of several ternary mixtures will be carried out to evaluate
              the roles that cosolvent polarity and phase concentration may have in enhancing
              the molar concentration of a variety of relatively non-volatile liquid solutes
              in the  gas-solvents-rich liquid l2.    It is proposed that the llg phase
              equilibria be studies for nine ternary mixtures composed of gas solvent +
              solute + cosolvent, six  containing the gas solvent carbon dioxide and three
              containing the gas solvent ethane.  The solute will be selected from species of
              distinctly different molecular structure (n-tetradecane, l-methylbenzene, l-
              decanol), species that have heretofore exhibited llg partial miscibility with
              these gas solvents.  The cosolvent will be selected according to it polarity
              (methanol or acetone, species that has attracted previous interest with respect
              to enhancing gas-phase solubility in prototype supercritical extraction
              systems).    The studies will be performed in the temperature range of 250 to
              325 K at pressure  to 90 bars (9 Mpa) in existing visual cell apparatuses
              especially designed for and dedicated to the study of multiphase equilibria
              phenomena.    Subcritical llg extraction systems offer a dense (i.e., liquid)
              gas-solvent phase at modest temperatures and pressures.  The data resulting
              from this study will be of value for suggesting possible new ways to separate
              at benign conditions certain molecular types of species from complex mixtures
              that occur in environmental, manufacturing, and refining applications. 
              Additionally, these studies will further  expand our understanding of
              multiphase equilibrium phenomena in general by adding to the limited existing
              experimental database of llg systems.
