Title       : Studies of Stratocumulus and Fair-Weather Cumulus Clouds Using a 94 GHz Droppler
               Cloud Radar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a9730119

Award Number: 9730119
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $178169             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce A. Albrecht balbrecht@rsmas.miami.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger M. Lhermitte  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Miami Sch Mar&Atmos
	      4600 Rickenbacker Causeway
	      Key Biscayne, FL  331491098    305/361-4800

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract/Albrecht      Many climate and forecast models are not able to account
              for shallow boundary layer clouds properly.  The result of this deficiency is
              uncertainty in climate and long-range weather predictions. To provide an
              observational basis for improvement of cloud parameterizations and to increase
              understanding of key cloud processes, a 94 GHz Doppler radar will be used with
              other remote sensing systems and in situ aircraft observations to study
              continental stratocumulus and fair-weather cumulus clouds.  This study will
              focus on processes that affect cloud lifetime and the production of large drops
              that serve as precursors to the formation of precipitation.  A key, unique
              feature of this work is the deployment of the 94 GHz radar on a helicopter to
              enable researchers to study the entire life cycle of cumulus clouds.    The
              continental stratus studies will use an extensive data set (more than 250 hours
              of cloud observations) from the cloud radar, a microwave radiometer, a
              ceilometer, and supporting meteorological observations that were collected over
              central Pennsylvania under prior NSF support. This will include investigations
              of large-eddy structures, entrainment processes, and the production of large
              drops and drizzle.     An extensive set of observations of shallow cumuli will
              be made using a single-dish 94 GHz radar that has recendy been developed and
              constructed at the University of Miami.  A ceilometer, a micropulse lidar, a
              microwave radiometer, an IR radiometer, and a video camera will be used to
              support the cloud structure measurements from radar operations at shoreline and
              inland sites in south Florida. The environment in which the clouds form will be
              characterized using rawinsondes and a 915 MHz wind profiler.  In addition, an
              infrared interferometer will be available during some observing periods for the
              retrieval of boundary layer temperature and moisture  profiles.      The radar
              on a helicopter will be used to sample the dynamics and microphysics of clouds
              over their en tire life cycles as wind shear, stability, and aerosol conditions
              vary.  This has not been tried and has great potential to improve the
              description of the spatial distribution and evolution of large-drop
              concentrations in fair-weather cumulus clouds and to determine whether the
              lifetime of small cumuli decreases when drizzle is produced.                   
                          P:\Pmet\pmet awds, f7 & abst\Albrecht.abs
