Title       : Cross Regulation and Central Metabolism in Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9730034

Award Number: 9730034
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry L. Wanner   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Wanner  9730034  Cross regulation is the regulatory interactions that occur
              between different global systems. These interactions may be key information
              integrators, directly linking different pathways in a network to coordinate
              growth and metabolism. The most compelling evidence for cross regulation is
              found in the phosphate (Pho) regulon of E. coli. The Pho regulon is comprised
              of a large number of co-regulated genes encoding uptake systems and degradative
              enzymes required for the use of various environmental phosphorus (P) sources.
              This system is controlled primarily by the PhoR/PhoB two-component regulatory
              system; its control responds to the extracellular inorganic phosphate (Pi)
              level and is coupled to a Pi transporter but not Pi uptake per se, the first
              step of Pi metabolism. Cross regulation of PhoB involves two additional signal
              transduction pathways that are coupled to the incorporation of Pi into ATP, the
              primary phosphoryl donor in metabolism. One signaling pathway leads to
              activation of PhoB by the catabolite regulatory sensor kinase CreC (formerly
              called PhoM). CreC and its partner response regulator are thought to control
              genes of central metabolism, although no target gene was previously known. The
              other leads to activation of PhoB by acetyl phosphate, an intermediate of the
              phosphotransacetylase-acetate kinase (Pta-AckA) pathway of substrate level
              phosphorylation for entry of Pi into ATP. Accordingly, cross regulation links
              the control of genes for P assimilation with those for central carbon and
              energy metabolism. New genetic tools have been developed to identify genes
              controlled by a regulatory protein of unknown function. These tools were used
              to identify CreC/CreB-regulated genes. One such gene is especially interesting
              as it encodes a protein that is highly conserved in diverse bacteria (E. coli,
              Haemophilus influenzae, Bacillus subtilis, and Methanococcus jannaschii),
              suggesting an important, although unidentified, function. Other recent results
              suggest that high energy com pounds in addition to acetyl phosphate are
              involved in the in vivo activation of PhoB. New studies have been designed to
              further investigate these results.  Specific Aim 1 is to define the genetic
              regulation of the newly identified CreB-regulated (cbr) genes and, as feasible,
              to identify additional cbr genes using similar or new strategies, including
              ones based on genomic techniques.   Specific Aim 2 is to define the function of
              one or more cbr genes using newly developed genetic and genomic techniques. 
              Specific Aim 3 is to define the role of one or more high energy compounds in
              global regulation of gene expression using similar approaches.    These studies
              will be valuable both in gaining a deeper understanding of cross regulation and
              the control of genes in central metabolic pathways in bacteria and in
              developing strategies for studying global regulation of gene expression in the
              new era of bacterial genomics.
