Title       : ERC CREST: Computational Prediction of Aircraft Icing Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  2002     
File        : a9730365

Award Number: 9730365
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mary Poats                              
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Roger Briley briley@erc.msstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Whitfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lafayette K. Taylor  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mississippi State Univ
	      
	      Mississippi State, MS  39762    662/325-2131

NSF Program : 1480      ENGINEERING RESEARCH CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                BRILEY  97-30365    This award provides funding for an Engineering Research
              Centers (ERC) Program/Centers for Research Excellence in Science and Technology
              (CREST) Program Partnership between the Engineering Research Center for
              Computational Field Simulation at Mississippi State University (MSU) and
              Tennessee State University (TSU) CREST entitled "Computational Prediction of
              Aircraft Icing Phenomena."  This objectives of this research program include
              the development, application and evaluation of existing one-dimensional icing
              models, as well as new models involving two-and three-dimensional physical
              processes that represent the complex physical process of ice formation and
              accumulation on surfaces.  This research will also develop new solution
              algorithms capable of efficient solution of complex flow and heat transfer for
              applications which include both very low and transonic Mach number regions. 
              These algorithms will allow the use of structured and unstructured grids, and
              implementation in scaleable form on distributed memory computing systems.  The
              icing models will be coupled to the Navies-Stokes flow solver through a
              boundary surface interface procedure.  The research collaboration between the
              MSU ERC and the TSU CREST is well suited for the proposed collaboration in that
              it will require the coupling of separately developed codes for the icing models
              (TSU) and the Navier-Stokes solution (MSU), to correctly model the boundary
              interface.  The coupling of these codes and the demonstration and validation of
              predictions will focus the collaboration.
