Title       : Optimal Incentive Contracts for Teams
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9730472

Award Number: 9730472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30217              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yeon-Koo Che yche@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Much of the existing theory of incentives describes a relationship that lasts
              for just one transaction. Except for a few recent articles, the view emerging
              from these static models promotes incentive schemes that are sensitive to
              employees' individual performance measures and encourage competition among
              employees through tournaments or relative performance evaluation. The static
              nature of these models is not only unrealistic, given that most real world
              organizations have long, often open-ended, life spans, but their predictions
              appear to be at odds with many (long-term) agency relationships.  Incentives
              for many employees are often muted, and firms increasingly rely on
              `self-managed teams` that encourage cooperative relationships among their
              members through mutual accountability, group incentives and delegated
              authority.  While there has been no firm proof of their benefit, many prominent
              firms attribute their productivity gains and high performance records to the
              successful operation of work teams.    Several recent authors such as
              Holmstrom, Milgrom and Itoh demonstrated the benefits of  inducing cooperation
              among workers through team-based incentives. The static nature of these papers
              leaves unexplained how cooperation among agents can be achieved, however. This
              project remedies this limitation by focusing on the repeated nature of agency
              relationships. Doing so not only enables us to explain cooperation among agents
              as self-enforcing behavior, but it also yields much richer, interrelated
              predictions on various aspects of internal organization. The new element in the
              proposed model, absent in the static models, is the possibility of an `implicit
              incentive` being  created.  Agents can be induced to monitor and punish one
              another's shirking, when appropriately motivated by the explicit incentives
              designed by the principal.  The objective of the study is to explore how the
              implicit incentives can be optimally induced by, and combined with, explicit
              incentives.  This project will provide useful insights on important issues such
              as the design of pay-for-performance scheme, task assignment, allocation of
              authority, and the role and value of communication.    The preliminary research
              suggests that the optimal incentive scheme displays many observed features of
              team arrangements.  Specifically, it  predicts that relationships with long
              life spans and mutual accountability are likely to be characterized by
              low-powered, group incentives and by a high degree of delegation of authority,
              whereas relationships with short life spans or no mutual accountability are
              characterized by high-powered, competitive incentive schemes such as relative
              performance evaluation and tournaments and by a high degree of centralized
              control and supervision.  These findings show a great deal of promise for a
              theory that will contribute not only to the development of the principal-agent
              literature but also to the understanding of general incentive issues arising in
              dynamic agency relationships. The project has direct applications in
              identifying the benefit of team-based organizations but it will also shed light
              on other institutions such as group-based lending programs and Japanese
              subcontracting relationships.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
