Title       : Explaining the Design of Social Security Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9730401

Award Number: 9730401
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Xavier Sala-i-Martin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Casey B. Mulligan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project analyzes economic and political design features of social security
              programs.  It includes the construction of a large cross country and time
              series data set measuring various dimensions of program design, the size of
              social security administrations and their components as well as other related
              economic and social measures such as retirement patterns and old age political
              participation.  A preliminary analysis uncovers a number of empirical
              regularities across countries.  Four of those findings of the study are: (1)
              old age benefit eligibility almost always depends on a person's labor market
              status, (2) old age benefit eligibility rarely depends on a person's wealth,
              (3) social security appears to grow more than could be accounted by the growth
              of the retirement aged population or national income, (4) retirement aged
              citizens appear to devote more effort to political activities than do the
              young.  These regularities indicates that both theoretical and the empirical
              analyses need to relate social the origin and growth of the social security
              administration to labor markets and to the political behavior of the retirement
              aged.  The project will expand the data sets in various dimensions.  The
              investigators will expand the institutional and `design` variables for a number
              of years and for a larger cross section of countries, include finer and more
              comprehensive measures of social security programs as well as retirement
              patterns of the retirement aged, and include measures of political, legal, and
              economic institutions.  The PIs will also construct measures of `intensity` of
              political participation and separate the time intensive from the money
              intensive forms of participation.  The project will also investigate `pressure
              group` and other models of collective choice that might explain why the
              retirement aged are able to get pensions from the young and why those pension
              have the eligibility requirements and other features mentioned above.  A
              preliminary analysis of a model where the political power of a particular group
              depends on the amount of time devoted to political activities, the
              investigatorrs show that the retirement aged have incentives to introduce
              retirement inducing regulations like the ones observed in the data, which will
              reduce the value of the time of the members of their own group. This, in turn,
              enlarges their political power and will allow them to extract more transfers
              from the young. The model explains why the pension system induces the
              retirement aged to retire, why the size of the social security program appears
              to be related to the amount of restrictions on the work of the retirement aged,
              why the retirement aged are more interested in politics, and why they devote a
              larger fraction of their time to political activities.                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
