Title       : Genetic Analysis of Neuropeptide Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9730003

Award Number: 9730003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142098             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Taghert   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9730003  Taghert    Neural communication leads to information processing and
              ultimately to the command of behavior.  The chemistry of the brain is the
              currency by which communication is exchanged by brain cells.  That chemistry is
              complex and includes several hundred different compounds that are used at
              different times and different places in the brain.  In particular one class of
              "neural transmitters" are small peptide hormones called neuropeptides.  These
              are very important for the direct regulatory control they appear to have on a
              variety of specific behaviors including appetitive and reproductive behavior,
              mood, stress, and anxiety.  Dr. Taghert uses a model invertebrate system, the
              fruit fly Drosophila,  to employ genetics to study the relation between
              neuropeptides and behavior.  This use of genetics is important because it
              provides the means to manipulate gene expression in the animals and Drosophila
              offers the most comprehensive and sophisticated set of genetic tools.  Indeed
              by manipulating these mechanisms genetically, Dr. Taghert can address
              neuropeptide functions in vivo.  Given that neuropeptides rely on proper
              post-translational modifications for their correct structure and hence for
              their functions, he will examine a specific enzyme that is necessary for the
              synthesis of nearly all neuropeptides, and only neuropeptides.  Since animals
              that are deficient in this enzyme die early indicating the importance of
              neuropeptides for development and survival, Dr. Taghert has devised two
              independent means to make animals that are mosaic for the enzyme.  Using
              biochemical, anatomical and behavioral tools, he will fully evaluate these
              mosaics.  The results from these studies will shed new light towards
              understanding the role that neuropeptides play in modulating how neurons
              communicate information.
