Title       : Multi-Object/Multidimensional Auctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2002       
File        : a9730175

Award Number: 9730175
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $168297             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mordechai Perry   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 Abstract     This project deals with the study of multi-object auctions with
              multi-dimensional signals. The recent spurt in interest in the study of
              multiple-object auctions is largely the result of large-scale privatization of
              socially held assets by governments. In light of the emerging view that many
              results from the mechanism design and information economics literature fail to
              extend to multiple-object multi-dimensional settings, and in consideration of
              the influence economic theory has had on the recent design of a number of these
              privatization auctions, it is of some importance to understand which of the
              results from the one-good one-dimensional signal auction literature, on which
              economists base most of their intuition, are sensitive to dimensionality. This
              is especially germane since the multi-object, multi-dimensional case is by far
              the more common.     Milgrom and Weber (1982) provide a number of important
              results on the revenue-ranking of various auction forms under incomplete
              information. However, their analysis is limited to the case in which the seller
              has but a single unit of an indivisible good, and the signals received by the
              bidders are one-dimensional.     As a first step beyond the Milgrom-Weber
              framework, and in order to get a feel for the underlying economics, we derive
              the equilibrium of a Vickrey auction in the simplest possible extension of the
              single-unit environment. That is, we consider a homogeneous-good, two-unit
              setup wherein there are but two agents. The agents receive affiliated signals
              regarding the value of the good and there is a common-value component to the
              agents' valuations.   Remarkably, in this very simple 2x2 environment, we are
              able to demonstrate the failure of the linkage principle. The significance of
              this finding is highlighted by the recent design of the spectral auction. It is
              widely agreed by the experts involved in the process that the choice to include
              an open-auction format in the FCC auction was largely influenced by the faith
              placed (now perhaps misplaced) in the linkage principle.     We continue this
              line of research by conducting a careful study of the equilibria and their
              properties in multi-object/multi-dimensional auction environments. There are
              numerous questions we focus on. Does the linkage principle hold for multi-unit
              first-price auctions? Is the multi-unit ascending auction efficient? What are
              its equilibrium strategies? How do its revenues compare to those in the
              multi-unit Vickrey auction? What are the equilibrium strategies there?         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
