Title       : US-Pakistan Cooperative Research: Ecophysiology of Coastal Halophytes of
               Pakistan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9730882

Award Number: 9730882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Irwin A. Ungar ungar@ohio.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio University
	      
	      Athens, OH  45701    614/594-5511

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 5943,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Irwin
              Ungar of Ohio University in Athens, and Dr. M. Ajmal Khan, Department of Botany
              at the University of Karachi in Pakistan.  The two will conduct research to
              study the comparative response of halophytes, the leaf succulent (Suaeda
              fruticosa), stem succulent (Haloxylon recurvum) and the grass (Halopyrum
              mucronatum) to various levels of salinity and drought under field and
              laboratory conditions at different stages of their life cycle.  Investigations
              will be carried out on the germination, establishment, growth, reproduction,
              plant and soil relationship, variation in the ion content of tissue and soil,
              osmotic relations, and mechanism of salt and drought tolerance to determine the
              tolerance limit of species and their ecological responses under field
              conditions.  The differential effect of salinity and drought on germination and
              growth will be followed throughout the growth season.  Physiological markers of
              salt tolerance will be investigated so that plants can be bred to acquire such
              characteristics.  Scope:  This project will involve two scientists who had
              worked together in the past in an effort to address one of the more pressing
              ecological problems in many of the world's poorer countries, namely the
              ever-decreasing resources and the dwindling fresh water supplies as well as the
              increasing salinity of soils.  They plan to increase our knowledge of the
              ecology and physiology of salt-tolerant plants through the study of halophytes
              of Pakistan.  Pakistan is particularly suitable for this research because it
              has a large coastal line adjacent to large mangroves, with many varieties of
              salt tolerant plants, in several areas.  The rest of the coastline is adjacent
              to vast deserts.  The two scientists possess complementary skills and
              facilities, and their research would be enhanced through this collaboration. 
              This proposal meets the INT objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration in
              areas of mutual benefit.  This project is jointly funded with the Division of
              Integrative Biology and Neuroscience.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
