Title       : Political Structure, Demographics and Economic Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  1998     
File        : a9730474

Award Number: 9730474
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacek Kugler jacek.kugler@cgu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yi Feng  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul J. Zak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Claremont Graduate Univer
	      152 Harper Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/607-9406

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This investigation offers a novel approach  for understanding the dynamic
              interactions between political change, demographic transformation and economic
              development.  This research is at the forefront of political economy as it
              formally integrates dynamic models of economic growth with individual level
              demographic decisions and the evolution of political structures.  Beginning
              with heterogeneous households, the researchers model how choices for savings,
              consumption, children and locational preferences are impacted by government
              policies.  Dynamic analysis of this model shows that political change is a
              precursor to demographic transformations which affects the rate of economic
              growth.  The model also discloses how changes in the distribution of income and
              migration shift the development path.  The research integrates current work on
              the dynamics of economic growth driven by the accumulation of physical and
              human capital, with complementary studies linking political effectiveness to
              demographic transformations.  Previous models of economic growth failed to
              account for the effect of politics on fertility, mortality and migration which
              in turn, determine the growth rate.  In this study the investigators consider
              political capacity and economic growth as evolving jointly within a consistent
              general equilibrium framework.  The analysis characterizes the sequence of
              policies and the required  political structures that lead countries toward
              sustained development.  A formal model is used to derive the optimal choices
              for consumption, fertility and migration for each household type.  Households
              vary by the age of the head of household, as well as their income and
              education.  Household choices, which are optimal responses to the economic and
              political environments, are summed across all households to determine aggregate
              outcomes.  Subsequently, an empirical analysis is conducted to assess the
              quantitative effects of changes in political capacity on fertility, migration
              and economic growth.  Empirical studies for the last half-century will be
              undertaken for China and the Asia-Pacific countries, the NAFTA region, and the
              European Union.  The goal is to understand the political mechanisms that,
              through demographic transformation, affect economic development. 
              Decision-makers can use the theory and empirical results of the research to
              identify the sequence of policies required to advance development.  The
              preliminary research of the investigators shows that consolidating political
              support precedes the implementation of population stabilization policies.  This
              is followed by raising educational levels and controlling migration flows. 
              Understanding the mechanics of this sequence allows decision-makers to approach
              the maximal growth rate while preventing social instability.  The research
              suggests that once a critical mass of political and economic momentum are
              achieved, development will be self-sustaining.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
