Title       : Travel Grant for Students to Attend the American Power Conference; Chicago,
               Illinois; April 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1998   
File        : a9730951

Award Number: 9730951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saifur Rahman                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9975               (Estimated)
Investigator: VC Ramesh vcr@iit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Illinois Inst of Tech
	      3300 South Federal Street,
	      Chicago, IL  606163793    312/567-3035

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730951  Ramesh  The American Power Conference (APC), sponsored by the Illinois
              Institute of Technology (IIT), is an annual national forum for the discussion
              of the broad overall aspects of generation, transmission, distribution and
              utilization of power.  APC has significant educational value particularly for
              undergraduate students who aim to learn more about the industry with a view
              towards deciding their career options.  In recognition of this fact, IIT has
              been conducting a special program for faculty and students in conjunction with
              APC.  This program is called the Ben Elliott Sponsored Student Faculty Program
              (BESSF).  The program features special breakfast sessions and other events for
              students (like plant tours) in addition to the regular APC sessions.    Through
              utility sponsorship, the program has been successful in enabling over 120
              students and faculty to participate in APC each year.  However, many
              undergraduate and graduate students are currently unable to attend due to lack
              of industry sponsors.  The emerging competitive utility environment makes it
              difficult for existing sponsors to even maintain their current levels of
              sponsorship.    In this proposal, we request travel funds, totaling $9,975, for
              35 students to attend APC and participate in the BESSF program for the APC-98. 
              The amount will be cost-shared with funds from utilities and from universities
              of the students.  The students will be selected from among those enrolled in
              U.S. universities per the following criteria:    * Undergraduate students, in
              particular, sophomores and juniors will be given priority.    * Women and
              under-represented minorities will be given first preference.    * U.S. citizens
              and permanent residents will receive greater consideration than non-citizens.  
               * Students who have demonstrated prior interest in the power industry either
              through power engineering courses or through internships will receive
              additional consideration.    * Graduate students who intend to present papers
              at APC will be given pr eference over other graduate students.    This grant
              will significantly aid the BESSF program in its mission of encouraging more
              students (especially undergraduates) to pursue careers in power engineering. 
              ***
