Title       : Carbon Isotope Constraints on Benthic Carbonate Dissolution in the Eastern
               Equatorial Atlantic and The North Carolina Continental Margin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  2000       
File        : a9730932

Award Number: 9730932
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250315             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel C. McCorkle dmccorkle@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pore water and benthic flux chamber concentration (ECO2) and  isotopic 
              composition (o13C) measurements will  be  used  to  investigate the factors
              which control the rate of  carbonate  dissolution at the sea floor.  The major
              goal of  this  work  is  to  document  the occurrence and impact  of 
              "metabolic"  carbonate   dissolution,  dissolution  driven   by   benthic 
              decomposition  reactions  in  sediments  above  the  calcite  saturation  
              horizon,   where   the   bottom   waters    are  supersaturated with respect to
              calcite.  Pore water  samples  will  also determine the /\14C of dissolved
              inorganic carbon  and dissolved organic carbon.  The field work for this
              project will be carried out during  two upcoming process studies of benthic
              carbonate  dissolution.  PIs. R. Jahnke, W. Martin, and F. Sayles have  been
              funded to carry out coordinated dissolution studies in  the eastern equatorial
              Atlantic Ocean (Cape Verde Plateau  and Sierra Leone Rise) in 1998 and on the
              continental margin  off North Carolina in 1999.  Jahnke will carry out direct 
              flux measurements (oxygen, nutrients, alkalinity, and  calcium) using benthic
              flux chambers, and Martin and Silks  will use in situ sampling techniques to
              measure pore water  profiles of oxygen, nutrients, alkalinity, ECO2, calcium, 
              iron, and manganese.  Samples from Jahnke's benthic flux chambers and from
              Sayles  and Martin's in situ pore water will be analyzed in this  study using
              del C-13.  These samples will provide  independent estimates of the relative
              contributions of  decomposition-derived CO2 (o13C = -20 o/oo) and dissolution- 
              derived CO3 -2 (o13C = 0 o/oo) to the flux of ECO2 out of  the sediments.  It
              is particularly important to make these  independent isotopic estimates because
              alkalinity and  calcium flux estimates from Jahnke's benthic flux chamber  and
              from Sayles' and Martin's in situ pore water sample  yielded conflicting
              results in a previous dissolution study  on the Ceara Rise (western equatorial
              Atlantic).  In that  Ceara Rise s tudy, both pore water and benthic flux
              chamber  o13C results agreed with the pore water alkalinity and  calcium data
              (and with microelectrode profiles of pore water  pH and oxygen), indicating
              substantial metabolic dissolution  at and above the saturation horizon.
