Title       : Workshop on the Present Status and Future Direction of Solid State Chemistry and
               Materials: NSF; Arlington, VA; January 15-16, 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  2001        
File        : a9730689

Award Number: 9730689
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $53230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jurgen M. Honig jmh@purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1762,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9730689  Honig    The symposium Workshop on Present Status and Future Direction
              of  Solid State Chemistry and Materials will deal with the present  status and
              likely future directions of research, development and  education in the solid
              state chemistry and materials area, and it  will address the needs of this
              community.  Academic, industrial  and government laboratory educators and
              researchers will consider  four topical areas together with another three areas
              to be  addressed by panel discussion.  The four topical areas are:  (1) 
              Strategies for New Materials Discovery;  (2)  Structure /  Property Relations
              and Theory;  (3)  Hybrid Materials and  Interfaces;  (4)  Societal Needs and
              Technological Opportunities.  The three areas to be discussed by panels are: 
              (1) Education and  Training;  (2)  What is Materials Chemistry?  (3) 
              Facilities and  Resources.  The Workshop will be held as an open meeting at NSF
               on January 15-16, 1998.  A document summarizing the findings will  be prepared
              by the Solid State Chemistry and Materials Planning  Committee on January
              18-19, 1998. This document will be made  public and circulated among government
              agencies such as NSF, ONR,  DoD, and DOE for their internal use.  %%%  The
              present workshop arose in response to a recent review process  at NSF.   A
              committee of visitors (COV) consisting of Susan  Kauzlarich (UC Davis), Jack
              Johnson (Exxon), and Thomas Bein  (Purdue U) was selected to study the
              procedure by which proposals  are reviewed and selected for funding within the
              solid state  chemistry program at DMR.  Susan Kauzlarich represented this 
              group in a larger COV, which consisted of representatives from  all DMR
              programs,  and this larger committee prepared a report  for the Assistant
              Director of NSF in April, 1996.  In that report  the COV voiced concern over
              the lack of continuity between this  and previous COVs which had been drawn
              from the Materials  Research Advisory Committee (MRAC).  The COV recommended
              that the  Division find ways to benefit from c ommunity input and also to 
              provide the needed continuity for the COVs.  Thus, the Division  of Materials
              Research is responding to a recommendation by the  MPS Advisory Committee to
              enhance the COV process.  This will be  accomplished through a three year plan:
              (1) In the first year,  hold a seies of topical workshops tied to each of the
              programs  within the Division of Materials Research.  This would provide a 
              focus for the exacting scientific opportunities within a  particular subfield. 
              Near  the end of the year, a workshop would  be held calling together some of
              the members of these workshops  to set priorities among the various new
              opportunities.   (2) In  the second year, hold a series of workshops on areas
              at the  periphery of the Division's interest.  The interfacial areas  would be
              identified through community input and from outgrowths  of the first year
              workshops.  For continuity, some of the  workshop members from the first year
              panels would be invited to  attend this series of workshops.  (3) The
              Divisional COV would  then be held in the third year.  The members of the COV
              would be  drawn, although not exclusively, from the attendees at the  workshops
              held the previous two years. Also, the COV noted in  their report to the
              Assistant Director that funding statistics by  scientific area were not
              available, and in response to this DMR  is now developing a taxonomy of the
              field of materials research  and the programs.  This taxonomy will be useful in
              evaluating the  balance of scientific effort in the programs and across the 
              Division.  ***
