Title       : Business Cycles and Industry Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1998     
File        : a9730442

Award Number: 9730442
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90319              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey R. Campbell jcampbe@midway.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              At the same time that theoretical work sought to understand the cause of counter
              cyclical job reallocation, new empirical work has shed doubt on the proposition
              that all job reallocation is counter cyclical. There is good evidence that job
              reallocation is procyclical in many non manufacturing industries. This new job
              creation and destruction evidence challenges all theories of counter cyclical
              job reallocation. This research addresses this challenge by applying the
              dynamic microeconomic theory of a competitive industry to study differences in
              cyclical dynamics between young and old plants and to study the industry
              dynamics of a single service industry, restaurants.  This study consists of two
              projects. The first analyzes observed life cycle differences in cyclical
              behavior between young and old plants. The hypothesis is that one difference
              between young and old plants, (their adjustment costs), is responsible for the
              many measured differences in their employment dynamics. Rather than assume that
              young plants have lower adjustment costs then old plants in an ad hoc fashion,
              such a difference are derived endogenously by giving managers a choice of
              organizational technology.   Because of their simplicity, competitive models of
              industry dynamics make stark predictions regarding the effects of demand shocks
              on prices and quantities. If entry can occur quickly and congestion does not
              affect costs, then demand shocks have no effect on prices or incumbent plants.
              In this case, the dynamics of individual producers and that of aggregate
              variables have no connection with one another. If entry takes time or if
              congestion increases costs, demand shocks affect both prices and incumbent
              plants. The second project will determine which competitive model best
              describes the restaurant industry; and it will provide a more detailed
              characterization of the response of net entry, average firm size, and other
              size distribution statistics to a demand shock than can be gained from theory
              alone. The approach is to identify local demand shocks with local military
              basing and defense contracts and estimate their impact on restaurant prices and
              quantities, revealing whether the short run supply curve is flat or increasing.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                      
