Title       : Direct Methods in Organic Electron Crystallography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1998     
File        : a9730317

Award Number: 9730317
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Dorset dorset@hwi.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hauptman-Woodward Med Res
	      
	      Buffalo, NY  14201    /   -

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Douglas Dorset is jointly supported by a grant from the Theoretical and  
              Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division and the   Polymers
              Program in Division of Materials Research to continue his   studies of direct
              methods for electron crystallography.   The overall   thrust of the research
              program is to continue the application of direct   phasing methods to electron
              crystallography.  Specific goals of the   current project are: 1) to improve
              methods for collecting more accurate   electron diffraction intensity data; 2)
              to optimize the use of direct   methods for handling undersampled reciprocal
              lattices; and 3) to develop   refinement procedures which circumvent the
              difficulties associated with   multiple scattering problems.  Although the
              proposal is primarily focused   on methodology development, various
              applications are also proposed on   small organic systems such as triphenylene,
              TCNQ, pyrene, quaterrylene   and anthanthrene, and polymeric systems such as
              whisker crystals of   p-oxybenzoate, spider drag line silk,  and oriented films
              of   poly(tetrafluoroethylene).    X-ray diffraction has had a tremendous
              impact on the fields of Chemistry   and Material Science.  It provides a direct
              experimental probe of   molecular structure at the atomistic level.  However,
              for many important   organic compounds, only small crystals can be grown that
              are unsuitable   for investigation by X-ray diffraction.  Electron
              crystallography   presents a powerful alternative for studying such compounds
              providing   that a number of technical difficulties can be overcome.  Dorset's
              work   in this area is directed at improving this alternative to conventional  
              X-ray crystallography to the point where it is precise and relatively   easy to
              use.                                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
