Title       : Assessment of Ecological Roles of Cyanophages in Aquatic Environments using
               Molecular Approaches
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2000   
File        : a9730602

Award Number: 9730602
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $304411             (Estimated)
Investigator: Feng Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Hodson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                High concentrations of morphologically diverse marine Synechococcus
              cyanophages (viruses which infect Synechococcus spp) are found in nature. Co
              existence of such abundant and diverse cyanophages and cyanobacteria in aquatic
              environments has been thought to be an important factor in regulating the
              community diversity of both groups.  Some recent studies suggest cyanophages
              may account for 30% of Synechococcus mortality in marine ecosystems. However,
              other studies suggest it is unlikely for cyanophages to be major contributors
              to Synechococcus mortality in either inshore or offshore waters. The evidence
              supporting these two different opinions was based on data collected from
              bacterial cultures in the laboratory; at conditions which may be quite
              different from what occurs in nature. So far, there are no biological means to
              detect and quantify in situ how many Synechococcus cells are being infected by
              phages. To assess the effects of phages on natural microbial mortality, it is
              important to determine the percentage of the natural population that is being
              infected. Development of in situ molecular detection techniques can provide new
              insight into the ecological impact of phages on Synechococcus mortality in
              natural aquatic environments. This research is composed of two parts.  First,
              DNA polymerase gene (DNA pol) sequences from several marine cyanophages which
              infect representatives of Synechococcus strains will be characterized and
              subsequently used for studying diversity and genetic relationships among
              Synechococcus cyanophages in seawater.  The second part of the study will
              develop in situ molecular detection of the percentage of Syncechococcus cells
              infected by various strains of cyanophages in marine environments.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
              
