Title       : Coordinated Analysis of Fully Polarimetric CSU-CHILL Radar Signatures with
               Surface and Airborne Hydrometeor Images
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 15,  2001   
File        : a9730231

Award Number: 9730231
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336180             (Estimated)
Investigator: V. N. Bringi bringi@engr.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Hubbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
ATM-9730231
Bringi, V. N.
Colorado State University
Title:
              Coordinated Analysis of Fully Polarmetric CSU-CHILL Radar Signatures with
              Surface and
          Airborne Hydrometeor Images

Coordinated analysis of
              CSU-CHILL polarimetric radar data and insitu hydrometeor measurements from two
              instrumented chase vans, airborne imaging probe, and other auxiliary surface
              observations is proposed for evaluating and improving bulk-hydrometeor
              classification schemes and precipitation estimation algorithms.  The T-28
              aircraft equipped with the High Volume Particle Spectrometer (HVPS) obtained
              high quality hydrometeor images in three convective storms and one bright-band
              event during a deployment in June 1995.  One chase van was instrumented with
              the 2D-video disdrometer obtained on lease from Joanneum Research, Graz,
              Austria.  Numerous storm cell intercepts were made with this van providing high
              quality image data (front and side views, vertical speed) in intense rain mixed
              at times with hail.  During the 1996/97 winter season, the disdrometer was
              located for one period at the CSU campus site, and for another period at the
              NCAR Marshall field site where a variety of winter precipitation was sampled in
              conjunction with other auxiliary measurements (snow gauge, formvar
              replication).  A second chase van was equipped with a roof-mounted hail catcher
              net (of NCAR design) and a capacitance rain gauge. Numerous hail intercepts
              were made enabling the determination of time-resolved hail rates and size
              distributions.  Recently developed optimal area algorithms which address the
              problem of comparing radar measurements aloft with surface instruments will be
              further refined and evaluated.  This proposal seeks funding for a comprehensive
              analysis of these insitu hydrometeor data to advance polarimetric-based
              hydrometeor classification schemes and more fully evaluate polarimetric
              rainrate algorithms in mixed phase precipitation.

