Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Cooperative Development of Molecular Diagnostics:
               Application to Severe Hereditary SkinDiseases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 19,  1997  
File        : a9730761

Award Number: 9730761
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25184              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sherri J. Bale   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Natl Institutes of Health
	      
	      Washington, DC  20014    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
              0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5944,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by a US team
              including by Dr. Sherri Bale and Dr. John G. Compton of theGenetic Studies
              Section, Laboratory of Skin Biology, National Institute of Arthritis and
              Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases, Bethesda, MD,  and Dr. John DiGiovanni of
              Brown University Department of Dermatology, and an Egyptian team led by Dr.
              Nemat Hashem, Professor of Pediatrics and Genetics, and Chief, Ain Shams
              University Medical Genetics Center in Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to pursue
              genetic studies to identify the genes that cause a number of severe skin
              disorders.  This work is facilitated by the high incidence of recessive
              disorders affecting the skin which occur in an inbred Egyptian population. 
              They also plan to develop superior methods for detection of genetic mutations
              which cause these disorders.  These methods will be refined and eventually
              transferred to clinical laboratories at the medical schools at Ain Shams
              University and Brown University in Providence, RI     Scope:  This project will
              involve strong teams in each of the two countries.  These include human
              geneticists and clinical physicians at Ain Shams University and at the National
              Institutes of Health (NIH).  The opportunities available in Egypt include the
              relatively less mobile population, and the marriage patterns which allow a
              fairly uniform genetic database for the Egyptian population.  Dr. Hashem has
              maintained an extraordinary database of pedigrees on patients with inherited
              diseases, which will be used in this work.  The US scientists have extensive
              experience in the genetic and clinical examinations required for this research.
               The two sides have had joint activities in the past, and will be able to
              resume their collaboration smoothly.  This proposal meets INT objective of
              supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  The project
              was generated as a result of a workshop on biotechnology organized by the
              National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Egyptian Government.  NIH was
              involved in the evaluation of the project and in recommending its support. 
              This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
              administered by the US Department of State, which provides grants to scientists
              and engineers in both countries to carry out cooperative activities.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                
