Title       : Scaling in Molecular Electronic Spectroscopy: Core-Nonpenetrating Rydberg States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9730852

Award Number: 9730852
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alfons Weber                            
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $714500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Field rwfield@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program supports Prof. Robert W.   Field of
              Massachusetts Institute of Technology in his continuing   investigation of
              `scaling laws,` a priori known functions of quantum   numbers. Such scaling
              laws arise when the coupling between parts of a   molecule becomes sufficiently
              weak. For example, many properties of   hydrogenic eigenstates can be expressed
              as simple functions of Z, n and   l. Many atom-based scaling relationships
              remain useful and instructive,   even for polyatomic molecules; for
              core-nonpenetrating molecular Rydberg   states, in which the coupling between
              Rydberg electron and the molecular   ion-core is very weak, the resemblance to
              hydrogenic systems is quite   strong.  Field will undertake various types of
              experiments involving   either resonance-enhanced multiphoton ionization or
              multiple resonance   spectroscopies in an effort to develop experimental
              methods for   spectroscopic studies of core-nonpenetrating molecular Rydberg
              states.    These studies will yield information on the electric anisotropies
              and   polarizabilities of molecular ion cores.    A few comments about the
              practical significance of these experiments are   warranted.  Why should we
              care about the electric multipole moments of   cations?  All +1 cations have
              the same monopole, so this dominant aspect   of the interaction of the cation
              with the outside world is independent of   the molecule.  Ion-specific
              long-range interactions, on the other hand,   derive from the higher multipoles
              (and their normal coordinate   displacement derivatives).  These multipoles and
              derivatives control the   mechanisms and rates of resonant long-range
              ion-molecule, ion-electron,   and possibly ion-surface energy and angular
              momentum exchange.  The   information obtainable from systematic studies of
              core-nonpenetrating   Rydberg states would yield valuable insights into a wide
              variety of   processes occurring in plasmas.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
