Title       : The Effect of Gamete Competition on Levels of Gamete Production in a Marine
               Invertebrate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  2001     
File        : a9730354

Award Number: 9730354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin J. Eckelbarger kevine@maine.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip O. Yund  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Maine
	      5717 Corbett Hall
	      Orono, ME  044695717    207/581-1476

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1650,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Previous work suggests that high population densities result in more intense
              male gamete competition and select for increased levels of production of these
              gametes. This hypothesis will be tested by examining spatial and temporal
              correlations between density and male gamete production levels in natural
              populations of a colonial ascidian. Two additional considerations which might
              modify the effect that male gamete competition has on levels of male gamete
              production will also be explored. First, natural selection can only act on the
              genetic portion of total phenotypic variance. Secondly, selection acts
              simultaneously on the entire phenotype, and so the effect of selection on male
              gamete production could be constrained by genetic correlations between this and
              other life history traits that are also subject to strong selection. Negative
              genetic correlations between male gamete production and allocation to other
              traits or structures would generate a trade off, with enhanced male gamete
              production offset by reductions in other traits. Alternatively, positive
              genetic correlations would constrain selection to operate on total allocation
              patterns as a single unit. These two potential constraints on evolution will be
              examined via a laboratory breeding experiment that will estimate the narrow
              sense heritability of male gamete production levels and explore possible
              genetic correlations between male gamete production and other life history
              traits. Overall, this study will contribute to our knowledge of the evolution
              of reproductive strategies in marine organisms by examining the selective
              pressures that fertilization processes can exert on gamete production patterns.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
