Title       : An Economical AUV for Routine Deep Ocean Surveys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 21,  2002 
File        : a9730690

Award Number: 9730690
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alexandra Isern                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1978515            (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert M. Bradley abradley@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dana R. Yoerger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barrie B. Walden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9730690  Bradley    Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will continue
              development of a   deep sea autonomous vehicle (AUV) capability that will
              provide a   platform for a variety of sensors of interest to the ocean science 
               community.  A new undersea vehicle builds on the work and   experience gained
              during development of the Autonomous Benthic   Explorer (ABE) which is a
              prototype, designed and constructed to   test engineering concepts while
              attempting to provide a useful   capability for the deep sea research
              community. The ABE vehicle has   characteristics which make it ideally suited
              for long term   deployment of a variety of off-the-shelf sensors coupled with
              the   precision navigation and control capabilities necessary to obtain a  
              complete co-registered data set. However, ABE is not well suited   for
              short-term routine utilization. Based on scientific and   logistical
              requirements, there is a need for an ABE-like AUV   specifically designed for
              routine short-duration operations to   occur simultaneously with more
              traditional scientific vehicles,   such as ALVIN, Jason and towed
              instrumentation platforms.   Significant design changes are required to create
              a vehicle that   will meet these requirements, including 1) improved
              floatation,   durability and efficiency of design to allow for frequent launch 
               and recovery,  and 2) alteration of the navigation system to allow   many
              vehicles to operate simultaneously using the same transponder   net.  A
              second-generation ABE will be suitable for continuous daily   operations and
              will be economical to operate.    This project is to design and construct a
              second generation ABE   vehicle (called "Sentry ) along with continued
              development of   capabilities desired by the science community. The new vehicle
              will   maintain the characteristics needed by science community. However,  
              Sentry will be better suited for routine deployment by a small   operations
              team for longer periods of time than with the present   vehicle. Sentry should
              be able to m eet the requirements of the   science programs presently hoping to
              utilize ABE and, its   operational costs should be low enough to attract
              additional   investigators.
