Title       : America's First Securities Markets, 1787-1836: Emergence Development,
               Integration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a9730692

Award Number: 9730692
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182245             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Sylla rsylla@stern.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In 1790, Congress enacted the plan of Alexander Hamilton to restructure
              Revolutionary War debts into long term securities with quarterly interest to be
              paid in specie, an action that created the U.S. national debt in more or less
              its modern form. The following year Congress enacted Hamilton's plan for a Bank
              of the United States, a large public bank owned mostly by private investors who
              subscribed for four fifths of its capital stock. Historians generally have
              viewed these actions in terms of their effects of enhancing the credit of the
              U.S. government and giving a major boost to the country's banking system, which
              at the time consisted of only three banks. Much less studied, though no less
              important for the country subsequent economic development, is the effect these
              actions had in creating securities markets that allowed American governments
              and corporations to raise capital and investors to benefit from the liquidity
              of active trading markets for bond and stock issues.  This project invloves
              extracting a detailed quantitative record of early U.S. securities markets,
              mostly from newspapers of the era and to a lesser extent from archival
              manuscript sources and public records, and for preparing studies analyzing the
              efficiency characteristics of these markets and their implications for economic
              growth. The principal investigators have surveyed these sources in connection
              with a study of the market for U.S. debt from 1790 to the mid 1830s, when that
              debt was briefly eliminated. In the process they discovered that active markets
              for debt and equity sprang up immediately at the time of Congress's enactments
              in the cities of New York, Philadelphia, and Boston, and shortly thereafter in
              Baltimore. In each of these cities newspapers reported, usually with weekly
              frequency, the prices of the three U.S. debt issues of 1790, as well as the
              price of U.S. Bank shares. These were the `national market` securities of the
              day. At the same time, markets for `local` issues  bank and insurance company
              shares, state and municipal debt issues, and transportation and other corporate
              enterprises were also reflected in newspaper price quotations. Analysis of end
              of month quotations for the national market securities indicates that the
              domestic city markets quickly exhibited a high degree of intermarket
              integration, and that their existence contributed to a flow of U. S. securities
              overseas and a corresponding inflow of foreign capital to the United States. 
              The project will create a coded, computerized data base of weekly securities
              price quotations along with periodic interest and dividend payments. This data
              base should be of interest to others, including economic historians and
              financial economists. The investigators will apply the data base to
              investigations of a number of issues, including integration of domestic and
              overseas securities markets; patterns revealed by construction of more detailed
              asset price, yield and return indexes than currently exist; and relationships
              between securities markets and the development of the banking system and, more
              generally, corporate enterprise. The project will explore the larger question
              of the relationship of financial development to economic growth. The United
              States was fortunate to have a financial system that compared favorably with
              those of other nations at the beginning of its history. It is likely that this
              financial system made a major contribution to the country's early start on
              economic modernization and growth.                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
