Title       : Outcome and Process Parallelism in Mock Witness and Eyewitness Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a9730937

Award Number: 9730937
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy S. Malpass rmalpass@utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Mock witness Paradigm asks mock witnesses - `witnesses` who have been given
              a verbal description of an offender but who have never seen him - to view a
              lineup or photospread and try to choose the suspect.  If the suspect is chosen
              more often than expected by chance, the lineup or photospread is said to be
              biased towards the suspect, and thus unfair.  Since 1973 the Mock Witness
              Paradigm has been used in various forms for two important purposes:  as the
              basis for evaluation of the difficulty of the fairness of lineups and
              photospreads in studies of eyewitness identification, and as the basis for post
              hoc assessments of fairness by the defense in a variety of legal cases.  The
              basic validity of the mock witness paradigm has been widely assumed but never
              specifically evaluated or demonstrated.  Studies in the laboratory demonstrate
              that when applied to sequential presentations, the outcomes of mock witness
              evaluation do not follow the pattern expected of eyewitnesses under similar
              conditions.  These results raise a series of questions including the following:
               What are the important differences between mock witness and eyewitness
              identification decision making contexts and processes?  Do these differences
              lead the psychological processes in the two types of witnesses to diverge from
              each other - a failure of process parallelism?  Do differences in social
              contexts and judgment processes lead to contrasts in the rates and accuracy of
              choosing the offender?  And do they result in contrasting judgments of the
              fairness of lineups or photospreads?  These seem to be important questions.  To
              the extent processes and outcomes differ and lead to different outcomes the
              mock witness paradigm is called into question.  If it is invalidated we would
              be left with only very cumbersome ways to evaluate lineup/photospread fairness
              in research and in the legal process.  The methodology employed in this study
              is based on videotaped crime scenes, varying in the quality of the viewing
              conditions for the observer, and providing for the use of multiple `offenders`.
               Pilot studies calibrate the quality of the viewing conditions in the
              videotaped crime and calibrate varying levels of photospread bias.  Photographs
              of the `offenders` and those to be used as foils come from the procedures and
              files of the El Paso Police Department.  Historically, data from eyewitnesses
              has focused on choosing, accuracy and other classifications of the witness's 
              lineup/photospread choice, while data taken from mock witnesses has been used
              in the aggregate to estimate the bias toward the defendant and the
              appropriateness of the foils employed in the lineup/photospread.  This
              investigation is in a position to examine both sets of dependent variables for
              eyewitnesses and mock witnesses, providing a common basis for examining outcome
              parallelism.  Witnesses who have viewed the videotaped crime provide a verbal
              description of the offender.  A mock witness will be yoked with each eyewitness
              and will be given the eyewitness's verbal description, thereby preserving the
              range of variation in both sets of witnesses and providing a stronger basis for
              comparison of outcomes.  This research will clarify the conditions which are
              appropriate for mock witness evaluation and thus combine solid basic research
              with high potential for application.                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
