Title       : SGER: A Distributed Hybrid Optimization Technique for Protein Structure
               Prediction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9730053

Award Number: 9730053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: THOMAS QUARLES                          
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $100000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto M. Segre segre@cs.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yinyu Ye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth P. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William R. Kearney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0510104   Past Carbon Dioxide Level               
              0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9183,9237,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Optimization problems arise naturally in many areas of  science,
              engineering, and busi-ness. Some of these problems  are discrete, where the
              solution involves finding the best  configuration over a finite number of
              possible conformations  (for example, production scheduling problems in
              operations  research or circuit minimization problems in computer 
              engineering). Other optimization problems are inherently  continuous, where the
              solution involves finding the best  solution in some infinite space (for
              example, entropy  minimiza-tion in physics, portfolio allocation problems in 
              finance, or elasticity studies in civil engi-neering). Often,  useful
              abstractions exist which convert one type of problem  into a simpler problem of
              the other type.    Some of the most compelling optimization problems in the 
              biological sciences also dis-play this same kind of duality.  An obvious
              example is the problem of predicting a protein's  (continuous)
              three-dimensional shape- and, consequently, its  biological function-from its
              (discrete) primary structure,  expressed as the sequence of constituent amino
              acids {  Friesne~6 . Curren~y, protein structure is most accurately  determined
              by experimental means, such as X-Ray  crystallography or NMR spectroscopy. A
              primary goal for compu-  tational biologists is to be able to predict the
              tertiary  structure without resorting to experi-mental observation.    This
              project takes a new approach to the problem of  predicting protein structure.
              In partic-ular, the merger of a  novel distributed search technique for
              discrete  (combinatorial) opti-mization, and an efficient, polynomial  time,
              interior-point algorithm for solving continuous  optimization problems. Each
              approach will operate using  separate, albeit related, energy models, with the
              discrete  system "proposing" conformations for the con-tinuous model to 
              evaluate. The goal is to increase the efficiency of the  computation by
              exchanging information between the two  approaches while exploiting parallelism
               in order to solve  realistically-sized proteins. Specifically the project will
               construct a prototype hybrid computational tool, apply the  prototype to a
              protein conformation problem, and evaluate the  solution by comparison to both
              existing computational  approaches and physi-cal reality.
