Title       : Reconstructing Vertebrate Exploitation and Resource Focus at Ujuxte, Guatemala
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 22,  1998   
File        : a9730918

Award Number: 9730918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas A. Wake twake@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Thomas Wake will analyze faunal
              remains excavated at the archaeological site of Ujuxte in Pacific coastal
              Guatemala. Ujuxte dates to the Formative period and thus documents the rise of
              complex social organization in Middle America - the stage at which societies
              shifted from a mobile hunting and gathering way of life when small groups moved
              frequently over the landscape to a more settled existence with aggregation into
              large settled villages.  Associated with the process is the development of more
              complex political forms of organization in which the egalitarian hunter gather
              lifestyle is replaced by a more hierarchical form which is subsumed under the
              term `chiefdom.` While this transformation has been well documented on a
              worldwide basis, archaeologists do not understand just what factors led to the
              emergence of high status chiefs, the extent to which social stratification
              extended across entire societies or the factors which allowed chiefs to
              maintain their power.  Ujuxte covers a considerable time span within the
              Formative period and has yielded a large series of faunal remains. These result
              from the consumption of food and through the analysis of their spatial
              distribution across the site they provide insight into issues of social
              stratification. It is possible to determine whether the choicest cuts of meat
              from highly desirable species such as deer are spatially concentrated and
              associated with a small number of dwellings or whether they are more evenly
              distributed across the site. When viewed in a diachronic perspective, these
              data will provide insight into changes in the nature of status over time.  
              This research is important because it addresses a central anthropological
              question. It will provide information of interest to many archaeologists and
              will increase understanding of the prehistory of Middle America.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
