Title       : Electoral Systems, Party Strategies and Bargaining Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9730275

Award Number: 9730275
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman Schofield schofld@wuecon.wust1.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Itai Sened  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                A long-standing argument in political theory is that the use of a majoritarian
              electoral system, based on single member districts, is associated with stable
              government.  Conversely, the use of proportional representation (PR) is
              associated with fragmented policies and `weak` coalition governments. 
              Macro-political analyses to justify these arguments are somewhat inconclusive,
              because of the wide variety of PR policies.  This research addresses this
              question by micro-political methods focusing on the nature of party and voter
              strategies in twelve polities.  For nine of these polities (Belgium, Britain,
              Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands) a
              `multinomial probit` electoral model has been devised, based on 1979 survey and
              elite data.  In Israel, a conditional logit model has been constructed based on
              1992 and 1996 surveys and manifesto data.  These models will be extended to
              analyze elections in these countries to the present day, by incorporating party
              responses to electoral and economic disturbances.  These data are augmented by
              new information on Poland and Russia.  For Poland, a combination of opinion
              poll data, elite interviews and party manifestos will be used to study
              strategic behavior by parties and voters, in the context of a mixed
              majoritarian/PR electoral system.  In Russia, elite interviews and study of
              party manifestos will be used to structure the nature of the policy space of
              relevance to political factions.  This research focuses on the incentives for
              factions to coalesce in a political situation which is highly fragmented and
              uncertain.  The theoretical purpose of the research is to understand the nature
              of the formation of factions and parties in the context of differing electoral
              systems.  By `endogenizing` parties in this fashion, it is hoped that the
              research will lead, in the long run, to an account of the obvious differences,
              in party structure and coalition behavior, displayed by these various polities.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
