Title       : "Hard" and "Soft" Knowledge in High-Hazard Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9730605

Award Number: 9730605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $134060             (Estimated)
Investigator: Constance Perin cope@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1041,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Daily life relies increasingly on the smooth operation of a class of industries
              in which accident probabilities are low, but any one accident can result in
              extensive human and ecological destruction.  These industries include, for
              instance, oil and chemical processing, nuclear power production, waste
              management, and aviation and other transportation modes.  Safe operation
              requires appropriate action and reaction when anomalies occur, when
              standardization does not provide the answer, and when gaps appear between the
              patterned responses of a closed system and the social and cultural dynamics of
              its use.  Post-accident analyses reveal that to understand how to design a safe
              technology is not the same as understanding what is required to operate it
              safely. Other kinds of knowledge in addition to algorithms or mathematical
              analyses are needed for operators and managers to create and maintain safe
              conditions, such as sociological and cultural analyses of work systems,
              communication patterns, and organizational structures.  Integrating 'hard' and
              'soft' knowledge is particularly challenging in these industries.  This project
              undertakes an examination and analysis of the semantics and rhetorics of the
              discourses of technical experts and of social and behavioral scientists in
              order to improve approaches to safe operations.  Technical materials derive
              from the nuclear power industry, drawing on field notes, industry documents,
              interviews, workshop notes, and incident reports.  Social science materials
              consist of accident investigation reports and studies of high hazard
              industries.  The materials are analyzed for differences in their
              characterization of evidence and attitudes towards types of knowledge,
              presentation of claims and justifications, interpretation of various kinds of
              data, and the intersection of technical and everyday discourses.  The study
              will propose criteria  to improve mutual understanding.  Technical experts and
              scholars will comment on interim results.  Dissemination plans include articles
              and presentations at professional and industry meetings.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
