Title       : Equipment to Support Transgenic and Stem Cell Gene Transfer in Mice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9730044

Award Number: 9730044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gregory K. Farber                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank H. Ruddle frank.ruddle@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Adrian C. Hayday  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Trevor Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The use of transgenic mice has been instrumental in the  characterization and
              understanding of the genetic basis of  mammalian development and physiology. 
              The genetics group at  Yale University in particular has utilized transgenic
              mice  to study the evolution of the HOX genes that are essential  for normal
              development, the role of the transcription factor  AP-2 in vertebrate
              morphogenesis, and the role of T-cells in  immune system function and
              development, among other  projects.  This proposal requests funds to augment
              the  transgenic mouse facility at Yale University.  The facility  presently has
              one old transgene injection set-up and one  modern set-up for blastocyst
              injection of stem cells.  The  transgene apparatus is now 20 years old and
              despite  mechanical wear and tear is used at capacity.  This project  proposes
              to add a new transgene injection station, to repair  and upgrade the existing
              apparatus, and to add ancillary  equipment that will generally support the
              overall program in  transgene research and education.  As transgene techniques
              continue to expand, the facility  comes under even greater use by the faculty
              and students at  Yale.  The sheer volume of experimental studies necessitates 
              the acquisition of new instrumentation.  New instruments  will enhance the
              efficiency of both research and teaching  activities.  Additional equipment
              will also make possible  the development of new techniques such as the
              controlled  expression of transgenes, fluorigenic reporter constructs,  and the
              modification of endogenous genes by "knock-in"  procedures.  The requested
              equipment will be accessible to a  broad spectrum of investigators and students
              both within and  outside of Yale University.  Access if facilitated by  housing
              the equipment in an Animal Research Facility managed  by a consortium of
              faculty investigators rather than within  a single investigator's group.  The
              facility is self-  contained and integrates both animal care and housing and 
              transgene laboratory space.
