Title       : The Subjective Value of Information in high-stakes domains: An Analysis of
               Patient Decisions to Obtain Diagnostic Testing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1998       
File        : a9730182

Award Number: 9730182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90219              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara E. Kahn kahn@wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mary Frances Luce  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Health care in the United States is rapidly changing.  In particular, two
              dramatic trends characterize this change: (1) the rise of the patient as a
              consumer and decision-maker and (2) the introduction of innovative technologies
              including a tremendous proliferation of both clinical and home diagnostic
              testing procedures (e.g., HIV testing, mammograms, prostate cancer tests, pap
              smears, genetic testing, pregnancy testing, sexually-transmitted disease tests,
              etc.).  The proposed laboratory and survey research investigates how patients
              make these types of diagnostic testing decisions.  Such an understanding of
              patient decision making should have important public policy implications.  For
              instance, an understanding of the systematic decision making biases patients
              exhibit should allow for the development of interventions helping them to make
              better decisions.  In making the decision as to whether or not to get tested,
              the patient has to decide what the value of the information is to him or to her
              in a rational, normative way.  However, the potential life or death outcomes of
              medical decisions may generate negative emotion and stress and thus patients
              may react non-normatively to the provided information in order to cope.  For
              example, normatively irrelevant, but emotionally salient, factors, such as
              testing errors, may influence one's perceived vulnerability to a disease. 
              Patients' assessments of test information are expected to reflect this richer,
              emotionally perceived vulnerability rather than the more objective prior
              probability estimates that should be used to determine vulnerability. 
              Investigation of three issues regarding diagnostic testing decisions will be
              conducted.  First, research will investigate how patients interpret and use
              information regarding test accuracy; reactions to both test accuracy rates
              (i.e., overall false positive and false negative error rates for a particular
              test) and case information (i.e., the description of a particular false
              positive test result) will be considered.  For instance, initial results
              indicate that a false positive result might inappropriately increase the
              patient's perceived vulnerability, and therefore subsequent test compliance, if
              the patient mis-attributes this erroneous test result to personal factors. 
              Second, research will be conducted to identify what factors affect perceived
              vulnerability.  Again, a particular focus will be on factors that are
              normatively irrelevant to one's prior probability of disease, but may influence
              the subjective value of test information.  Finally, the research will assess
              patients' willingness to integrate both monetary and non-monetary costs across
              testing and treatment situations.                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                      
