Title       : Industrial Productivity, Urban Growth, and Air Quality Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2000      
File        : a9730142

Award Number: 9730142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272220             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Vernon Henderson j_henderson@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project has three interrelated parts, with a unifying theme being the
              dynamics of patterns of location and agglomeration of plants, industries, and
              populations as affected by agglomeration economies, geography, and regulation.
              Another unifying element is the data utilized. The first part examines the
              effects of environmental regulation on major polluting industries, where, apart
              from studying regulatory effects on location and industrial structure, a focus
              concerns plant operating efficiencies in different locations, over time, and by
              plant size and age. Capital intensities across plants are compared by age
              before and after the advent of strong environmental regulation and between
              regulated non attainment (`treatment`) and less or unregulated attainment
              (`control`) areas. Quasifixed factor cost functions are estimated so as to be
              able to calculate shadow marginal products of capital and efficient operating
              sizes. Issues to be analyzed include to what extent environmentally induced
              investments contribute to productivity and to what extent and at what cost
              plants after regulation and in non attainment areas are relatively
              overcapitalized and relatively under sized.  The second part of the proposal
              examines the spatial evolution of high tech and traditional industries and the
              effects on plant productivity of local static and dynamic externalities.
              Spatial evolution of distributions of high tech employment across cities are
              modeled as a stationary first order Markov process. Apart from studying issues
              of `convergence,` the object is to determine what urban site characteristics
              define good sites for what industries. To what extent are urban high tech
              `miracles` predictable? Site characteristics include predetermined city
              population and employment characteristics, exogenous geographic 
              characteristics, and characteristics of neighboring cities. If, for example,
              base period metro area population is a key characteristic, there remains a
              question of why. To answer this question, urban externalities will be examined
              to determine if they are static versus dynamic and if they are ones of
              localization versus urbanization.   The third part focuses on urban evolution.
              The theory combines the urban elements of local scale economies versus
              diseconomies yielding multiple finite size cities in an economy, with exogenous
              national population growth and endogenous economic growth through human capital
              investment involving localized knowledge spillovers. Apart from modeling urban
              evolution, the idea is to study evolving income inequality across cities. At
              any instant, different goods and city types will generally have different
              equilibrium per person human capital levels and real observed incomes. Moreover
              workers may sort across cities by ability levels. A key issue concerns the
              interaction among localized knowledge spillovers, parental education, inter
              generational transmission of ability, urban production patterns and income
              inequality. The empirical part examines urban evolution in the USA from 1900 to
              the present.   The research uses three major data sets. First is the
              Longitudinal Research Database from 1963 1994 to study plant productivity,
              metro area industrial environments, and environmental regulation (combined also
              with Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures data of the Census Bureau).
              Second is county level data set for 19001990 for all USA counties consistently
              defined over time, covering Census population and industrial characteristics
              and incorporating geographic characteristics. Finally there is annual County
              Business Patterns data for 1977 1995, giving industry detail on all private
              employment, combined with Census data on government employment and urban
              characteristics.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                
