Title       : Coping with Darkness: The Physiological Responses of Marine Microalgae to
               Aphotic Conditions and their Ecological Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9730098

Award Number: 9730098
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $264598             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hugh L. MacIntyre macintyr@hlp.umces.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Todd M. Kana  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evamaria W. Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD Ctr Environ Scs
	      BOX 775
	      Cambridge, MD  216130775    /   -

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This research is designed to test the effects of extended darkness on the
              photosynthetic competence of benthic and planktonic diatoms. Lagrangian models
              of estuarine light fields surrounding phytoplankton and benthic algae indicate
              that exposure to darkness for from 2   5 days is a common occurrence.
              Preliminary evidence indicates that there is considerable species variation in
              the physiological competence after several days of darkness but the factors
              accounting for these differences are unknown. Metabolic and physiological
              changes during extended darkness are hypothesized to alter the photosynthetic
              apparatus and the subsequently ability of the cell to respond to light.  The
              research focuses on two time scales of photosynthetic regulation. The extended
              time scale of hours days will be studied using measurements of the change in
              photosynthetic components including photosynthetic and quenching pigments,
              ribulose1,5 bisphosphate carboxylaseloxygenase (Rubisco), carbohydrate and
              protein. Short time-scale (minutes) responses will be evaluated using
              measurements of the kinetics of photosynthetic induction and of Rubisco
              activation and deactivation. Short time scale experiments will be interpreted
              in the context of the ability of cells to withstand brief exposures to bright
              light subsequent to prolonged darkness. It is anticipated that this research
              will lead to a more relevant framework for interpreting fluctuating light
              effects in estuarine habitats than can be had without considering the
              physiological 'costs' of periodic confinement to darkness.                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
