Title       : Uncovering Long-Run Economic Relationships in High-Frequency Financial Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a9730440

Award Number: 9730440
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $242109             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tim Bollerslev boller@econ.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Torben G. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730440  Bollerslev    This project enhances the ability of researchers to
              extract useful information about important economic phenomena from
              high-frequency financial data.  The increased availability of intraday
              financial data has spurred a tremendous growth in empirical research on the
              cross-sectional and intertemporal dependencies across financial instruments and
              markets.  However, only recently has it become clear that the analysis of such
              high-frequency data necessitates the introduction of novel modeling paradigms
              relative to the standard methodologies employed at the daily and lower
              frequencies.  The reliance on conventional time series techniques invariably
              results in the intraday-specific features dominating the inferred statistical
              properties of the observed high-frequency data, whereas any evidence concerning
              longer-run dependencies tend to be distorted or disappear altogether.  These
              facts have effectively divorced the empirical studies of high-frequency data
              from the remainder the literature, and a near dichotomy has arisen between
              so-called microstructure studies and the more mainstream empirical literature
              in asset pricing finance.   This project bridges this gap by developing new
              econometric time series models and tools and using these to improve our
              understanding of the type of information that induces dramatic price responses,
              and the forces shaping the intensity of price movements and their relation to
              underlying market microstructure.   The empirical research is based on a long
              time span of intradaily exchange and interest rates.  It provides a direct
              window to the market expectations and the importance of macroeconomic
              announcements across different policy regimes.  The project also develops new
              and more accurate risk measurements based on high-frequency data and these
              should have immediate practical implications for the management and monitoring
              of financial market risks.  The general results of the project should be of
              relevant to applied macroeconomists, time series econo metricians, financial
              researchers, regulators, and practitioners alike.      ??
