Title       : The Recurrent Coastal Plume in Lake Michigan: A Critical Event for Copepod
               Reproduction and Recruitment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9730416

Award Number: 9730416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102684             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marie H. Bundy bundy@acnatsci.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Acad of Nat Sci of Phila
	      1900 Benjamin Franklin Parkway
	      Philadelphia, PA  191031195    215/299-1036

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0204000   Oceanography                            
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 0000,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730416  Bundy    Research will be undertaken in response to an Announcement  
              of Opportunity (NSF 97-38)for Coastal Studies in the Great   Lakes.  This is a
              collaborative research project between   investigators from ten academic and
              government research   institutions.  The research is being conducted under the 
               auspices of the NSF Coastal Ocean Processes (CoOP) program   and the NOAA
              Coastal Ocean Program.    This collaborative, 5-year research program will
              focus on   the importance of episodic events on nearshore-offshore   transport
              and subsequent ecological consequences. The study   seeks to 1) determine what
              processes control the cross-  margin (inshore to offshore) transport of
              biological,   chemical, and geological materials in the coastal margins of  
              the Great Lakes, and to 2) develop and test scientific   strategies for
              assessing, quantifying, and predicting the   impacts of multiple stresses both
              natural and anthropogenic,   in the Great Lakes or selected coastal
              sub-regions.    A tight coupling between sediments and overlying water   exists
              in lakes and coastal ecosystems through the process   of sediment resuspension.
              Satellite observations in Lake   Michigan illustrate an annually recurrent
              episode of   nearshore-offshore transport, a 10 km wide plume of   resuspended
              material extending over 200 km along the   southern shores of the lake.
              Preliminary evidence indicates   that this episodic event may be the major
              mechanism for   cross-margin sediment transport in Lake Michigan. The   program
              results will be applicable to similar events in many   coastal areas.    This
              component of the study addresses the general   hypothesis: large episodic
              events, such as the Lake Michigan   Recurrent Coastal Plume (LMRCP), change
              mesozooplanktonic   community structure and production by altering species and 
               life-stage distributions of certain organisms and their   trophic
              interactions. Field observations, process studies,   and laboratory
              investigations will be combined to evaluate   physical  and biotic effects of
              the plume on the   mesozooplankton community. Biweekly sampling of nutrients,  
              physical variables, and other parameters will serve to put   the LMRCP in
              perspective with ongoing changes in the   plankton and other events, and help
              evaluate its   significance to the Lake as a whole. The response of  
              mesozooplankton to large scale episodic events during the   winter-spring
              period in the Great Lakes and other similar   aquatic systems is important at
              the ecosystem level because   these populations play a pivotal role in energy
              transfers   and nutrient transformations that occur throughout the rest   of
              the year.
