Title       : Collaborative Research: On Experience-Weighted Attraction Learning in Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9730187

Award Number: 9730187
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101526             (Estimated)
Investigator: Teck Hua-Ho hoteck@marketing.wharton.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In strategic situations, people, firms, or nations care about what others are
              likely to do.  Examples of such situations include bargaining, business
              decisions which require coordinating various activities, or 'signaling games'
              in which the actions people take signal something about their abilities or
              intentions.  In the last few decades, a large body of mathematical 'game
              theory' has developed about how people will make choices in these situations. 
              However, these theories generally assume that people know or can figure out how
              other people in the strategic situation are likely to behave.  In fact, people
              usually figure out what others are likely to do by learning from experience. 
              Our project proposes a general theory of how this learning occurs.  The theory
              combines two very different forces - 'reinforcement,' which means that
              successful strategies will be repeated, and 'belief learning,' which means that
              players keep track of what other people have done to figure out what those
              people will do in the future, then they choose strategies which will give the
              biggest payoff if their guesses are right.  These different types of learning
              were thought to be different for about 50 years.  In earlier NSF-funded
              research, we discovered that the two theories are actually special kinds of a
              single kind of learning, 'experience weighted attraction' (EWA) learning.  The
              current research proposes to extend the EWA theory in three ways -- to
              incorporate the obvious fact that different people may learn in different ways;
              to extend the theory to cases where people aren't sure what the payoffs from
              different choices are (which is of course more realistic); and to allow the
              possibility that people realize, as they learn about what their opponents do,
              that their opponents are learning also.  When the extensions are incorporated
              we will have a very general theory of learning which can explain the way people
              bargain, coordinate, and signal to each other changes over time in response to
              experience.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
