Title       : Building Blocks--Foundations for Mathematical Thinking, Pre-Kindergarten to
               Grade 2: Research-based Materials Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a9730804

Award Number: 9730804
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark Saul                               
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $999807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas H. Clements Clements@buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Sarama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9730804  Clements      The State University of New York at Buffalo plans to
              develop exemplary PreK-grade 2 curriculum materials, which will enable young
              children to build solid content knowledge and to enhance their higher-order
              thinking skills.  The approach is that of "finding the mathematics in," and
              "developing mathematics from, children's activities."  Activities will be
              designed based on children's experiences and interests, with an emphasis on
              supporting the development of mathematical growth.    The materials will
              emphasize the development of basic mathematical building blocks - organized
              into two areas:  (a) spatial and geometric competencies and concepts and (b)
              numeric and quantitative concepts.  There will be three mathematics sub-themes,
              patterns and functions, data, and discrete mathematics.  The materials will be
              progressively layered so that users will be able to "dig deeper" into them in
              order to reach increasingly rich, but demanding, pedagogical and mathematical
              levels.      The "Building Blocks" will be developed for a wide variety of
              situations according to a research-based design model.  These materials will
              support and complement the new NCTM PreK-2 Curriculum and Evaluation Standards.
               This project has the potential to develop pedagogically efficacious materials
              that will serve as tools of content and pedagogical reform, to conduct
              formative and summative evaluations at multiple levels, and to have a positive
              effect on learning of young children from a variety of settings.
