Title       : Mesoscale Ensemble Forecasting and Predictability Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  2001  
File        : a9730985

Award Number: 9730985
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1998  
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323735             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohan K. Ramamurthy   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9196,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              An ensemble forecast is a technique in which a numerical forecast model is used
              to generate several forecasts based on different initial conditions.  It has
              been found that if the forecasts are consistent, then this indicates a more
              reliable forecast than if the forecasts diverge.  While such techniques have
              been developed for synoptic and climate models, application of ensemble
              forecasts to local-scale numerical models is still a very new field.

The
              fundamental goal of this research is to investigate the feasibility and
              usefulness of an ensemble approach in mesoscale prediction.  Specifically, the
              Principal Investigator will investigate the advantages and limitations of
              ensemble versus deterministic forecasting in mesoscale models at high
              resolution.  To this end, an advanced numerical forecast model will be used to
              address a range of issues pertaining to short-range ensemble forecasting,
              including those concerning perturbation strategies, ensemble configuration, and
              the structure and evolution of initial errors.  The design of an ensemble
              forecasting system for mesoscale systems poses many challenges.  Perhaps the
              most important concerns the initialization of an ensemble.  The Principal
              Investigator will compare two different approaches for constructing the initial
              perturbations: a) the Monte-Carlo method based on observing systems simulation
              experiments, and b) the breeding of growing modes method. He will also
              investigate the importance of perturbing different parameters and coefficients
              in model physics, as well as perturbation of surface fields such as topography
              and sea surface temperature.  The role of perturbing lateral boundary
              conditions will also be examined as part of this study.  

Other issues
              related to ensemble forecasting, such as minimum size of an ensemble,
              dependency of ensemble performance on resolution, and structure and growth of
              initial errors will be addressed.  The aforementioned ensemble studies will be
              carried out on a total of ten cases, split evenly between summer and winter
              situations.   A number of validation and evaluation techniques will be utilized
              to document the performance and characteristics of the ensembles.  Particular
              attention will be paid to the reliability of ensemble-derived probability
              estimates and quantitative precipitation forecasts.  Successful completion of
              this research will advance capabilities in short-term local weather
              forecasting.

