Title       : Marine Reserves and Spiny Lobster: Effects on Male Size and Reproductive Success
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9730195

Award Number: 9730195
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Butler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,4444,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Changes in the abundance, size structure and sex ratio of populations can have
              large and consequential effects on mating systems, and thus on reproductive
              output.  Yet, we know relatively little about these effects on the large,
              mobile marine species commonly exploited by humans.  These species are
              generally difficult to observe and their populations are not generally amenable
              to manipulation at the requisite scale.  There is the additional problem that
              in most cases the unexploited population was poorly, or never, studied and
              there are no unexploited populations with which to make contemporary contrasts.
               The advent of marine sanctuaries over the last 30 years and the recovery of
              exploited populations within some of them, offers opportunities to contrast the
              effects of changes in population structure on reproductive dynamics at
              appropriately large scales.  Spiny lobsters (Palinuridae) are excellent models
              for such studies.  Spiny lobsters are widely distributed and heavily exploited,
              and although mobile, their movements are limited enough that their populations
              respond to the protection afforded by many marine sanctuaries.  Male spiny
              lobsters grow substantially larger than females, and although both male and
              female size is reduced by exploitation (fishing), male size declines more
              precipitously.  The reproductive output (clutch size) of females is
              exponentially related to female size, so a shift toward smaller females in
              exploited areas has clear implications for reproductive potential.  Less clear
              is the effect of reduced male size on lobster reproductive dynamics and this
              unfamiliarity extends to ecology as a whole.  We have evidence from laboratory
              experiments on two species of spiny lobsters (Caribbean spiny lobster and New
              Zealand Rock Lobster) that the availability of large males has a large, direct
              effect on female fecundity.  In both species, clutches fertilized by small
              males are significantly smaller than clutches fertilized by large males.  There
              also is strong evidence for gamete limitation and it applies to two species in
              separate genera that dwell in very different habitats on opposite comers of the
              world.  Male size effects on mating systems are known in only a few systems,
              primarily insects, but the population-level consequences are poorly understood.
               We propose a series of laboratory experiments to describe more fully the
              mating system of the Caribbean spiny lobster, with special reference to the
              effect of male size on reproductive success, and then to utilize field studies
              of exploited and unexploited lobster populations and simulation modeling to
              investigate the population-level consequences of reduced male size on
              reproductive dynamics.                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
