Title       : Surface-Controlled Nanoscale Materials for High-Added-Value Applications -
               Symposium FF - 1997 MRS Fall Meeting to be held December 1-5, 1997 in Boston,
               Massachusetts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  1997   
File        : a9730016

Award Number: 9730016
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Pachavis pachavis@mrs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Materials Res Society
	      506 Keystone Drive
	      Warrendale, PA  150867573    412/779-3003

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9730016  Robert Pachavis/MRS    This proposal is being submitted
              for the support of Symposium FF:  Surface Controlled Nanoscale Materials for
              High-Added-Value Applications at the Fall Materials Research Society Meeting
              During Dec. 1997 in Boston.    Nanoscale materials have attached wide attention
              due to their superior properties.  One of the main initial, now achieved, goals
              has been the development of scalable synthesis methods of nanosized powders,
              essentially for promising sintering and mechanical applications.  However, as
              the size of the grains further decreases, the surface-to-bulk ratio
              dramatically increases, conferring to he first atomic layer a major role in the
              overall properties of the material.  Indeed  the chemical composition of the
              reactive particle surface becomes different from that of the bulk upon exposure
              to air contaminants.  It has been realized recently that, not only clean
              synthesis processes are needed to obtain reproducible high purity nanosized
              powders, but also that tools and techniques to adequately characterize and
              monitor the very surface of the nanoparticles, in situ, independent of any bulk
              characterization are necessary.  Moreover, the preservation or recovery of the
              desirable chemical properties of the surface of the grains need to be developed
              to facilitate and thus increase the industrial use of the nanosized powders in
              current technological processes.  The major objective of this
              cross-disciplinary symposium is twofold.  The fundamental aspect is to
              emphasize the relationship between the surface chemical composition of the
              nanoparticles, that of the grain boundaries, and the macroscopic physical
              properties of the consolidated material.  The technological objectives is to
              evaluate new approaches of surface purity control and surface chemical
              modification to engineer superior nanostructured materials and composites.  A
              complete tailoring of the surface properties is expected to lead to perfectly
              controlled consolidated materials and to have a g reat impact on the
              nanofabrication of electronic, optoelectronic and magnetic devices as well as
              biomedical-oriented compounds.  ***
