Title       : Ecological and Biogeochemical Characterization of a Dominant Lineage of Coastal
               Ocean Bacterioplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 15,  2001  
File        : a9730745

Award Number: 9730745
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $287422             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Moran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  A phylogenetic cluster of marine bacterioplankton has been identified that
              is numerically abundant in coastal seawater and estuaries of the southeastern
              U.S. These bacteria, termed the `marine alpha` group, consistently account for
              up to 30% of the bacterial ribosomal DNA (rDNA) in coastal seawater and in high
              salinity reaches of major southeastern estuaries, and may constitute the single
              most dominant bacterial lineage in these systems. Marine alpha bacteria can be
              readily isolated from seawater samples using low nutrient culturing techniques,
              and thus some indications of their potential biogeochemical roles have emerged.
              Many marine alpha isolates are capable of growth on lignin related compounds
              and humic substances, two types of naturally occurring aromatic compounds found
              in high concentrations in southeastern U.S. salt marshes and in riverine
              material exported to the coastal ocean. Other isolates are capable of
              metabolizing organic sulfur molecules, such as DMSP and methanesulfonic acid,
              which are important compounds in oceanic sulfur cycling and atmospheric
              processes. This proposal describes an investigation into the ecology,
              biogeochemical roles, and physiological capabilities of these numerically
              dominant coastal marine bacteria. We will determine the distribution and
              abundance of marine alpha bacterioplankton in southeastern U.S. waters and
              other selected coastal sites around the U.S., to construct a clone library of
              marine alpha sequences, to isolate and characterize culturable members of the
              group, and to use molecular techniques (based on in situ PCR and 16S rDNA
              approaches) to study the biogeochemical roles of the group in natural seawater.
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
