Title       : Fluids and Their Mixtures: Lattice and Continuum Studies and Comparisons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  1999     
File        : a9730976

Award Number: 9730976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jane E. G. Lipson jane.lipson@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-1110

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730976  Lipson  This is a renewal grant funded jointly by the Materials Theory
              Program  in the Division of Materials Research and the Theoretical and 
              Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division.  The  theoretical
              research is targeted at understanding how the microscopic  nature of fluids and
              their mixtures is correlated with their  macroscopic behavior.  Systems of
              interest include both simple and  complex molecules.  In addition, a unique
              opportunity afforded by this  work is the ability to compare the results for a
              lattice model with  those for a continuum model using the same theoretical
              approach.    The behavior of complex fluids has been of high interest in recent
               years, and this has been stimulated by the increasingly sophisticated  kinds
              of measurements becoming accessible.  In addition, the ability  to simulate
              mixtures of dense fluids has expanded dramatically within  the last decade. 
              Thus, more data are beginning to appear whcih are  capable of testing
              statistical mechanical theories, particularly for  complex liquid mixtures. 
              The research conducted here involves an  integral equation technique known as
              Born-Green-Yvon  (BGY) theory.  Using the BGY formalism theoretical
              descriptions of lattice and  continuum systems have been derived, and
              comparisons between the  results using the two have been initiated.  The
              lattice theory has  resulted in simple closed-form expressions for
              thermodynamic  quantities of interest.  The advantages of lattice theory
              include its  accessibility to non-theorists, and the ability to test it using 
              lattice simulation results on relatively complex fluids and mixtures,  which
              are more plentiful than continuum simulation data.  The  continuum theory is
              capable of tackling more subtle issues involving  the interplay between local
              structure and bulk properties.  However,  continuum solutions involve numerical
              methods and simulation data on  mixtures are not yet plentiful.  The
              development of analogous lattice  and continuum theories yields the p
              ossibility of determining what  kinds of equilibrium properties are expected to
              be sensitive to the  imposition of a lattice constraint.    This research will
              focus on developing an understanding of polymer  solutions and blends, building
              on the demonstrated ability of the  lattice BGY theory to describe pure fluids,
              simple alkane mixtures and  polyethylene solutions.  This work will involve
              analysis of data,  including equation of state information and (new to these
              efforts)  small angle neutron scattering results, in order to obtain the 
              characteristic microscopic parameters.  Having determined what minimum  data
              set is required to characterize a system, the goal is then to  predict less
              accessible properties, such as the pressure dependence of  the coexistence
              curve.  Such information is important in deciding on  processing conditions,
              for example.  The BGY theory is also capable of  probing the effects of
              structural differences (for example polyolefin  blends) and energetic
              differences (such as ocur in strongly  interaacting mixtures) on miscibility in
              an effort to understand at a  more sophisticated level the balance between
              these two.  %%%  This is a renewal grant funded jointly by the Materials Theory
              Program  in the Division of Materials Research and the Theoretical and 
              Computational Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division.  The  theoretical
              research is targeted at understanding how the microscopic  nature of fluids and
              their mixtures is correlated with their  macroscopic behavior.  Systems of
              interest include both simple and  complex molecules.  In addition, a unique
              opportunity afforded by this  work is the ability to compare the results for a
              lattice model with  those for a continuum model using the same theoretical
              approach.    Research will focus on polymer solutions and blends.  Besides 
              providing fundamental insight on these materials, the results will be  of
              importance in the processing of these materials.  ***
