Title       : Children's Spontaneous False Memories for Traumatic Medical Experiences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2001    
File        : a9730143

Award Number: 9730143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250275             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles J. Brainerd brainerd@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Farrell Lloyd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Valerie F. Reyna  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Children's spontaneous false memories have been the subject of considerable
              heat and little light recently.  This research is testing several hypotheses
              about false memories for doctor visits that are accompanied by trauma to answer
              questions that bear on the accuracy of children's witness testimony.  Prior
              research by these investigators has produced a theoretical framework
              (fuzzy-trace theory) that makes counterintuitive predictions about such
              important issues as:  age variability in spontaneous memory falsifications, age
              variability in the effects of delay on memory falsification, the persistence of
              false memories over time, the tendency of mere memory testes to falsify the
              contents of memory, and the features of experienced events that are most prone
              to memory falsification. Three experiments will use a false-recognition
              procedure and will consist of four sessions.  Participants will be 180 children
              between the ages of 23 and 8.  Children's experiences to urgent-care clinics
              will be the focus of subsequent memory interviews to occur 1-3 days after the
              child sees the physician.  Subsequent interviews occur at 6 month and 1 year
              intervals.  Memory interviews will query events that the child did and those
              that her or she did not experience.  False-recognition effect will be used to
              index spontaneous memory falsification.  Differences in spontaneous memory
              falsification are being tracked as a function of several variables that have
              forensic relevance:  frequency of experience with events, amount of prior
              interviewing, whether inferences have been made about events, whether
              inconsistent version of evens have been experienced.  These data will resolve
              tow uncertainties in current scientific knowledge about children's false
              memories. These are that mere memory tests can create false memories that are
              stable over time and whether spontaneous false memory increase with age or
              delay between exposure to events and memory tests.   %%%  Children's
              spontaneous false memories have been the subject of considerable heat and
              little light recently.  This research is testing several hypotheses about false
              memories for doctor visits that are accompanied by trauma to answer questions
              that bear on the accuracy of children's witness testimony.  Prior research by
              these investigators has produced a theoretical framework (fuzzy-trace theory)
              that makes counterintuitive predictions about such important issues as:  age
              variability in spontaneous memory falsifications, age variability in the
              effects of delay on memory falsification, the persistence of false memories
              over time, the tendency of mere memory testes to falsify the contents of
              memory, and the features of experienced events that are most prone to memory
              falsification. Three experiments will use a false-recognition procedure and
              will consist of four sessions.  Participants will be 180 children between the
              ages of 23 and 8.  Children's experiences to urgent-care clinics will be the
              focus of subsequent memory interviews to occur 1-3 days after the child sees
              the physician.  Subsequent interviews occur at 6 month and 1 year intervals. 
              Memory interviews will query events that the child did and those that her or
              she did not experience.  False-recognition effect will be used to index
              spontaneous memory falsification.  Differences in spontaneous memory
              falsification are being tracked as a function of several variables that have
              forensic relevance:  frequency of experience with events, amount of prior
              interviewing, whether inferences have been made about events, whether
              inconsistent version of evens have been experienced.  These data will resolve
              tow uncertainties in current scientific knowledge about children's false
              memories. These are that mere memory tests can create false memories that are
              stable over time and whether spontaneous false memory increase with age or
              delay between exposure to events and memory tests.                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
