Title       : Dissertation Research: Slang and the Social Construction of Race and Identity
               Among Brazilian Portuguese Adolescents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9730096

Award Number: 9730096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11050              (Estimated)
Investigator: Penelope D. Eckert eckert@turing.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropological linguist
              from Stanford University.  The study explores how Brazilian teenagers engage
              with and experience race through the innovation and use of slang.  Through a
              deep, ethnographic look at one community of speakers, this lexical study
              investigates how Brazilian teenagers encode race and construct identity through
              slang. Participant observation will be conducted inside and outside of three
              schools to record language in practice, creating one of the first ethnographies
              of slang. Qualitative and discourse methods of linguistic analysis will be used
              to illustrate how adolescents develop and manipulate slang to create social
              meaning.  The utility of this research is that it will advance our
              understanding of how race is experienced and racism produced in a Brazilian
              context; it will show how the lexicon articulates cultural discourses,
              revealing what race really `means` to speakers as they explain their use of
              slang to the investigator; and the research will show how such popular
              practices as slang speak to pressing social issues among youth. By advancing
              our understanding of the significant issues of race, slang and adolescence, the
              project will provide information useful towards understanding these issues in
              our own society. In addition the project contributes to our expertise about
              this important area of the world, and adds to the training of a young social
              scientist.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
