Title       : Sequential Voting Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2000     
File        : a9730493

Award Number: 9730493
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $192067             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eddie Dekel dekel@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Project Abstract  The proposal contains two parts.  The first and main part is
              joint work with Michele Piccione.  In voting models, which underlie much recent
              research in political economy, the voting can have two roles: it can aggregate
              private information and / or preferences.  Whereas in most voting models the
              electorate votes simultaneously on each issue, we analyze sequential voting
              games.  This makes it possible to address many interesting questions on both
              roles of voting. For example, concerning aggregating information, which
              mechanism is better: simultaneous or sequential voting?  When the electorate
              can choose when to vote, will they choose a method that is efficient for
              aggregating information?  We also study the implications of two opposing
              considerations in voting earlier or later: early voters are more likely to
              determine the set of `relevant` alternatives and later voters will know which
              alternatives are relevant and hence are less likely to `waste` their vote. 
              What sequential structures will then occur when voters can chose when to vote?
              Will voters who expect to have similar preferences choose to vote close
              together or far apart in time?  The project addresses these and other questions
              that arise from considering sequential voting environments.  This sheds light
              on the implications of states `gaming` on when to have their primaries, or of
              announcing the outcomes of votes in some districts before voting is completed
              in others.  The second part contains two projects on the foundations of game
              theory (but that are otherwise unrelated).  The first, joint with Bart Lipman
              and Aldo Rustichini, derives unique subjective probabilities for the model of
              unforeseen contingencies proposed by Kreps* and further extended by the three
              of us in earlier work.  The second, joint with Drew Fudenberg and David Levine,
              develops, for games of incomplete information, solution concepts that are based
              on learning, such as the notion of self-confirming equilibria, and that
              incorporate rationality as well.  *D. M. Kreps (1979): `A Representation
              Theorem for 'Preference for Flexibility',` Econometrica 47 565 - 576.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
