Title       : Nonequilibrium Dynamics of Disordered Condensed Matter Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2002  
File        : a9730678

Award Number: 9730678
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Cristina Marchetti mcm@phy.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730678  Marchetti  Theoretical research will be conducted with the goal of 
              understanding the dynamical properties of various spatially  extended condensed
              matter systems.  A major part of the  research focusses on the nonequilibrium
              dynamics of periodic  media driven through disorder.  Examples of such systems 
              include flux lattices in type-II superconductors, charge  density waves in
              anisotropic conductors and the magnetically-  induced Wigner crystal in a
              two-dimensional electron gas.  As revealed by recent experiments, the interplay
              of  interaction, disorder and drive results in a complex  dynamics that is
              poorly understood.  The main goals of this  work are to develop a theoretical
              framework for the  description of these nonequilibrium systems and to map out 
              their nonequilibrium phase diagrams.    Closely related problems that will also
              be investigated  arise in microscopic models of friction and lubrication.  One
              important difference is that inertial terms, negligible  for overdamped systems
              such as flux lattices, may be  important in this case and change the nature of
              the sliding  state.  A key objective is to understand the relative  importance
              of surface roughness and bulk elasticity in  yielding dissipation.    Another
              effort more directly continues past research on flux-  line arrays in type-II
              superconductors.  The focus is on the  physical consequences of entanglement
              and longtudinal  correlations which are probed experimentally by  magnetization
              measurements and transport experiments.  Both  analytical work, aiming at a
              two-fluid hydrodynamics capable  of describing both entangled and disentangled
              components of  flux liquid, and numerical work, addressing the stability of 
              the transverse Meissner effect against point disorder, are  described.  %%% 
              Theoretical research will be conducted on a class of  problems which describe
              the behavior of the high temperature  superconductors.  These type of problems
              are very common and  the results will also impact studies of friction, charge  
              transport in periodic media and novel phases at low  temperatues.  ***
