Title       : A Force Measuring Apparatus For The Study of Intermolecular Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  2000      
File        : a9730060

Award Number: 9730060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhifeng Shao   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jianxun Mou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Virginia
	      Post Office Box 400195
	      Charlottesville, VA  229044195    434/924-4275

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                       Specific interactions between complementary macromolecules play a   
              critical role in most biological processes, from signal transduction, to   
              gene regulation and motor activities. Although such interactions have    been
              studied with many biochemical and biophysical methods, a direct    examination
              with single molecular pairs was only realized recently with    the advent of
              the atomic force microscopy (AFM). However, our ability to    study
              intermolecular interactions or recognition at great detail is still    severely
              limited at present, because with the AFM technique, only a    single rupture
              force, which is related to the maximum binding force, can    be directly
              measured, due to the lack of control of the cantilever    position and
              movement. The relationship of such measurements to those    measured
              thermodynamically can only be inferred and is often far from    clear.         
                 It has been recognized that this limitation may be technical in    nature
              and might be eliminated with a properly designed apparatus. The    primary
              objective of this project is to develop a force measuring    apparatus based on
              the AFM, but incorporating a magnetic force to the    force sensing cantilever,
              in order to control its position and motion. In    this system, the cantilever
              should remain during the approach/retraction    cycle of the measurement,
              allowing the determination of both the    interacting force and the distance
              between the two molecules. Because the    position of the cantilever does not
              move during the entire measurement,    other problems due to the lateral swing
              of the cantilever which has the    potential of introducing artifacts are also
              eliminated. To further    improve the precision in position, the thermal motion
              of the cantilever    will be compensated with a fast response coil, branched
              from the main    feedback.             When this technique is fully
              implemented, the entire force-    distance curve of a molecular pair can be
              measured at sub-A intervals    under physiolo gical conditions. A simple
              integration will yield the    potential curve that can be directly compared
              with the parameters    obtained with thermodynamic measurements, such as the
              binding free    energy. This will provide unprecedented details of
              intermolecular    interaction, which will be invaluable for our understanding
              of this    important process, especially when carefully selected mutant
              proteins are    studied in comparison.
