Title       : Committee on Science, Engineering, and Public Policy Core Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  2002     
File        : a9730221

Award Number: 9730221
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sherrie B. Green                        
	      OIA  OFFICE OF INTEGRATIVE ACTIVITIES        
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $698325             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard E. Bissell rbissell@nas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence E. McCray  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Nat Acad of Sciences
	      500 Fifth Street, NW
	      Washington, DC  20001    202/334-2254

NSF Program : 0300      GENERAL ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In 1961, the National Academy of Science (NAS) created a   committee, that
              eventually evolved to become the Committee on   Science, Engineering, and
              Public Policy (COSEPUP). COSEPUP was   intended to assist the NAS President and
              Council in their roles   of advising the government at the highest levels on
              policy   matters related to U.S. science and technology. The NSF has  
              supported COSEPUP from its onset. Formally, COSEPUP is charged   with the
              responsibility  to deliberate on initiatives for new   studies in the area of
              science and technology policy, taking   especially into account the concerns
              and requests of the   President s Science Advisor, the Director of the NSF, the
                Chairman of the National Science Board, and the chairmen of key   science and
              technology-related committees of the Congress .   COSEPUP undertakes major
              independent studies of national issues   in U.S. science and technology policy.
              In recent years, for   example, it has conducted prominent studies on NSF s
              Science and   Technology Centers, graduate education in science and  
              engineering, policy goals for science and technology, and   recruitment and
              retention of Presidential appointees. In   addition, it has developed a number
              of guidance manuals on   science and engineering for students and faculty on
              responsible   conduct of research, careers in science and engineering, and  
              mentoring of students in science and engineering. COSEPUP also   hosts
              workshops and convocations to encourage dialogue on key   science and
              technology policy issues such as the recent   Convocation on Doctoral Science
              and Engineering Education which   was cosponsored by many disciplinary
              societies and university   organizations.
