Title       : Magnetic Tweezers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  2000      
File        : a9730999

Award Number: 9730999
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1998 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24119              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabor Forgacs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clarkson University
	      8 Clarkson Avenue
	      Potsdam, NY  13699    315/268-6400

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This grant will support the development of a magnetic  tweezers apparatus to
              measure local viscoelastic and  structural properties of the cell cytoplasm and
              the  extracellular matrix.  The magnetic tweezers produce a  magnetic field of
              known magnitude and direction.  The field  exerts a magnetic force on spherical
              magnetic particles with  definite geometric and magnetic properties, which are 
              injected into the cytoplasm or matrix.  The motion of the  magnetic particle is
              monitored using optical methods.  The  trajectory of the particle is recorded
              on a computer.  Simultaneously, the motion of the particle is also described 
              in terms of standard models.  The local viscoelastic  parameters of the
              cytoplasm or matrix are obtained from the  matching of the model trajectory and
              the experimentally  obtained trajectory.  The knowledge of these parameters 
              provides information on the local structure of  interconnected networks of
              biological macromolecules that  exist in the cytoplasm (i.e. cytoskeleton) and
              the  extracellular matrix.  The magnetic tweezers will also be  used to study
              intracellular stress propagation.  At present  the magnetic tweezers are the
              only apparatus that allows the  measurement of local viscoelastic properties of
              biological  systems in a non-destructive way.  By combining several  magnetic
              tweezers, effects similar to those produced by  optical tweezers could be
              generated.  The laser traps in the  latter case are analogous to magnetic traps
              in the former  case.  At the same time, the costs associated with the 
              development and operation of a magnetic tweezers are  significantly lower.
