Title       : Topics in Econometric Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2000    
File        : a9730277

Award Number: 9730277
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230630             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Andrews   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730277  Andrews    This project involves research in three different areas of
              econometrics:  (1) Extremum Estimators in Non-Standard Scenarios.   A standard
              assumption for estimators and test statistics is that the true parameter is in
              the interior of the parameter space.  This assumption is convenient because it
              allows one to make use of the fact that first order conditions hold, at least
              asymptotically.  There are numerous cases of interest, however, in which the
              true parameter is on the boundary of the parameter space.  This project
              develops methods for testing, model selection, bootstrap and subsampling
              procedures and Bayesian asymptotics for problems where this standard assumption
              no longer holds.  (2) Moment and Model Selection for the Generalized Method of
              Moments (GMM).  Empirical researchers using GMM often find that not all moment
              conditions are correct.  At the same time, it is often the case that
              researchers have some uncertainty regarding the precise specification of the
              model of interest.  For example, they may not know how many lags of a variable
              to include in the model or whether a variable should be included in the
              regressor or not.  This project develops selection procedures for GMM
              estimators that simultaneously select correct moments and correct model
              specifications.  These model/moment selection procedures are applied to dynamic
              panel data models with unobserved individual effects, an important area of
              applied econometrics.   (3) Accelerated Bias-Corrected Confidence Intervals. 
              Bootstrap methods have gained a great deal of popularity in empirical research.
               Although the methods are easy to apply, determining the number of bootstrap
              repetitions to employ is a common problem in the existing literature. 
              Typically, this number is determined in a somewhat ad hoc manner.  This is
              problematic, because one can obtain a different answer from the same data
              merely by using different simulation draws if the number of bootstrap
              repetitions is too small.  This project develops a method  of determining the
              number of bootstrap repetitions for accelerated bias-corrected confidence
              intervals.    ??
