Title       : Role of a Cellulose Binding Protein in the Dictyostelium Spore Coat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 19,  2000   
File        : a9730036

Award Number: 9730036
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Mishkind                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165824             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher M. West westcm@anatomy.med.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9730036  West    Cells construct extracellular barriers (e.g., walls) to
              separate cells from each other or from the external environment.  A common
              structural theme of such extracellular barriers is that they consist of a
              network of fibrillar components and an amorphous component. The goal of this
              project is to better understand the mechanism of spore coat formation in the
              slime mold Dictyostelium discoideum, a eukaryote which diverged from the
              evolutionary tree around the parting of plants and animals.  An underlying
              assumption is that knowledge of how the Dictyostelium spore coat is assembled
              by the cell will be relevant, at least in terms of general principles, to cell
              wall biosynthesis in other organisms, such as bacteria, plants, and other
              fungi. Dictyostelium is an advantageous system for studying the formation of
              cellulosic barriers, for a variety of reasons:  coat formation is readily
              manipulable in the laboratory, since the spore coat forms over a short period
              of time in a strictly developmentally-regulated fashion; biochemically useful
              quantities of material can be readily isolated; the organism is genetically
              tractable, and most of the coat protein genes have already been cloned; and,
              since sporulation is non-essential for the life cycle (in the laboratory
              setting), strains can be engineered with coat genes can that are mutated and
              replaced.      The Dictyostelium spore coat contains cellulose fibrils, a
              galuran polysaccharide, and nine major proteins.  Dr. West has demonstrated
              that one of these proteins, SP85, which is known from earlier work to be part
              of a precoat protein complex, is capable of binding cellulose.   SP85 is
              abundant, is present at the start of coat assembly, is uniquely localized in
              the inner / middle layers of the coat along with cellulose, is encoded by the
              pspB gene, and appears to have a modular structure.  Expression of SP85 and
              protein domains of SP85 in E. coli showed that cellulose-binding is a property
              of the C-terminal half of the protein.  Dr. West hypot hesizes that SP85 helps
              to organize the cellulose and protein components of the coat by a cross-linking
              mechanism.  Studies of modular cellulose-binding proteins in cellulolytic
              systems, and of proteins in other "walls" such as that of the unicellular alga
              Chlamydomonas, the spore coat of the bacterium B. subtilis, and animal basement
              membranes, suggest that biochemical and genetic approaches will be informative
              for analyzing this supramolecular complex.  The first aim of the project is to
              block expression of SP85 in vivo by gene disruption.  In a complementary
              approach, the N- and C-terminal domains will be overexpressed in an attempt to
              create a dominant negative effect based on the hypothesized cross-linking
              activity.  Analysis of coat phenotype in these mutants will show whether SP85
              is involved in organizing other coat molecules as anticipated from the in vitro
              binding studies.  If there is evidence for redundantly encoded functions,
              disruptions will be carried out in a background of other coat gene deletion
              mutants.  The second aim is to determine the binding specificities of SP85 N-
              and C- terminal domains through biochemical studies.  To facilitate proper
              tertiary folding and glycosylation, and to avoid isolating SP85 from a complex,
              SP85 will be expressed by growing Dictyostelium cells which do not express
              other spore coat proteins.  The third aim will be to use epitope tagging to
              localize the SP85 domains in vivo, to see if they correlate with the known
              physical distributions of the putative binding targets identified in the second
              aim.
