Title       : Dissolved Organic Nitrogen and Brown Tide Blooms in Long Island Coastal Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9730015

Award Number: 9730015
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $365386             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Repeta drepeta@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 4444,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                       Blooms of the `Brown Tide` unicellular algae (Aureococcus
              anophagefferens) have occurred sporadically since 1985 in coastal waters of
              Eastern Long Island and have devastated the local commercial scallop fishery.
              Analysis of a 10 year time series data set from the Peconic Estuary indicates
              that bloom intensity is inversely correlated with the discharge of high nitrate
              groundwater and associated with higher salinities. Laboratory and field data
              suggest that salinity is unlikely to represent a direct physiological control
              on Brown Tide blooms. However budget calculations indicate that nitrogen supply
              from groundwater is 1 2 orders of magnitude higher than other external sources
              for this ecosystem. Data collected in 1995 demonstrated that Brown Tide blooms
              utilize dissolved organic nitrogen (DON) for growth as evidenced from the large
              decrease in DON parallel with cell increase. We hypothesize that bloom
              initiation is regulated by the relative supply of inorganic and organic
              nitrogen, determined to a large extent by groundwater flow variability. An
              appropriate first step to test this hypothesis is the demonstration that there
              are compounds in the DON that can be efficiently utilized by A. anophagefferens
              giving it a competitive advantage over other endemic species. We will identify
              the source of DON that is available to A. anophagefferens via field and
              laboratory studies. The laboratory work will involve the identification of the
              DON components from the Peconic Estuary that can support growth of the alga and
              characterization of the DON uptake systems and utilization mechanisms that make
              this alga competitive at utilizing nitrogen. Immunological probes to major
              proteins involved in the utilization of DON will be prepared. In the field we
              will characterize the DON fraction utilized by A. anophagefferens during a
              bloom as well as follow the nitrogen nutrition of this algae using
              immunological probes. Weekly nutrient bioassays and analysis of various
              dissolved and particulate nitrogen pools will complement the more detailed
              field sampling.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
