Title       : ATR FTIR Investigation of Beta-Lactamase Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2000     
File        : a9730035

Award Number: 9730035
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony L. Fink enzyme@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9730035  Fink  The proposed research involves two related areas: (1) the use of
              Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, in the attenuated total
              reflectance (ATR) mode, to study enzyme-substrate intermediates and
              enzyme-inhibitor complexes, and (2) studies on beta-lactamase catalysis and
              inhibition, especially using a combination of site-directed mutagenesis and
              structural probes, including ATR FTIR.  Beta-lactamases are the major source of
              resistance to penicillin antibiotic therapy. In spite of considerable study
              there is no consensus on their catalytic mechanism. A detailed kinetic and
              structural characterization of selected active-site mutants is planned to
              answer a number of specific questions regarding the beta-lactamase catalytic
              mechanism. Infrared spectroscopy can reveal critical information about
              catalytic mechanisms, as well as the conformation and interactions of bound
              inhibitors and drugs. By immobilizing the enzyme to the internal reflectance
              element of an ATR flow cell it is possible to acquire the IR spectra of
              stabilized enzyme-substrate or enzyme-inhibitor complexes. The ATR FTIR studies
              will initially be applied to complexes of beta-lactamase, and subsequently
              extended to other enzyme systems.     Beta-lactamases are enzymes made by many
              bacteria and are the major source of resistance to penicillin. The planned
              research is aimed at understanding how these enzymes work, and how they may be
              inhibited. A detailed kinetic and structural characterization of selected
              active-site mutants will be undertaken to answer a number of specific questions
              regarding the catalytic mechanism. The information learned will contribute to
              understanding how beta-lactamases work and to the design of potential
              inhibitors. Infrared spectroscopy can reveal critical information about bond
              changes during catalysis. A new procedure will be developed to study
              enzyme-substrate intermediates and enzyme-inhibitor complexes, especially those
              of beta-lactamase.
