Title       : Adsorption of Polyampholytes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1998  
File        : a9730777

Award Number: 9730777
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Rubinstein mr@unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9183,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730777  Rubinstein  Charged polymers have recently attracted much attention due
               to their unique properties and their technological  importance as rheology
              modifiers, dispersing aids,  stabilizers, gelling agents, binders, etc. 
              Polyampholytes  are polymers carrying both positive and negative charges. 
              Polymers carrying only positive or negative charge are  called
              polyelectrolytes.  The net charge of polyampholytes,  e.g., proteins, is
              determined by the pH of the aqueous  solution.    Long-range Coulomb
              interactions are responsible for the rich  behavior of these polymeric systems
              and for the difficulties  in developing theories to describe them.  While the
              coherent  picture of polyelectrolytes and their interactions with  surfaces is
              beginning to emerge, the theoretical description  of polyampholytes is lagging
              far behind.  In particular,  there is no satisfactory theory of polyampholyte
              adsorption.  Such a theory is necessary for understanding the details of 
              interactions of latex particles stabilized by  polyampholytes, adsorption of
              proteins on cell membranes,  complexation of polyampholytes with
              polyelectrolytes and  related problems.    In the current research both
              analytical and numerical models  of polyampholyte adsorption on charged
              surfaces will be  constructed and solved.  The problems addressed will 
              include: the adsorption of a single polyampholyte chain,  multi-chain
              adsorption, and the kinetics of polyampholyte  adsorption.  %%%  Charged
              polymers have recently attracted much attention due  to their unique properties
              and their technological  importance as rheology modifiers, dispersing aids, 
              stabilizers, gelling agents, binders, etc.  Polyampholytes  are polymers
              carrying both positive and negative charges.  Polymers carrying only positive
              or negative charge are  called polyelectrolytes.  The net charge of
              polyampholytes,  e.g., proteins, is determined by the pH of the aqueous 
              solution.    Long-range Coulomb interactions are responsible for the rich 
              behavior of these polymeric  systems and for the difficulties  in developing
              theories to describe them.  While the coherent  picture of polyelectrolytes and
              their interactions with  surfaces is beginning to emerge, the theoretical
              description  of polyampholytes is lagging far behind.  In particular,  there is
              no satisfactory theory of polyampholyte adsorption.  Such a theory is necessary
              for understanding the details of  interactions of latex particles stabilized by
               polyampholytes, adsorption of proteins on cell membranes,  complexation of
              polyampholytes with polyelectrolytes and  related problems.    In the current
              research both analytical and numerical models  of polyampholyte adsorption on
              charged surfaces will be  constructed and solved.  The problems addressed will 
              include: the adsorption of a single polyampholyte chain,  multi-chain
              adsorption, and the kinetics of polyampholyte  adsorption.  ***
