Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: First Do No Harm;
               Elections, Political Parties and Human Rights
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9730130

Award Number: 9730130
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Cingranelli davidc@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                This Doctoral Dissertation research project provides a refined and useful
              analysis of democracy's ability to protect human rights via national elections.
               Previous research demonstrates that democracy is reliably associated with
              government respect for human rights.  the relationship between human rights and
              the presence of national elections is important, as for some time, US
              policy-makers have implied that democracy and national elections are the same
              thing.  This may not be the case, however.  For instance, Peru has had
              successively elected civilian governments since 1980, but at the same time, has
              suffered tens of thousands of political killings.  Thus, it may be that the
              states which formulate foreign policy using elections as a proxy for democracy
              do a disservice to all those who are potential victims of human rights abuse
              around the world.  The dissertation has five specific goals:  1) to examine the
              relationship between the presence of national elections and government respect
              for human rights; 2) to examine to what extent the role a viable, competitive
              political party representing the poorest sector of society plays in accounting
              for observable difference in government respect for human rights; 3) using an
              innovative scaling technique , to produce a new measure of human rights that is
              a significant improvement on the way human rights have been measured; 4) to
              produce a new variable measuring the viability and competitiveness of political
              parties for both presidential and parliamentary systems; and, 5) to introduce
              the presence of refugees as an important control variable for empirical studies
              of government abuse of human rights.  Qualitative as well as quantitative
              measures will be used to examine the relationships of interest in this study. 
              A case study of the United States is used to develop the theoretical framework
              of this study in respect to government repression and the incorporation of
              repressed groups into the political system.  Quantitative tests will be applied
              to this framework.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                             
