Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Preparation of Haemophilus Influenza Type
               B/Tetanus Toxoid Conjugate Vaccine
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1998   
File        : a9730757

Award Number: 9730757
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8968               (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary M. Mikhail   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U.S. Naval Medical Researc
	      PSC 452, Box 5000
	      Cairo, EG      202/284-0576

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5944,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Mary M.
              Mikhail, Senior Investigator, Enteric Microbiology, at the Naval Medical
              Research Unit -3 (NAMRU3) in Cairo, Egypt, and  Alaa Eldin Shehata Aly, Senior
              Chemist, Biomedical Research Center, Egyptian Organization for Biological
              Products and Vaccines (VACSERA), in Cairo, Egypt.  The two collaborators plan
              to synthesize a new vaccine for the protection of infants against Haemophilus
              influenza type b (Hib) diseases.  The polysaccharide of Hib will be prepared
              and purified then depolymerized and uniterminally coupled to a carrier protein
              (150KD fraction of tetanus toxoid).  This will improve its immunogenecity
              specially in infants and lead to a better protection and longer duration of
              immune response with T-cell dependent characters.  The conjugate produced will
              be of high hapten load so will be more active in priming infants, and more
              active in adults.  The improvement of the immune response of the conjugate will
              be tested in laboratory animals.   Scope:  This project will involve two
              laboratories with complementary capabilities to conduct research in an
              important industrial and health research field.  Part of the research work will
              be conducted at VACSERA, including the purification of Hib CPS and the
              preparation of the conjugate.  The steps of TT fractionation, Hib CPS
              depolymerization, periodate oxidation and chemical coupling will be jointly
              reviewed by VACSERA and the NAMRU3 teams.  The chemical testing of the
              conjugate also will be carried out jointly.  The animal immunization will be
              done at NAMRU3.  Dr. Mikhail is an expert in biological chemistry and animal
              clinical testing.  The Egyptian researcher is an expert in the field of
              polysaccharide protein conjugated vaccine preparation, and has experience in
              purification and testing of bacterial capsular polysaccharides.  This proposal
              meets the INT objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration in areas of
              mutual benefit.  The project was generated as a result of a workshop on
              biotechnology organized by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the
              Egyptian Government.  NIH was involved in the evaluation of the project and in
              recommending its support.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
              Joint Fund Program, administered by the US Department of State, which provides
              grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out cooperative
              activities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
