Title       : Synthesis of GA-Nitride Nanoclusters by Precursor Dispersion in Block Copolymer
               Cavities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9730019

Award Number: 9730019
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $525548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Subhash H. Risbud shrisbud@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Philip P. Power  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730019  Risbud  The goal of this project is to develop new synthesis science
              for  III-V nitride nanoclusters applicable to quantum dot structures.  The
              approach is to combine inspirations from the synthetic  chemistry of block
              copolymers and precursors to nitride compounds  to process nanocrystals of
              III-V nitride materials sequestered in  polymeric matrices. Parallel
              investigations of the microscopic,  optical and electronic properties of
              nitride quantum dots will be  pursued. Transmission electron microscopy and
              electron  diffraction will be employed to study the structure, size 
              distribution, and defects of the quantum dots. Optical  spectroscopies will be
              used to characterize the band gap of the  quantum dots, quantum confinement,
              and- emission processes  (photoluminescence and time resolved spectroscopy).
              The effects  of synthesis parameters, defects, surface passivation, and 
              impurities on the behavior of the III-V nitride quantum dots will  be studied
              using these primary measurement and characterization  methods.  %%%  The
              project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of  materials science
              having high technological relevance. The  research will contribute basic
              materials science knowledge at a  fundamental level to important aspects of
              electronic/photonic  devices. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from
              the  research is expected to contribute to improving the performance  and
              stability of advanced devices by providing a fundamental  understanding and a
              basis for designing and producing improved  materials, and materials
              combinations.  An important feature of  the program is the integration of
              research and education through  the training of students in a fundamentally and
              technologically  significant area.
