Title       : Biological and Chemical Controls on Fe Uptake by Marine Phytoplankton and
               Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2000     
File        : a9730334

Award Number: 9730334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $391838             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Hutchins dahutch@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George W. Luther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David L. Kirchman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1650,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Iron limitation of phytoplankton growth is now widely accepted, but we know
              little about the use of iron (Fe) by heterotrophic bacteria.  Limited published
              and preliminary data indicate that bacteria can account for a large but
              variable fraction of biological Fe uptake.  Because so few studies have been
              conducted, however, we do not understand what controls the relative amount of
              Fe uptake by bacteria and phytoplankton.  Recent reports also suggest that Fe
              may limit bacterial growth and affect the efficiency of dissolved organic
              matter (DOM) utilization.  If so, then Fe availability could control not only
              carbon fixation by primary producers, but also the mineralization of DOM by
              heterotrophic microbes in some oceanic regimes.  This project describes
              research using an interdisciplinary approach to answer the question: What is
              the relative importance of bacteria and phytoplankton in Fe uptake, and what
              biological and chemical factors control Fe uptake by each group?  We
              hypothesize that the important biological factors determining the partitioning
              of Fe include biomass, production and Iron:Carbon (Fe:C)  ratios of
              phytoplankton and bacteria. The critical chemical factor is the degree and
              nature of organic complexation of dissolved Fe.  Field work will be carried out
              in three contrasting regimes: Delaware Bay (high Fe, nutrients and biomass),
              the oligotrophic Sargasso Sea (moderate Fe levels, low nutrients and biomass)
              and a recently discovered Fe limited region off the coast of California (a low
              Fe, high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll regime).  Trace metal clean radiotracer
              experiments will measure Fe uptake by bacteria and phytoplankton to give us a
              complete picture of Fe uptake in a broad range of oceanographic regimes. In
              order to explain the expected. variation in relative Fe uptake, we will also
              measure several biological and chemical parameters.  The biological parameters
              include Fe:C ratios, bacterial and phytoplankton abundance, and primary and
              bacterial production.  Simultaneous electrochemical measurements will examine
              the relationship between organic complexation kinetics and biological Fe
              availability.  We hypothesize that slow dissociation kinetics of Fe organic
              ligand complexes will result in lower phytoplankton Fe uptake but high relative
              Fe uptake by siderophore utilizing prokaryotes.  This research is a logical and
              necessary first step towards unraveling the unique roles of heterotrophic
              bacteria and phytoplankton in marine Fe biogeochemistry, and will contribute to
              our understanding of the processes which ultimately control the cycling of
              major nutrients and carbon in marine ecosystems.                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
