Title       : The Macroeconomics of War and Peace
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  1999     
File        : a9730190

Award Number: 9730190
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine C. Eckel                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78062              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas T. Wills wills@sbc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Wells  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Sweet Briar College
	      
	      Sweet Briar, VA  24595    804/381-6100

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
                A problem inherent in all peace treaties and other types of multi-party
              agreements is the uncertainty of whether the participants have negotiated in
              good faith and remain committed to the contract. We use advances in
              macroeconomic theory to show that the unobservable intentions of treaty
              participants may be accurately reflected in the behavior of economic variables
              during the time of the treaty. In particular, the warring governments' budget
              constraints imply that any information concerning the probability of war will
              be quickly translated into asset prices, exchange rates, and the overall price
              level.  Using this theoretical information with recent advances in time-series
              econometrics, the authors provide an easily implementable strategy that they
              argue can be used to monitor the validity of agreements made by warring
              parties. This information is less costly and less dangerous to obtain than the
              common strategy of searching for troop movement and armaments, and may be a
              leading indicator of such activities. The authors assert that the knowledge
              could prevent monitoring agencies from committing troops to support a
              cease-fire that the combatants do not intend to uphold.  The project itself
              uses this approach in a systematic analysis of a series of treaties over the
              past 300 years to produce a deeper understanding of the complex interaction of
              unobservable political intentions, expectations, and economic variables. The
              goal of the research is to determine the extent to which one can accurately
              impute participants' intentions from an analysis of data available during the
              time of the treaty.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
