Title       : Estimating Mortality Risks Associated with Starvation for Atlantic Cod Larvae
               using Molecular Markers and Cox Regression Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1999  
File        : a9730712

Award Number: 9730712
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240115             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tun-Liang Ong   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Buckley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Based on laboratory feeding experiments, this effort focuses on demonstrating
              the feasibility of using molecular markers coupled with statistical modeling
              for estimation of starvation-induced mortality in larval Atlantic cod.  Our
              earlier studies have established that bulk RNA, 18S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and
              metallothionein (MT) mRNA levels may serve as specific markers for starvation
              in cod larvae.  A series of laboratory experiments will be completed to further
              characterize the responses of 18s rRNA and MT to changes in feeding,
              development and growth in Atlantic cod.  Laboratory results (molecular biology
              and survival data) will be used to calibrate a Cox regression model for
              estimation of starvation mortality risks in larval Atlantic cod.  The
              nonproportional hazards Cox regression model chosen for this study is commonly
              used by the life insurance industry for establishing risks and premium rates. 
              It can accommodate time-dependent covariates, time-lagged effect, and a
              stepwise change in hazard rates over the lifespan of the organism studied.  Our
              earlier work established that significant decreases18s rRNA levels can be used
              as a marker for the initial stages of starvation in Atlantic cod larvae. 
              Dramatic increases in MT mRNA levels also were shown to be indicative of
              starvation.  Both markers will be used to pinpoint recovery from starvation
              after refeeding.  The power of mortality risks estimation will greatly increase
              if recovery from starvation can be established.  A single marker alone may not
              be able to define the `point-of-no-return` in starvation with sufficient
              confidence.  Animal and human studies have shown that dietary deprivation leads
              to polysome breakdown and a reduction in the number and activity of ribosomes. 
              Refeeding after starvation results in significant increase in the levels of
              rRNAs.  However, when starvation has exceeded the `point-of-no-return`, i.e.
              rRNA levels fail to rebound after refeeding, mortality sets in.  To the extent
              that Atlantic cod is a suitable model for other fish and invertebrates that
              produce planktonic larvae, this effort will provide a picture of the molecular
              response of  larvae to changing feeding conditions and provide tools to
              determine growth, starvation mortality and feeding conditions. These studies
              should provide insight into the effects of environmental variability on
              production of fish.                                                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
