Title       : Conjugated Polymers as Materials for Solid State Lasers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 21,  1998   
File        : a9730126

Award Number: 9730126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan J. Heeger ajh@physics.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Moses  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730126  Heeger    Semiconducting polymers offer important advantages as
              potential  laser materials, e.g., High photoluminescence efficiency (PL),  low
              self-absorption, emission wavelengths that span the visible  spectrum, easily
              processed into optical quality thin films, and  electrically pumped in a diode
              configuration.    The high PL efficiency and large cross-section for stimulated
               emission persist to high concentrations.  In contrast to  traditional laser
              dyes, conjugated polymers function as high gain  laser materials in the solid
              state, neat and undiluted.  To  obtain lower thresholds and to generate
              coherent laser light, it  is necessary to incorporate the conjugated polymer
              into a  resonant structure.    The goal of this research is to achieve low
              threshold optically  pumped polymer lasers through improvements in materials
              and  materials processing and through the creation of novel resonant 
              structures.  With sufficiently low thresholds, lasing structures  fabricated
              from semiconducting polymers can be developed as cw  lasers.  For example they
              could be pumped with conventional light  sources, or with blue-emitting LEDs
              (e.g. using the InGaN  technology), or with solar radiation (solar powered
              lasers!).  To  accomplish this goal, significant improvements in the polymer 
              materials are required to enable the high-Q resonant structures  that are
              needed.  These improvements and the related achievement  of high-Q resonant
              structures with conjugated polymers as the  gain media are the goals of the
              proposed research.  The actual  work will include:  measurements of gain and
              loss in photopumped  semiconducting polymer films; materials development
              including  fabrication of high quality, low-loss optical thin film  waveguides
              and expansion into new conjugated systems (new PPV  derivatives, polyfluorene
              derivatives and spiro-conjugated  materials);  development of cladding
              materials; and evaluation of  these conjugated materials in microcavities, in
              distributed  feedback structures and in `whispe ring gallery mode' structures 
              (micro-disks and micro-rings).  %%%  This research will provide fundamental
              understanding and  potentially new and improved devices in the area of laser 
              materials and electrically active polymers.  ***
