Title       : Ceramic Based Multi-Site Electrode for Electrochemical and Electrophysiological
               Recording
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1999     
File        : a9730899

Award Number: 9730899
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lee C. Makowski                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Greg A. Gerhardt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                  The major goal of these studies is to design and develop ceramic-  based
              multisite microsensors. At the present time, microsensors are  being   used 
              primarily  in  the  area  of  neuroscience  to  study  neurochemicals  and to
              measure the electrical properties  of  brain  cells.  The advantages of
              microsensors are the abilities to rapidly  (<lsec) measure molecules or
              electrical potentials on small spatial  scales  (microns)  to  understand 
              biological  signaling  processes  directly. In addition, such methods can be
              miniaturized to be  used  directly  in  the field. Current designs of such
              microsensors  have  been  expensive, fragile, subject to failure and limited 
              in  their  scope  of  applications. We plan to develop a new  type  of  sensor 
              based  on  the  concepts  of  the micromachining  of  ceramic.  The  resulting
              sensors may be cheaper to manufacture, stronger, and more  inert, and capable
              of measuring chemicals and electrical potentials  at  the  same  time. The
              potential uses of these  microsensors  for  chemical  measurements may be
              extensive. It is  possible  that  low  cost ceramic-based microsensors can be
              used to measure chemicals in  a  variety of situations such as brain
              recordings, used to  control  fermentation processes, for determinations of the
              purity of  drugs,  for  determining  harvest  time information  regarding 
              fruits  and  vegetables,  and  they  will likely have a  variety  of 
              additional  biological  sensing applications. These microsensors could  have  a
               global  impact  on neuroscience, agriculture, industry,  government  and
              private labs, and the general public.
