Title       : Time Preference and Macroeconomics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9730402

Award Number: 9730402
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Barro   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The standard long run model of the macroeconomy-the neoclassical growth model-
              assumes a simple form of household preferences in which the rate of time
              preference is constant. However, some recent experimental evidence suggests
              that households are myopic in the sense that rates of time preference are very
              high over the near term but much lower between dates advanced some time in the
              future. This project will assess the theoretical implications of this form of
              preferences for observable macroeconomic behavior and then test the hypotheses
              on cross country data.  The neoclassical growth model is modified to allow for
              a non constant rate of time preference. If the household cannot commit future
              choices of consumption and if utility is logarithmic, then an equilibrium is
              found that resembles the standard results of the neoclassical model. In this
              solution, the effective rate of time preference is high, but constant. Although
              this model has potentially important implications for institutional design and
              other policies- because households would benefit from an ability to commit
              future consumption-there is a sense in which the results are observationally
              equivalent to those of the conventional growth model. When the framework is
              extended to allow for partial commitment ability, then some testable hypotheses
              emerge. Steady state results are obtained for more general utility functions,
              and some properties of dynamic paths are worked out for the case of isoelastic
              utility.  Further theoretical research will assess the uniqueness of the
              equilibria. Multiplicity of equilibria have been found in analogous contexts by
              other researchers but only when the household's horizon is infinite. The
              properties of the transitional dynamics will be worked out numerically for the
              case of isoelastic utility, and further testable hypotheses will be derived
              from the theory. The theory will also be linked with existing analyses that
              endogenize population growth and technological progress.  Previous cross
              country empirical work on the determinants of economic growth will be extended
              to evaluate the macroeconomic significance of the kinds of time preference
              analysis that form the theoretical part of this research. The analysis will
              consider institutional and cultural elements that affect people's ability to
              make and enforce commitments. The institutional side will consider measures of
              the rule of law and political stability and other features of the legal
              environment that affect people's ability to organize financial markets and
              enter into contracts and other market relationships. The cultural side will
              assess aspects of religion, language, and ethnicity as possible influences on
              thrift, a propensity for honesty, and a willingness to work hard. In each case,
              the hypothesis to be tested is that the explanatory variables have joint
              influences across a group of dependent variables, including the rate of
              economic growth, the saving rate, the extent of financial market development,
              fertility decisions, and the intensity of investment in human capital          
                                           ½ñ+¼^úá¼                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
