Title       : GOALI: A Fundamental Investigation of the Design, Processing and Evaluation of a
               Model, Oxidation Resistant, Functionally-Graded Coating System for Refractory
               Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1998     
File        : a9730775

Award Number: 9730775
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. Linga (KL) Murty                     
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389852             (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Moore jjmoore@mines.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado School of Mines
	      1500 Illinois
	      Golden, CO  804011887    303/273-3200

NSF Program : 1771      METALS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730775  Moore    The   research   program  investigates   functionally-graded 
              coating  systems  that  incorporate an  amorphous  diffusion  barrier  layer.  
              Past research identified  a  functionally-  graded  molybdenum-silicon based
              coating system (MoSi2-SiC),  deposited  on the refractory metal substrate using
               physical  vapor  deposition  as  a  promising  processing  route.    A 
              sufficiently thick, outer layer of MoSi2 can be subsequently  applied  to  the 
              functionally-graded  layer  using   plasma  spraying.    The   earlier 
              research  also  identified   the  potential  of  utilizing  MoSi2-SiC 
              composite  targets   as  compared  with  elemental targets  (e.g.  Mo,  Si, 
              and  C).  However,  a  suitable diffusion barrier  layer  between  the 
              MoSi2-SiC  functionally-graded coating  and  the  refractory  metal  substrate 
              must be identified in  order  to  minimize  diffusion of silicon and carbon
              into the refractory  (Mo  or  W)  substrate.   If this barrier is not used, 
              sub-silicides  and  carbides of the refractory metals are produced  at  the 
              coating-substrate interface, resulting in  deterioration  of  oxidation 
              resistance  and  mechanical  properties  of   the  coating system, as well as a
              reduction in the coating  life.  A  Mo-Si-N-C diffusion barrier has recently
              been  identified  that remains amorphous up to 1260C.  Thermal cycling of  the 
              MoSi2-SiC  functionally-graded coating  system  between  the  service  
              temperature  and  room  temperature  can   produce  stresses  in the coating
              system.  Therefore, finite  element  modeling will be used to predict the
              optimized compositional  gradient,  and  coating architecture, i.e.
              substrate-barrier  layer-functionally-graded layer-outer thick  kinetic  layer,
               consistent  with  minimizing  the  stresses  generated,  and  maintaining
              oxidation resistance for prolonged times  up  to  1600C  in  air. ?  Industrial
              advisors are Mel  Jackson  (GE  Corp.  Research and Development) and William
              Allen  (UTRC  -  East  Hartford).   These  co mpanies have  interest  in  high 
              temperature  materials and coatings for  materials  used  in  turbine  engines.
                Students spend time  in  the  industrial  laboratory  research facilities and
              present  their  research  activities  at  CSM  Center meetings.  It  is  an 
              excellent  opportunity  for  the  students  to  participate  in  superb 
              industrial materials laboratories in the United States.  The  MPS OMA Office is
              co-supporting this GOALI activity.  %%%  The  main  objective of this GOALI
              research  program  is  to  explore  oxidation-resistant coating systems for 
              refractory  metals   for  application  in  high  temperature,  oxidizing 
              environments.   The  coatings  are  designed  using   finite  element  modeling
              and deposited by physical vapor deposition  using novel MoSi2-SiC or
              MoSi2-Si3N4 composite targets.  The  research  program  is managed in the
              Advanced  Coatings  and  Surface   Engineering  Laboratory  (ACSEL),   an  
              industry-  university consortium, at Colorado School of Mines.  ***
