Title       : Interactions, Dynamics and Phase Transitions of Charge-Stabilized Colloidal
               Suspensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2000        
File        : a9730189

Award Number: 9730189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David G. Grier d-grier@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730189  Grier    This  continuation proposal by Prof. David G. Grier  of  the 
              James   Franck  Institute  of  the  University  of   Chicago  describes  a 
              research  program  to  study  the  microscopic  origins  of  bulk properties in
              charge-stabilized  colloidal  suspensions.   The experimental methods to be 
              employed  for  these  studies  will  include the use of  a  combination  of 
              optical  trapping  techniques  in  conjunction  with   high-  resolution
              digital video microscopy.  There are two thrusts.  The  primary thrust involves
              a systematic study of  how  the  pairwise  interaction  potential  depends  on 
              key   control  parameters  already identified in previous work by  the  PI. 
              This  will involve the use of the "blinking optical tweezer"  technique 
              developed by the PI for measuring colloidal  pair  potentials.  This
              comprehensive study will provide  a  basis  for  reformulating the theory of
              colloidal interactions.   A  valid   theory  of  colloidal  interactions  is  
              of   major  importance not only for colloid science in general but  also  for 
              the  critical  role  it plays  in  applied,  industrial  problems, such as the
              stability of suspensions.  The  second  thrust  centers  on the phase
              transitions  in  mono-disperse  charge-stabilized suspensions. Previous studies
              of colloidal  phase  behavior have taken as their starting point the basic 
              understanding  that like-charged spheres repel  each  other.  However, systems
              whose pair potentials are characterized  by  attractive  tails are predicted to
              undergo structural  phase  transitions  not  available  to  purely  repulsive 
              systems.  Studies of the phase transitions of such systems are crucial  to  the
               understanding  of  the structure  and  dynamics  of  colloids.  %%%  This 
              continuation proposal by Prof. David G. Grier  of  the  James   Franck 
              Institute  of  the  University  of   Chicago  describes  a  research  program 
              to  study  the  microscopic  origins  of  bulk properties in charge-stabilized 
              colloidal  suspensions.    The experimental methods to be  employed  for  these
               studies  will  include the use of  a  combination  of  optical  trapping 
              techniques  in  conjunction  with   high-  resolution digital video microscopy.
               There are two thrusts.  The  primary thrust involves a systematic study of 
              how  the  pairwise  interaction  potential  depends  on  key   control 
              parameters  already identified in previous work by  the  PI.  This  will
              involve the use of the "blinking optical tweezer"  technique  developed by the
              PI for measuring colloidal  pair  potentials.  This comprehensive study will
              provide  a  basis  for  reformulating the theory of colloidal interactions.   A
               valid   theory  of  colloidal  interactions  is   of   major  importance not
              only for colloid science in general but  also  for  the  critical  role  it
              plays  in  applied,  industrial  problems, such as the stability of
              suspensions.  The  second  thrust  centers  on the phase transitions  in 
              mono-disperse  charge-stabilized suspensions. Previous studies of colloidal 
              phase  behavior have taken as their starting point the basic  understanding 
              that like-charged spheres repel  each  other.  However, systems whose pair
              potentials are characterized  by  attractive  tails are predicted to undergo
              structural  phase  transitions  not  available  to  purely  repulsive  systems.
               Studies of the phase transitions of such systems are crucial  to  the 
              understanding  of  the structure  and  dynamics  of  colloids.  ***
