Title       : Proximate Factors Affecting Vertical Migrations in Mesopelagic Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2000    
File        : a9730073

Award Number: 9730073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329229             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamara M. Frank frank@hboi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edith A. Widder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harbor Branch Ocean Inst
	      5600 Old Dixie Highway
	      Fort Pierce, FL  349467303    407/465-2400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,1096,1650,4444,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                This proposal seeks to continue ongoing studies by this laboratory of
              proximate factors triggering vertical migrations in midwater organisms.  While
              this phenomenon is known to be one of the dominant behavioral patterns on
              earth, and has a profound influence on the structure of marine ecosystems,
              little is known about the factors which cue the daily timing of this behavior. 
              Studies conducted in the last three years have definitively eliminated one of
              the hypotheses regarding which characteristic of light might cue these
              migrations.  These studies demonstrated that it is not the change in the
              spectral distribution of light, which occurs at twilight,  that is serving as a
              trigger to cue these migrations.  In addition, photosensitivity to near-UV
              light was not found to be a common characteristic of vertically migrating
              crustaceans, and therefore, the role of UV light in triggering these migrations
              in most species has also been discounted.  This proposal will continue to
              address questions about what factors at twilight are cueing vertical migrations
              in mesopelagic organisms in Oceanographer Canyon in the Gulf of Maine. 
              Potential cues that will be addressed are 1) exposure to a threshold value of
              absolute light intensity, 2)  tracking of an isolume, 3) relative increase or
              decrease in downwelling light,  and 4) if the rate of change in light intensity
              has an effect on migration speeds.  The visual physiology of some of these
              migrating species will also be examined to determine if  1) there are
              differences in photoreceptor sensitivity between the various species that can
              be correlated to differences in their migration patterns, and 2) if endogenous
              rhythms in photoreceptor sensitivity are present in mesopelagic species that
              can be correlated to a migratory lifestyle.  Combining in situ and net studies
              of animal distribution patterns with studies of their photoreceptor physiology
              will make a significant contribution to determining what proximate factors are
              important in controlling the daily timing of vertical migrations in the
              mesopelagic realm.                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
