Title       : Heterogeneity and Adjustment: Fixed Costs, Renovation, and Diffusion of Ideas -
               An Accomplishment Based Renewal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a9730326

Award Number: 9730326
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228738             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ricardo J. Caballero caball@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT  Ignoring the ebullient nature of the microeconomic world and the
              problems within it is likely to hamper severely our ability to give meaningful
              quantitative---and sometimes even qualitative--- answers to questions as
              central as: What are the costs of recessions? How do financial and contractual
              factors hamper aggregate economic performance? What is the natural rate of
              unemployment? What is a ``reasonable` level of job destruction and unemployment
              in the aftermath of structural adjustment? What is the cost and why do some
              countries experience technological sclerosis?  Why are methods of production
              (e.g., capital/labor ratios) so different across economies that are, otherwise,
              at a similar stage of development? Why do some countries build social
              institutions that are later perceived as obstacles to flexible adjustment? Why
              do poor countries with cheap labor so often fail to attract capital and grow?
              What is the likely impact of investment incentives? Will workers benefit from
              such incentives? Why are capital flows so volatile? How should international
              liquidity be managed during currency and systemic crises? and so on.  This
              purpose of this project is to address some of these questions, and to provide a
              macroeconomic framework of analysis which builds from a realistic description
              of microeconomic institutions and behavior.  This project incorporates three
              closely connected themes.  First is the connection between individual
              microeconomic decisions, many of which occur intermittently, and aggregate
              economic activity.  This project develops and applies a methodological
              apparatus designed to keep track of the impact of aggregate shocks on
              underlying cross-sectional distributions and vice versa.  Second is the
              relationship between microeconomic decisions, economic restructuring, and macro
              dynamics - the Churn.  The process of creation and destruction of production
              sites depends on technology, adjustment costs, and institutional factors. 
              Third is the problem of the decoupling of job creation and job destruction in
              many economies, and the institutional and other factors contributing to it.  
              Six interrelated goals are pursued in this Accomplishment Based Renewal.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                        
