Title       : Tunneling Studies of Ferromagnetic Junctions and Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9730908

Award Number: 9730908
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jagadeesh S. Moodera moodera@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730908  Moodera    This  experimental  research project is concerned  with 
              electron  tunnel junctions with electrodes of magnetic metals conceived  in 
              such  a  way  that  the  tunneling current  is  controlled  in  a  sensitive  
              fashion   by   an  applied   magnetic   field.   Well  characterized
              ferromagnetic tunnel junctions and interfaces  will  be prepared under clean
              and ultra high vacuum conditions to allow  accurate and reproducible tunneling
              measurements, particularly on  structures with 3d and 4f ferromagnetic metals.
              Spin polarization  of  the same films that make up the tunnel junction will
              also  be  measured  by  superconducting tunneling  spectroscopy.  The  main 
              thrust  is to understand the physical mechanisms responsible  for  the observed
              magnetic field sensitivity. It is expected that this  research will
              additionally lead to new results and techniques  in  condensed  matter  physics
               and  new  applications  for  magnetic  technology.This research program is
              interdisciplinary  in  nature  and  has typically involved several
              undergraduate and high school  students in its activities. These involvements
              are beneficial  in  the preparation of students for further study and for
              careers  in  industry, government laboratories or academia.  %%%  This 
              experimental research project is concerned with a new class  of   electronic 
              devices  that  the  PI  has  discovered  in  his  previously supported work,
              which are highly sensitive to magnetic  field. The electrical resistance of the
              device, which is called a  tunnel  junction, changes when the device is placed
              in a magnetic  field,  and is said to exhibit magnetoresistance. This 
              discovery  has  created  interest  worldwide because of  the  potential  for 
              improvements  in technology. The main technological  applications  may be in
              magnetic sensors for computer hard drives, possibly for  magnetic computer
              memory or logic elements, and for miscellaneous  applications s uch as sensors
              to measure rotational speeds, eg,  a  tachometer. The basic tunnel junction is
              a capacitor-like  device  with  a  thin insulating oxide between two metal
              plates. In  this  case  the oxide layer is so thin that electrons can transfer
              from  one  plate  to  the  other  by the quantum  mechanical  tunneling 
              process.  This  process was firmly established and understood  in  detail  in 
              the  late  1960's by basic  physics  researchers  who  realized that a tunnel
              junction device, if it could be fabricated  with  a  sufficiently thin and
              homogeneous oxide layer, could  be  instrumental  to   understanding the nature
              of superconductivity.  Ivar  Giaever  won the Nobel Prize in Physics  in  1973 
              for  his  experiments  on  superconductivity  which  were  based   on   his 
              development  of  improved  fabrication  techniques  and  a   more  complete 
              understanding  of  the  physical  behavior  of   tunnel  junctions.  The
              present PI has gone on from these  earlier  basic  research  results  to find
              the magnetic effects  which  are  very  promising  for  applications in
              computers and other technologies.  As  in  the earlier case, the PI here has
              perfected new and  more  careful  experimental methods to clearly reveal the
              theoretically  expected physical effects, in this case magnetic in nature. 
              This  project  focuses  on  careful  and  systematic  measurements   on 
              junction   structures   with  metal   electrodes   of   different 
              ferromagnetic  compositions, in order to  better  understand  and  maximize the
              sensitivity to magnetic field. This research program  is interdisciplinary in
              nature and has typically involved several  undergraduate  and high school
              students in its activities.  These  involvements  are beneficial in the
              preparation of  students  for  further   study   and   for  careers  in  
              industry,   government  laboratories or academia.  ***
