Title       : In Situ Measurements of Sound Speed and Density of Live Zooplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9730680

Award Number: 9730680
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180254             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dezhang Chu dchu@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter H. Wiebe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Applications of acoustic techniques to marine biological surveys provide a
              more efficient way to map the spatial distribution, abundance and temporal
              variation of marine organisms in the ocean compared with traditional sampling
              techniques involving pumps and nets.  Since acoustical methods are remote
              sensing techniques, they are only indirect measurements.  In order to correctly
              infer useful biological information from raw acoustic data, reliable, robust,
              and accurate acoustic models are required.  To date, various acoustical models
              have been developed and much progress has been made both in laboratory
              experiments and field applications.   To accurately interpret acoustic data, no
              matter what model is chosen and whether the model is simple or sophisticated,
              one needs to select appropriate acoustic properties of the biological
              scatterers, such as sound speed and density contrasts ( and ).  We have found
              that even using the same model, the target strength or volume scattering
              strength can vary as much as 6 dB or a 2 fold bias for a 2% variation in sound
              speed and density contrasts.  Differences in target strength predictions due to
              biases of sound speed contrast,  , and/or density contrast,  , could be as
              large as or greater than those due to the choices of different acoustic models.
               In addition, variations in   and   result in not only different scattering
              levels, but also different scattering patterns as a function of frequency and
              orientation angle.  We propose to develop a reliable and robust method to
              conduct in situ measurements of acoustic properties co-registered with the
              acoustic data, i.e., to provide time varying   and   corresponding to the
              actual positions of the animal where the acoustic data are collected.  A
              laboratory version of an in situ measuring system, Acoustic Properties Of
              Plankton (APOP), will be developed and evaluated.  The proposed method involves
              measurement of the backscattering from a water-zooplankton mixture.  By using a
              broadband backscattering acoustical setup, the frequency response due to the
              acoustical interferences from two interfaces bounding the mixture layer is
              directly related to the effective sound speed and density contrasts (  and  )
              in the mixture.  With the assistant of conductivity measurement which provides
              volume fraction of the zooplankton and the use of the theory of `effective
              medium`, the sound speed and density contrasts (  and  ) in the zooplankton can
              be inferred.   The proposed research is divided into two phases:  (1) initial
              laboratory development of the measuring system and preliminary system
              performance evaluation, and (2) more extensive laboratory measurements using a
              variety of different zooplankton species to test the robustness and consistency
              of the system performance, and some refinement of the system.  The effort of
              phase two is very important and necessary to achieve a much smoother transition
              from the laboratory version to the one that will be used for the actual field
              applications.  Throughout the proposed experiments, error analysis will be
              conducted to guide the experiments.  In addition, the concept of the `effective
              medium` based on different theoretical considerations will be examined
              thoroughly.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
