Title       : Rational and Semi-Rational Learning-Theory and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9730385

Award Number: 9730385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $268816             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alvaro Sandroni   (Principal Investigator current)
              Rann Smorodinsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ***    9730385  Alvaro Sandroni  Rann Smorodinsky    The objective of this
              project is to model learning in situations of repeated interactions among
              agents. The research looks at very general games, as well as concrete
              situations such as games of common interest (e.g., partners in a firm) and
              financial markets. The common thread underlying all of our models is the
              subjective approach. Namely, agents' are endowed with a belief over the
              evolution of the economy which may not coincide with the truth.     In the
              first part we focus on a single, fully rational, agent. We study necessary and
              sufficient conditions for agents to learn, and the rate at which they learn. In
              the second part we extend the one agent model to a repeated game set-up. We
              study necessary and sufficient conditions for convergence to equilibrium (Nash
              equilibrium and its refinements.) We also show how fast equilibrium is
              obtained.     Another research direction, using this subjective framework, is
              the consequences of plausible restrictions on players' beliefs. Preliminary
              results suggest that in repeated coordination games, the unique efficient
              allocation is obtained if agents believe (possibly incorrectly) that they can
              influence their opponents behavior in a particular way (which we will refer to
              as ``positive influence.'')     The third part applies the techniques developed
              in the previous parts to financial markets. The novelty is that we do not
              impose any conditions on agents' beliefs. We show that the compatibility
              conditions exogenously imposed in the game theoretic set-up must be satisfied
              in financial markets, otherwise an arbitrage opportunity exists. From this we
              can conclude that if agents are subjectively optimizing and if markets clear
              then convergence to a rational expectations equilibrium (i.e., an ``objective''
              equilibrium where agents' beliefs are correct) will eventually be obtained.    
              We also study the relation between forecast accuracy and wealth accumulation.
              In the literature it is shown that if savings ar e exogenous then agents making
              accurate forecasts may accumulate less wealth than agents with systematically
              incorrect beliefs. We show that, once savings are determined endogenously,
              agents who make inaccurate predictions are driven out of the market.     The
              last part departs from the fully rational approach. We study models of
              learning, which we refer to as semi-rational. The motivation for this part is
              to close the gap in the literature between rational learning and adaptive
              learning. We relax extreme assumptions implied by full rationality on the one
              hand and myopic ad-hoc models on the other hand.    ***
