Title       : Experimental Investigations of Laboratory Markets Under Conditions of
               Substantially Increased Time Frame, Scope and Scale
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  1999     
File        : a9730176

Award Number: 9730176
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles R. Plott cplott@hss.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1338,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730176  Plott    This project explores the properties of experimental markets
              that operate on a time frame, scope and scale substantially beyond market
              systems that have been studied to date.  Advances in technology, coupled with
              significant scientific progress, have made possible the implementation and
              control of laboratory experiments that could not be imagined a few years ago. 
              The number of markets will be increased from the two or three market maximum,
              typical of current studies, to dozens of markets.  The time devoted to an
              experiment will be increased from two or three hours to days and possibly
              weeks.  The number of subjects will be increased from the dozen or so typical
              of current laboratory experiments to several hundred.  The purposed research
              removes constraints, opens new economic phenomena for study by laboratory
              experimental methods, develops new methodology and enhances the relevance of
              laboratory experimental results for applied purposes.    The first phase of
              research involves the creation of large scale/scope experiments that
              incorporate critical aspects of well researched, small scale experiments. 
              While the purposed large scale experiments are substantially new, the links to
              previous work will make them "anchors" than can be used for orientation in a
              variety of different experiments in large environments.  This phase
              concentrates on three areas of laboratory experimentation of interest in their
              own right: single market equilibration, information aggregation and multiple
              market (general equilibrium) systems.  The second phase depends importantly on
              the first phase.  Completely new research topics and variables will be
              addressed, once some of the possible influences of limited time, scope and
              scale are better understood and the anchor experiments have been established. 
              Both classical theory and applied theory involve the interaction of multiple
              markets, interdependencies and multiple organizations.  However,
              experimentation on such topics has been limited because appropriate 
              environments could not have been created.  This next phase creates them.  Some
              of the specific topics to be explored are: multiple moneys and general
              equilibrium; price controls; information aggregation; local non-convexities in
              general equilibrium experiments; networked systems and smart markets; and
              competing organizations.     ??
