Title       : The Media and African American Candidates: Defining and Tracing the Impact of
               Racialized Campaign Coverage
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9730457

Award Number: 9730457
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nayda R. Terkildsen nrterkildsen@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                In elections the media are typically believed to occupy a crucial position,
              influencing outcomes through the type and amount of coverage they assign to a
              given candidate or a specific political contest.  Armed with this knowledge,
              campaigns exert a great deal of time and effort trying to attract media
              attention.  For opponents of different races, media coverage plays a doubly
              important role--setting an election's racial tone.  However, whether or not the
              media diffuse or promote race in bi-racial contests is unclear.  The intent of
              this project is to explore media coverage of bi-racial congressional elections
              to determine which actors perpetuate or suppress candidate race and why. 
              Broadly, this work answers two inter-related questions:  1)  to what extent do
              the media define African American candidates by their race, covering minority
              candidates differently from white candidates?   2)  if race is a salient
              dimension in media coverage of black candidates, is the press solely
              responsible for injecting race into the campaign, or does the media merely
              reflect the racial manipulation of others?  The researcher will undertake
              content analysis of print and television coverage in bi-racial campaigns.  Data
              to be collected include public campaign communiqu?s (e.g., advertising, press
              releases, direct mailings, transcripts of candidate speeches), poll data where
              available and accessible, and immediate post-election interviews with
              candidates, their campaign staffs, and reporters who covered the congressional
              races included in the sample.  A thorough examination of how campaigns are
              racialized by the media and other electoral players will enhance our
              understanding about elections and the electability of African American
              candidates, as well as advance our knowledge about the campaign power of the
              media.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                   
