Title       : Assessing-to-Learn: Formative Assessment Materials for High School Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  2003      
File        : a9730438

Award Number: 9730438
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerhard L. Salinger                     
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1002162            (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Gerace wjgerace@physics.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jose P. Mestre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Dufresne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Leonard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 7355      INSTRUCTIONAL MATERIALS DEVELP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9730438  Gerace    Assessing to Learn is a technology-based assessment system
              for high school physics that integrates formative assessment and instruction. 
              The assessment items are consistent with constructivist and active learning
              pedagogies; they take account of research into physics education including the
              elucidation of student preconceptions.  Students evaluate their own learning
              and teachers are guided to tailor instruction to meet student needs.  The
              Classtalk system, a classroom software tool, provides an integrated package
              that allows presentation of the items for class discussion, collection and
              storage of individual student responses and a display of total class responses.
               The combination of sound assessment and immediate feedback results in teachers
              changing practice to adopt a more responsive instructional style and matching
              the assessment to the goals of physics education - understanding of physics
              concepts and the process of inquiry, and application of those concepts to
              engage in problem solving.  The assessment items cover mechanics, electric and
              magnetic fields, circuits, waves, optics, and modern physics.  The project is a
              collaboration of the PIs, teachers from high schools, Better Education, Inc.
              and Texas Instruments.  Products include the assessment items and accompanying
              teacher aids that identify the reasons for common student responses and give
              guidance on follow-up activities and discussion.  The extensive evaluation
              provides information on student achievement, change in teacher practice and on
              the development process.
