Title       : Berkeley Symposium Economics, Statistics, and Computation for 1998, 1999, 2000
               in Berkeley, California
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9730461

Award Number: 9730461
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224980             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel L. McFadden mcfadden@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Ruud  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. Powell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter J. Bickel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730461  McFadden    As computational capacity has grown dramatically in recent
              decades, there has been a corresponding explosion in computational activity and
              research aimed at improving statistical inferences.  Because this activity is
              widespread and diverse, new computational methods often permeate slowly among
              applied researchers and into instructional courses.  The renewal for the
              Berkeley Symposium on Economics, Statistics, and Computation will provide a
              focal point for the dissemination of research, interaction between researchers
              in statistics and econometrics, demonstration of software, and instruction of
              graduate students.  The intensive use of computation in solving statistical and
              econometric problems promises to yield solutions to otherwise intractable
              problems.  In statistics, for example, bootstrap and related sampling
              techniques provide a general method for accurately approximating the sampling
              distribution of estimators and test statistics.  In econometrics, simulation
              methods are used to cover come the intractability of such complex models as
              high-dimensional  multinominal choice.  These are two of many examples.  Robust
              inference methods, graphical methods, Bayesian analyses, nonlinear time series
              models and semi- and non-parametric methods also draw heavily on new
              computational approaches.    This project continues a program of annual
              symposia begun in 1993 with a combination of instructional surveys and research
              presentations, and a mix of junior and senior scholars.  This grant supports
              symposia in each of the years 1998, 1999, and 2000.  Each symposium will be
              about five days in length, and will be held in facilities at the Econometrics
              Laboratory and the Department of Economics at the University of California at
              Berkeley.  The tentative topics are: Nonlinear & Non-Stationary Time Series
              Models; Statistical Software: Architecture, Languages, Algorithms; and Bayesian
              and Classical Econometrics: Computational Considerations.  A secondary, but
              substantial, administrative task  would be installation and testing of software
              provided by conference participants, and supervision of the documentation and
              release of this software through the Econometrics Laboratory Software Archives.
                         ??
