Title       : Modelling Repeated Categorical Responses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9730136

Award Number: 9730136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162689             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan Agresti aa@stat.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Variables in social science studies often are measured on categorical scales. 
              Many studies have multiple response variables in the form of repeated
              measurement of the same or similar variables.  One example is in longitudinal
              studies, which measure a response variable repeatedly over time.  Another is
              the measurement of various facets of an opinion or attitude in a battery of
              related questions, such as in the annual General Social Survey.  This research
              deals with the development of statistical methods for modeling and analyzing
              repeated categorical responses.  The investigator will develop and apply
              generalized linear mixed models for binary, multiple-category, and count data. 
              Mixed models extend ordinary linear models by adding random effects, which are
              unobserved terms that can account for subject heterogeneity, sample clustering,
              omitted explanatory variables, or measurement error.  Random effect terms
              provide a mechanism for explaining the correlations typically observed among
              the repeated responses.  This research will deal both with technical aspects of
              model-fitting and with formulating and interpreting new models for a variety of
              social science problems.  An important application is the modeling of responses
              to similar items in a survey having the same categorical scale, both in terms
              of comparing responses to the items for different groups of interest and
              modeling how each response depends on a set of covariates.  Another potential
              application is accounting for subject heterogeneity in estimating population
              size in census work using capture-recapture experiments.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
