Title       : A Political Economy Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 2,  2000       
File        : a9730483

Award Number: 9730483
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $346489             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael P. Keane   (Principal Investigator current)
              Antonio Merlo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental question in political economy is: What are the returns to an
              individual from a career in politics? The main goal of this project is to
              provide at least a partial answer to this fundamental question. To achieve this
              goal, a dynamic model of career decisions of a member of the U.S. Congress is
              developed and this model is estimated using a new data set that is being
              collected.  The study of Congressional careers has a long tradition in American
              politics. However, existing empirical studies of Congressional careers suffer
              from two main limitations. First, they estimate static models using pooled time
              series data from the post war U.S. House of Representatives. Second, they
              ignore the possibility that representatives may decide to leave Congress to
              pursue alternative professional careers. This research will overcome both these
              limitations and will provide a new framework for the empirical analysis of
              Congressional careers. A key innovation of this framework is that the potential
              career opportunities of politicians outside Congress is modeled explicitly. In
              particular, it is assumed that when a politician exits from Congress, he or she
              can choose among a set of employment options, and the wage the politician would
              receive in each of these options is a function of the politician's age,
              education, congressional experience , and whether exit is voluntary or a
              consequence of an electoral defeat. In addition, it is assumed that politicians
              differ with respect to their ability, which together with their other
              characteristics affect both their probability of winning an election and their
              post congressional payoffs.  To estimate the model a new data set which is
              being collected. This data set contains detailed information on complete career
              histories of approximately 2,000 House and Senate members from the 80th to the
              103rd Congress (1947 1994). A novel feature of this data set is that it
              incorporates information about post congressional employment of former members
              of Congress and their salaries in these occupations. This crucial piece of
              information is used to  estimate the value of a Congressional career. This
              framework is also  used to sort out the relative importance of two key factors
              that may induce people to pursue a political career: the utility politicians
              derive from being in office and the monetary returns to a career in Congress.
              Finally, the model is used to evaluate the effects of various policy
              experiments on the value of a Congressional seat and on the career decisions of
              politicians. Such policies include the introduction of term limits, changes in
              the pension regime, changes in the wages in Congress, changes in the seniority
              rule for committee appointments, etc.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                          
