Title       : Dynamic Factors and Robust Economic Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2000       
File        : a9730489

Award Number: 9730489
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $426234             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Stock james_stock@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730489  Stock    This project pursues a research program to develop new methods
              for forecasting economic time series and to apply these methods to U.S.
              macroeconomic data.  The research program is based on four premises.  First,
              data availability has increased dramatically over the past decade; now
              literally thousands of series are available for real time forecasting
              applications.  Yet, the small and , arguably, highly structured large models
              that dominate economic forecasting fail to exploit this vast array of data. 
              Second, recent empirical studies using formal statistical tests confirm
              conventional wisdom that many economic time series relations are unstable over
              time.  This is an obstacle to many standard forecasting methods, but it also
              presents an opportunity: properly accounting for this time variation would
              improve economic forecasts.  Third, recent algorithmic and computational
              advances permit the development of robust forecasting methods based on
              nonGaussian filtering that can accommodate a wider range of time variation in
              parameters than conventional linear or state space models.  Fourth, economic
              forecasting is an important practical contribution to the economics profession
              to society, and as such improved methods for economic forecasting constitute a
              valid end in themselves.  This said, experience over the past several decades
              has shown that the tools and results of economic forecasting have had
              significant positive spillovers into applied and theoretical macroeconomics.   
              This project consists oaf two main projects.  The first is to use the tools of
              modern time series analysis to reexamine the construction of diffusion indexes
              and their use for forecasting.  In traditional business cycle analysis, a
              diffusion index is a measure of the extent to which an expansion or recession
              has spread across sectors or regions of the economy.  Because they are based on
              many series, these indexes hold out the possibility of providing useful
              information for forecasting that is not contained in th e main macroeconomic
              aggregates that dominate modern academic investigations of economic
              forecasting.  They approach developed in this project is to use a dynamic
              factor model to define diffusion indexes.  Preliminary results indicate that,
              with sufficiently many series, these indexes can be estimated precisely even in
              the presence of time varying parameters.  Promising results are reported here
              for an initial forecasting experiment, in which factors extracted from 183
              macroeconomic time series are used to forecast four main economic aggregates.  
               The second main project on robust forecasting seeks to develop and to
              implement forecasting procedures that are robust to out-of-sample changes in
              the process followed by the series and/or to in-sample mispecification.  The
              effort draws on large literatures on robust signal extraction and on
              nonGaussian filtering.  Evidence is presented that these and new, related tools
              have the potential to result in significant improvements in macroeconomic
              forecasts relative to linear models with conventional Gaussian time varying
              parameter uncertainty.                ??
