Title       : A Research Program for Autoadaptive Media in Complex Engineering Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9730211

Award Number: 9730211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54690              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mete A. Sozen sozen@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Frosch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      1063 Hovde Hall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1038,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project is for organizing two workshops to study the  potential of
              autoadaptive media in civil engineering and to  define targets and types of
              needed university-based, cross  disciplinary research for broad applications in
              civil  infrastructures. Autoadaptive media are materials, mechanisms,  devices,
              and structures that can modify, monitor, or control  their own characteristics
              to respond appropriately to external  stimuli. The slow adoption of
              autoadaptive media by civil  engineering is attributed mainly to three
              perceptions; lack of  relevant information, concern about maintenance of the
              materials  and devices in the field, and cost of materials. A directed 
              research initiative will help alleviate and possibly even  eliminate the first
              two perceptions and will exploit the vast  potential of these media fully. A
              research initiative targeting  the civil engineering uses of autoadaptive
              materials is desirable  because (1) in relation to consideration of `added
              value` to the  knowledge base it will have a substantial impact, (2) to leave
              it  to serendipitous development is to delay any possibly  application, and (3)
              even if the current prognostications are  negative, it is a strategic mistake
              not to explore an opportunity  that may revolutionize many segments of civil
              engineering. The  project activity will explore the potential of autoadaptive
              media  for civil engineering applications and to develop a program of 
              appropriate actions. It is predicated on the belief that the  knowledge base
              already developed by material scientists and  control engineers must be tapped
              and redirected by engineers  intimately familiar with the demands of
              civil-engineering  application.                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                           
