Title       : The Invertebrate 2Na+/1H+ Antiporter: Physiology, MolecularBiology, and Role in
               Heavy Metal Sequestration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1999    
File        : a9730874

Award Number: 9730874
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory A. Ahearn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9730874  Ahearn  The proposed investigation is a request for funds to continue
              to study ion transport mechanisms of crustacean hepatopancreatic epithelial
              cells.  The previous studies identified an apparently unique invertebrate
              cation exchanger on the epithelial brush border membranes of gastrointestinal
              epithelial cells from arthropods and echinoderms which was amiloride-sensitive,
              electrogenic and exchanged either 2 Na+ or 1Ca2+ for 1 H+.  This transporter
              was shown to be involved in a number of biological activities of the crustacean
              hepatopancreas that included 1) transepithelial cation transport, 2) proton
              secretion, 3) intracellular calcium storage during the molt cycle, and 4) heavy
              metal detoxification.  This transport system was one of three apical proteins
              involved in the influx of luminal calcium from food and appears to be
              responsible for the uptake of potentially toxic heavy metals as well.  The
              electrogenic, brush border 2Na+/1H+ exchanger works in conjunction with an
              electroneutral, basolateral 1Na+/1H+ exchanger to monitor intracellular pH and
              sodium concentration.  In the proposed continuation of this project we would
              like to use a combination of membrane vesicle techniques and molecular biology
              to further characterize the function roles that the 2Na+/1H+ and 1Na+/1H+
              antiporters have in crustacean hepatopancreatic biology and to determine the
              gene nucleotide sequences of these two invertebrate exchangers.  Dr. Ahearn
              will undertake three different lines of research over the next grant cycle to
              attain these goals: 1) The investigation of cellular regulatory mechanisms
              controlling the functions of each transporter for comparison with what is
              currently known about Na+/H+ exchangers of mammals; 2) The application of PCR
              and expression cloning techniques to determine both gene sequences; and 3) The
              continued investigation of the transport processes for divalent cations by this
              organ system by describing the mechanisms for heavy metal uptake across the
              brush border and basolateral m embranes and how these cations are sequestered
              in mitochondria and lysosomes as part of a detoxification process common to
              many invertebrates.  From these physiological and molecular studies, the PI
              should be able to clarify the functional role(s) of these antiporters in ion
              transport regulation and sequestration and compare their gene sequences with
              those of the analogous mammalian Na+/H+ antiporter isoforms.
