Title       : Life-Cycle Choices and the Evolution of Youth Labor Markets
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2003      
File        : a9730657

Award Number: 9730657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239754             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen V. Cameron   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Tracy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to empirically examine how changes in labor markets
              for young workers have affected their marriage, fertility, and housing
              decisions. The 1980s and 1990s have witnessed significant changes in the age of
              first marriage and the percentage of young households that own a house.
              Understanding these developments requires an understanding of how career
              developments for young individuals affect these other significant life
              decisions. There is a growing literature which documents that the 1980s
              involved a dramatic increase in income inequality in the United States.   It is
              argued that declining real income prospects for workers at the outset of their
              careers do not appear to fully explain the new trends in marriage, fertility,
              and housing decisions. For example, using Census of Population data it is shown
              that the declines in home ownership for young men between 1980 and 1990
              occurred across the income and education spectrum. To reconcile this,  other
              broad changes in labor market outcomes are examined. This research will add to
              the emerging literature which argues that earnings variability increased in the
              1980s. The trends in earnings variability are documented and analyzed using
              panel data from the National Longitudinal Surveys and matched Current
              Population Surveys.  The recent investment literature emphasizes the importance
              of the option value of delay for investments that involve irreversibilities and
              must be made in an uncertain economic environment. A general prediction is that
              the option value of delay increases with the degree of uncertainty regarding
              the costs/payoffs from the investment. These option based models apply equally
              to an individual's decisions regarding marriage, fertility, and housing. All of
              these decisions involve significant transactions costs and other forms of
              irreversibilities. Increasing variability of labor market earnings increase the
              option value of delaying these decisions. To date, little empirical work has
              been carried out to test this prediction. This project will take an important
              step in the direction of filling in this gap.  The research  will also
              significantly advance the general statistical modeling used to study housing
              tenure decisions. Most of the existing empirical literature on housing tenure
              decisions is estimated with cross sectional data. It is argued that using panel
              data and transition models provides a much tighter integration between economic
              theory and measurement. These models can be simulated to provide meaningful
              estimates of the stock of homeowners at any given age. It is shown that for
              variables such as the user cost of housing which vary considerably over time,
              the traditional estimation methods lead to significantly biased inferences. It
              is also shown how the econometric framework can be extended to handle multiple
              housing transitions, and allowing household formation, marriage, and fertility
              decisions to be endogenous.                                          u»        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                               
