Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Solid Waste Management (Recycling of Rubber
               Waste)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 5,  2001   
File        : a9730759

Award Number: 9730759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Ann Aglan triinc@bellsouth.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Technology Resources Incor
	      P.O. Box 69
	      Auburn, AL  368310069    /   -

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Laurand
              Lewandoski, President of Lewandoski Consulting Group in Colorado Springs,  and
              Dr. Abbas A. Yehia, of the National Research Center in Cairo, Egypt.  The two
              scientists plan to examine and test novel ideas to recycle rubber waste.  They
              plan to convert scrap rubber into powder; convert the powder into thermoplastic
              material; apply surface modification techniques by creating functional groups
              on the surface of the powder to be used as ion exchange resin; and by testing
              the properties of the produced material, for use as a component of road
              pavement.  Scope:  The US scientist is an experienced researcher in the
              polymers and rubber industry, and also in environmental research.  The Egyptian
              scientist is a senior researcher in the Chemical Industries Research Division
              of the NRC, and has experience in chemical processing and testing.  Also to be
              involved in the project is MARSO CHEMICALS, a chemical company in Egypt that
              has the facility and capability to carry out work not easily possible in the
              NRC.  This proposal meets INT objective of supporting US-foreign collaboration
              in areas of mutual benefit.  The project was generated as a result of a
              workshop on environmentally clean technologies that was organized, in 1996, by
              the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the Egyptian Government.  EPA was
              involved in the evaluation of the project and in recommending its support. 
              This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program,
              administered by the US Department of State, which provides grants to scientists
              and engineers in both countries to carry out cooperative activities.           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                     
