Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Development and Evaluation of Various Novel
               Probes to Detect Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9730758

Award Number: 9730758
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4403               (Estimated)
Investigator: Said A. Goueli   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Promega Corporation
	      2800 Woods Hollow Road
	      Madison, WI  537115300    608/274-4330

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5944,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Said A.
              Goueli, Team leader of Technology Development at Promega Corporation, in
              Madison, Wisconsin, and Dr. Mostafa Kamel El Awady, Chairman, Dept. of Human
              Genetics at the National Research Center (NRC) in Cairo, Egypt, and Acting
              Director of the Medical Biotechnology Program at the Genetic Engineering and
              Biotechnology research Institute, Mubarak City, Alexandria, Egypt.  The two
              scientists plan to synthesize distinct peptides, and generate antigen-specific
              polyclonal antibodies that are useful in detecting the presence of virus in
              Hepatitis C Virus (HCV)-infected population using ELISA-based system.  The
              system to be developed will be less sensitive to variations in hygienic
              conditions and fluctuations in handling procedures, and thus more useful in the
              environment in less developed countries.  The specific aims in this project are
              : develop in-house an ELISA-based assay to screen the general HCV-infected
              population.  This is to be validated against reference kits commercially
              available and against the performance of kits base on RT-PCR technology; and
              develop in-house RT-PCR kit for subtyping the general HCV-infected population,
              and validating the results against reference kits.    Scope:  This project will
              involve two laboratories with complementary capabilities to conduct research in
              an important field for both countries.  Most of the research work will be
              conducted by Dr. El Awady's team, with US participation through a visit by Dr.
              Goueli to Egypt, and visits by the Egyptian scientist to  Goueli's laboratory
              in Wisconsin.  This proposal meets INT objective of supporting US-foreign
              collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  The project was generated as a
              result of a workshop on biotechnology organized by the National Institutes of
              Health (NIH) and the Egyptian Government.  NIH was involved in the evaluation
              of the project and in recommending its support.  This project is being
              supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered by the US
              Department of State, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out cooperative activities.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
