Title       : A Two-Photon Imaging System for Biological Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9730059

Award Number: 9730059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mary Jane Saunders                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Nathanson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ira S. Mellman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pietro DeCamilli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
Program Ref : 1189,9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT    9730059  Michael Nathanson  Yale
              University  A Two-Photon Imaging System for Biological Research and  Education 
                This proposal will fund the purchase of a two-photon  excitation imaging
              system for the Center for Cell Imaging at  Yale University School of Medicine. 
              Specifically, the  Center's confocal microscope will be upgraded to have two- 
              photon capability.  Two photon laser excitation imaging has  several properties
              that make it unique, even relative to  point scanning confocal imaging.  Two
              photon imaging permits  more highly localized excitation of fluorophores,
              excitation  of dyes that excite at lower wavelengths, much deeper sample 
              penetration, less photobleaching, and less cytotoxicity than  conventional
              confocal microscopy.  These features improve  spatial resolution, especially in
              thicker tissue  preparations such as intact organs, and make it possible for 
              the first time to photolyse caged compounds or photobleach  dyes in highly
              localized, submicron-sized intracellular  regions.  No two-photon imaging
              system is currently  available at the School of Medicine, although a number of 
              investigators require this technology to advance their  research efforts.  The
              range of projects that will make  immediate use of this technology include
              flash photolysis of  caged second messengers to examine regulation of Cai2+ 
              signals at the subcellular level, photolysis of caged  oligonucleotides to
              perform in situ PCR at the single cell  level, immunochemistry of intact
              embryos and larvae,  examination of acid production in intact gastric glands, 
              examination of intercellular Cai2+ waves in intact, perfused  livers, and
              distribution and trafficking of GFP-labeled  proteins in tissues (including
              brain slices) and in whole  brains of transgenic animals.  In addition, the
              Center for  Cell Imaging is the only such imaging resource available to  all
              investigators at the School of Medicine.  Therefore, the  acquisition of the
              two-photon imaging system by the Center   will insure that any investigator at
              the school will have  access to this technology now and in the future.
