Title       : Encouraging the Use of Risk Concepts in Performance-Based Building and Fire
               Regulation Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1999     
File        : a9730783

Award Number: 9730783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149733             (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger E. Kasperson rkaspers@black.clarku.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Meacham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clark University
	      950 Main Street
	      Worcester, MA  016101400    508/793-7765

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1041,CVIS,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The intent of current building and fire regulations used in the United States is
              to provide an acceptable level of safety, health, and welfare during the
              design, construction and use of buildings.  However, the current regulations,
              with their hundreds of pages of prescribed measures, do not provide explicit
              indications of the level of safety they are intended to achieve. To address
              this concern, specific goals and objectives, reflecting acceptable levels of
              safety, could be incorporated into the regulations.  Furthermore, as building
              and fire regulations are intended to satisfy the public mandate for managing
              risks, these goals and objectives should ideally be based on the level(s) of
              risk acceptable or tolerable to society.  To address these concerns, a
              mechanism is needed to obtain a better understanding of the risks to people and
              property from fire and natural hazards, and to better address the risks within
              the building regulatory system.  The objective of this Joint NSF / Private
              Sector Initiative effort is to outline a process for developers of building and
              fire regulations that will aid in the identification, characterization, and
              incorporation of risk concepts and analysis methods into building and fire
              regulations.  In meeting this objective, this effort will review the use of
              risk concepts over a broad range of regulations, review various approaches to
              identifying and characterizing risk problems, identify fire risk issues in
              building and fire codes, and outline a process for identifying, characterizing,
              and incorporating risk concepts and analysis methods into performance-based
              building and fire code development.  This research will improve the
              understanding of risks and associated costs from fire and natural hazards,
              address the impact of uncertainty on the development and use of risk-based
              building and fire regulations (with a focus in the areas of application of new
              technologies and indeterminate uncertainty related to future human actions),
              assist codes and standards developers view, understand, and address building
              and fire regulation development as risk issues, and provide a basis for further
              development of risk- and reliability-based analysis and design tools for
              building and fire safety design.    The information, examples, and
              decision-making process that will result from this effort will be a valuable
              addition to the area of risk-based decision making.  Furthermore, by focusing
              on risk issues in building and fire regulation development, the private sector
              partners from the building and fire communities will be provided with a tool to
              help them better assess and address the technical risks from fire and natural
              hazards, to better understand values issues associated with risk decisions,
              such as risk perception and cost-benefit implications, and to better
              incorporate these concepts into the regulatory development process. 
              Ultimately, the product of this effort will encourage changes to the building
              and fire regulations that will better address the risks to people and property
              from fire and natural hazards, resulting in safer buildings and fewer losses
              from fire and natural hazards.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
