Title       : Inequality, Democracy and Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9730029

Award Number: 9730029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57617              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Raffalovich l.raffalovich@albany.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lawrence E. Raffalovich  The proposed research investigates the relationship
              between income inequality, economic development, and political democracy. It
              will focus on a crucial but neglected topic in stratification theory: the power
              of a small elite to appropriate a disproportionate share of society's surplus.
              A primary objective is to specify the structural sources and social
              consequences of this power. Time series analyses will permit the examination of
              models that incorporate both over-time change and cross-national differences in
              inequality. These models also can estimate the extent to which short-term
              power--such as the power to appropriate the immediate benefits of economic
              growth--is conditioned by the institutional structure of society, such as the
              extent of political democracy. This will help illuminate the apparent
              contradiction in prior research between longitudinal and cross-national
              findings. The proposed research will contribute to theory and research in
              social stratification, the sociology of development, and quantitative research
              methods. In addition, by examining both cross-national and longitudinal
              variation in inequality, the proposed research will contribute to a more
              comprehensive understanding of the short-run and long-run processes that
              produce observed patterns of inequality in society.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
