Title       : Organometallic Radical Chemistry; Cage Effects and Reactivity in Aqueous
               Solution
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1998     
File        : a9730436

Award Number: 9730436
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $341000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Tyler dtyler@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9183,BIOT,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              In this project, which is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and  
              Organometallic Chemistry Program, Dr. David R. Tyler of the Department of  
              Chemistry, University of Oregon, will continue his studies on   organometallic
              radical reactivity.  The first part of the project   involves using
              time-resolved pump/probe spectroscopy and `slow` kinetic   methods to measure
              the cage effect for a series of photochemically and   thermally generated
              organometallic radicals, including substituted   cyclopentadienyl compounds of
              Mo, titanocenes, and cobaloximes.  The cage   effect refers to the phenomenon
              that the probability of combination of a   radical pair is greater in solution
              than in the gas phase.  Cage effects   are necessary to explain kinetic
              observations and fundamental reaction   phenomena for chemical reactivity in
              solution in all areas of chemistry   and biochemistry.  Experiments will probe
              the effect of radical size,   shape, and mass on the cage effect.  The concepts
              of `microscopic   inertia` and solvent `microviscosity` will be probed as they
              relate to   the cage effect.  Radicals with long chains will also be examined
              as   these are directly relevant to polymer and bio-chemistry.  The goal of  
              this research is to acquire a predictive understanding of the cage   effect. 
              The second part of this project will focus on studies of the   reactivity of
              water soluble organometallic radical species in aqueous   solution. 
              Substitution reactions of photochemically and   electrochemically generated
              17-electron species will be studied, as will   oxidatively-induced migratory
              insertion reactions.  The kinetics and   activation parameters of these
              reactions will be determined by infrared   spectroscopy and chronocoulometry
              experiments, with the goal of   determining reaction mechanisms. 
              Electron-transfer-chain reactions   catalyzed by organometallic radicals will
              also be studied with an   emphasis on determining the differences in radical
              reactivity between   aqueous and nonaqueous solutions.  Several new water
              soluble phosphine   ligands will also be synthesized and tested in biphasic
              hydroformylation   and hydrogenation catalysis experiments using Rh complexes. 
                This project will provide useful and fundamentally important information   on
              the nature of reactions in solution that involve radicals, reactive   chemical
              compounds with an odd number of electrons.  Radical reactions   are ubiquitous
              in chemistry and biochemistry and include polymerization   reactions (plastics
              and fibers) and life sustaining enzyme reactions.    Results of the work with
              water soluble organometallic catalysts will be   fundamental and practical. 
              Most chemicals produced in industry involve   catalysis and many processes use
              volatile and toxic organic solvents.    There are compelling environmental
              reasons to develop catalysts that can   use water as a solvent.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
