Title       : The Impact of Damage Caps on Civil Litigation: Experimental and Field Analyses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  1998       
File        : a9730348

Award Number: 9730348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sandra L. Schneider                     
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Babcock 1b2k@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                A major issue in the current debate over litigation reform concerns whether to
              limit the amount a plaintiff can recover in a lawsuit.  Approximately thirty
              states now employ some type of `damage cap` that limits payments for pain and
              suffering, punitive damages, and other non-economic damages.  However, very
              little research has examined their effect on the litigation process.  This
              research uses experimental and field analysis and draws on the disciplines of
              economics, psychology, and law to explore the effects that damage caps have on
              the filing and settlement of lawsuits.    In the first stage of the research,
              we conduct three pre-trial bargaining experiments to explore the behavioral
              mechanisms by which damage caps affect the prospects for settlement. 
              Preliminary evidence suggests that when the damage cap is relatively low, it
              increases the likelihood of settlement.  However, a very high damage cap can
              actually reduce the prospects for settlement by providing plaintiffs with an
              upward `focal point`.  This implies that in a particular state, a cap statue
              will improve settlement rates for big cases and worsen them for small cases. 
              Further experimentation will explore the sensitivity of these findings with
              respect to the level of the cap and allow a description of the behavioral
              processes underlying settlement.  In the second stage of the research we
              collect extensive field data on the damage caps that are operable in the U.S.
              and estimate their impact on the number of claims filed and settled out-of-
              court.  This empirical work significantly expands on previous work that has
              been conducted.  First, the data collected covers a substantially longer time
              period than has been previously studied and it identifies the types of caps
              that are most effective.  Second, our analysis improves on previous research by
              comparing the pre- and post-cap filing and settlement of cases covered by the
              cap (the `treatment` group) to those not covered by the cap (the `control`
              group).    The combination of experimental and field methodologies provide a
              more complete understanding of the impact of damage caps on the litigation
              process.  The experimental analysis helps to understand the behavioral changes
              induced by a cap, examine their ensuing effect on settlement, and explore the
              sensitivity of the results to the level of the cap.  The field data analysis
              complements the experimental analysis by estimating the magnitude of the effect
              of caps and identifying the types of caps that are particularly influential. 
              Both analyses will inform the debate about the effect of damage caps and
              suggest how cap statutes can be designed to comport with policy goals.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
