Title       : Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1999      
File        : a9730276

Award Number: 9730276
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Pamela L. Stephens                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81937              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dan Lubin dlubin@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1527      LARGE-SCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9730276  Lubin     The Indian Ocean Experiment (INDOEX) is an international
              field experiment with participation from France, Germany, India, the
              Netherlands, and the United States.  The main effort under the U.S. component
              focuses on assessing the role of sulfates and other continental aerosols in
              global radiative forcing and is being supported jointly by the Department of
              Energy and the National Science Foundation.  In addition, complementary studies
              involving investigations of a variety of related chemical and radiative
              processes will be undertaken by scientists from other federal agencies and
              other international partners.  The composite observing system consists of a
              wide range of platforms, from ships to aircraft, as well as surface-based and
              balloon measuring systems, and satellite data.  The main part of the three year
              effort will be a four-month intensive field phase which begins January 1999.   
               The ultimate goal of this program is to obtain a better understanding of the
              decadal and longer time scale climate forcing.  The equatorial Indian Ocean
              during the northeast winter monsoon season provides a unique natural laboratory
              for this experiment.  The experimental area is probably the only place in the
              world where an air mass which has been modified by intense sources of
              continental aerosols, anthropogenic trace species, and their reaction products
              (e.g., sulfates and ozone) from the northern hemisphere comes into contact with
              the pristine air of the southern hemisphere, which has been transported via
              cross equatorial monsoonal flow, at the Intertropical Convergence Zone.   The
              juxtaposition of these two very distinct air masses will allow a thorough
              examination of both the direct and indirect effects of the aerosols on the
              radiative properties of the atmosphere.     Dr. Lubin's role in INDOEX is to
              supervise and carryout short-wave spectroradiometer experiments.  Dr. Lubin
              will oversee the deployment of a high resolution radiance-measuring instrument
              to the Maldives site during the 1999  intensive field phase.  This instrument
              will be equipped with radiometric calibration and a heliostat.  Dr. Lubin will
              also participate in the shipboard experiment, deploying and operating a suite
              of discrete-bandwidth Biospherical Instruments (Inc.) radiometers and a medium
              (2 nanometer) resolution spectroradiometer.  Dr. Lubin will analyze these data
              in the context of INDOEX objectives, utilizing ancillary field data and
              radiative transfer models at the Center for Clouds, Chemistry and Climate.
