Title       : The Non-Financial Consequences of Financial Relationships
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2002      
File        : a9730909

Award Number: 9730909
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190034             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil K. Kashyap anil.kashyap@gsb.uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This  research  analyzes a newly available database which provides information
              from 1982 to 1995 on the income statements and balance sheets of over 27,000
              Italian firms. This information can be linked to information on the firms'
              relationships with their banks-mainly how much is borrowed from different banks
              and an imprecise measure of how long the firm has borrowed from the bank. Data
              on the balance sheets of the banks and supervisory reports on the banks are
              also available. Consequently, this data base provides a much more comprehensive
              picture of bank firm relations than any other available source.  The major part
              of this project looks at the fallout from a banking crisis. This study
              documents what happens to an otherwise healthy firm when its main lender runs
              into trouble. These data will permit analyses of the substitution of other
              sources of financing; the employment, investment and sales adjustments
              undertaken by the firm; and the responses of the firm's competitors. Thus, it
              is possible to estimate a much more complete general-equilibrium impact of the
              shock than is typical in the literature on liquidity constraints.  A companion
              study  will analyze the role of financial factors in the propagation of
              idiosyncratic and industry level shocks. In this study, it is investigated
              whether firms' adjustment of employment and investment following these shocks
              relates to the structure of the firms' financing. The combination of the large
              sample size and detailed data on the ties between firms and banks will allow a
              significantly improvement on past estimates of the degree to which financial
              relationships shape a firm's response to financial distress.  Finally, the role
              of bank lending in the transmission of monetary policy is investigated. Whether
              the impact of monetary policy in Northern and Southern Italy is influenced by
              the differences in the banking markets is analyzed. One goal is to determine
              the extent to which lending smoothly flows across regions. Answering this
              question is important because an efficient adjustment to a common European
              monetary policy may depend on large credit flows across regions.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
