Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Studies on Air Quality Modeling and Its
               Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1999  
File        : a9730756

Award Number: 9730756
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $29241              (Estimated)
Investigator: Adel F. Hanna adel@mcnc.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Neil J. Wheeler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rohit Mathur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MCNC
	      P.O. Box 12889
	      Research Triangle Park, NC  277092889    919/248-1800

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0313010   Air Pollution                           
Program Ref : 5944,9188,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Adel F.
              Hanna, Chief Scientist, Environmental Programs, MCNC, North Carolina Super
              Computing Center,  and Dr. Magdy El Messiry, Vice Dean, Faculty of Engineering,
              Alexandria University, in Egypt.  The two scientists plan to address the use of
              advanced air quality modeling and analysis techniques.  Among the models to be
              used are: a mesoscale meteorology model, an emission model, and an atmospheric
              chemistry-transport model.  Two workshops are planned, one in the United States
              and one in Egypt.  The first will demonstrate and review state of the science
              modeling tools as discussed earlier.  In the second, the participants will
              establish the requirements, resources, and priorities that will facilitate the
              application of modeling systems in regulatory air quality management in Egypt. 
               The participants will include scientists and engineers from academic,
              government, and private sector organizations in Egypt, in addition to the US
              participants.  Scope:  The US team includes mathematical and environmental
              analysts, and computer modeling specialists, while the Egyptian side includes
              atmospheric scientists and industrial environmentalists.  The US team is
              expected to benefit from the testing of US-developed models and techniques in a
              new environmental setting.  The Egyptian side will learn new modeling
              techniques and become equipped and prepared to apply them to air pollution
              problems in that country.   This proposal meets INT objective of supporting
              US-foreign collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  The project was generated
              as a result of a workshop on environmentally clean manufacturing that was
              organized, in 1996, by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the
              Egyptian Government.  EPA was involved in the evaluation of the project and in
              recommending its support.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt
              Joint Fund Program, administered by the US Department of State, which provides
              grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out cooperative
              activities.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
