Title       : Empirical Studies of Self-Employment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9730355

Award Number: 9730355
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378974             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas Holtz-Eakin   (Principal Investigator current)
              Harvey S. Rosen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1092,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project involves empirical investigation of a number of issues pertaining
              to self-employment in three broad areas.  The first involves tax policy and
              small business. Taxes affect the entire life-cycle of an entrepreneurial
              venture: the initial choice to pursue self-employment, the entrepreneurial
              firm's mix of inputs, its growth over time, and whether and how it is
              transferred to new owners. How federal tax policy affects entrepreneurs'
              choices of labor and capital inputs is investigated, taking advantage of the
              changes induced by the Tax Reform Act of 1986. The next topic is taxes and
              transitions to self-employment; how do taxes affect the likelihood that an
              individual will become self-employed? The estate tax, an issue that has
              recently received a great deal of attention among small businesses, is also
              considered. Opponents of the estate tax claim that it forces liquidation of
              family businesses. To the extent that this claim is true, the desire to avoid
              such a forced sale may significantly distort business decisions. The impact of
              the estate tax on individually owned businesses is analyzed.  The second area
              of study involves risk and entrepreneurship. A basic fact about self-employment
              is that it is riskier than wage-earning. It is well documented that the
              earnings of the self-employed are highly variable, but the modern literature on
              consumption suggests that this is not the most meaningful measure of risk. This
              issue is analyzed within the framework of the theory of consumption risk.
              Another source of risk is change in regulatory circumstances, particularly
              environmental regulation. How the incidence of self-employment across states is
              affected by differences in environmental standards is also examined. Finally,
              the financing of small businesses is analyzed, with an emphasis on how the
              riskiness of an enterprise affects the way in which its financing is obtained. 
              The third area of study is the demographic aspects of self-employment. Here the
              focus is on how experience with self-employment affects the welfare of
              particular subgroups in the population like blacks, women, and the elderly.
              Particular interest is aimed at determining the extent to which experience with
              self employment affects earnings mobility. Is self-employment a sensible
              strategy for improving the economic circumstances of blacks and women? How
              family background affects one's propensity to become self-employed, and how the
              impacts of family background differ by race and gender is analyzed. In the
              context of older individuals' decisions, a particularly important issue is the
              effect of health insurance on the decision to make a transition to
              self-employment. Lastly, comparable data from the United States, Britain and
              Germany are used to examine the extent to which tendencies found in the U.S.
              data are also observed in other countries.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
