Title       : Structural Empirical Research on Temporal and Geographic Variations in Economic
               Activity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a9730341

Award Number: 9730341
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66734              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert E. Hall hall@hoover.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730341  Hall    This project studies the economic forces that lead to
              variations in the intensity of economic activity over time and across space
              and, more specifically, recessions.  The research provides the first integrated
              and systematic study of the two most conspicuous features of a recession -
              large increases in the number of workers seeking new jobs and the release of
              inventories into the product market.  Recessions are times when there are sharp
              increases in the number of plants and other productive units shut down.  Two
              basic forces lead to these shutdowns.  One is an increase in the discount rate
              applied by firms in making decisions about the continuation of marginal
              productive units.  A higher discount rate causes firms to choose immediate
              liquidation over a future stream of profits.  Measures of internal discount
              rates are highly successful predictors of job destruction and inventory
              liquidation.  The second force is profit.  When the profitability of future
              operation of a plant falls, either because its product price falls or because
              costs increase, shutdown is more likely.  Again, industry-level profit measures
              are successful predictors of job destruction.   This work is extended
              theoretically and empirically.  It becomes the basis for studying important
              outstanding questions in the analysis of business cycles such as: what are the
              shocks that trigger recessions?  What are the mechanisms that amplify and
              propagate them?    The project also continues work from the previous NSF grant
              on geographic variations in activity.  The investigator's work on differences
              in output per work across countries has demonstrated the importance of social
              institutions and infrastructure.  Favorable laws and government performance
              lead to vastly higher levels of output.  These factors operate through the
              accumulation of human capital, physical capital, and productivity.    ??
