Title       : High Field ESR Studies of Fulleride Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2000     
File        : a9730298

Award Number: 9730298
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Fischer fischer@sol1.lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andras Janossy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5916,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9730298  Fischer    This   interdisciplinary  experimental   research   project,
               involving  a  major  collaborator in Budapest,  Hungary,  is  concerned  with
              electronic conduction in fulleride compounds  such  as A3C60, where A is an
              alkali metal. A novel, cavity-  less,   high   magnetic   field  electron  
              spin   resonance  spectrometer  developed  by the Hungarian  collaborator,  A. 
              Janossy,  will for the first time allow measurement  of  the  conduction
              electron spin resonance below Tc. The American PI  Fischer    has  
              considerable   experience   in   synthesis,  characterization  and 
              structure-property  correlations   in  superconducting   fulleride  salts. 
              Characterization   will  routinely make use of NSLS at Brookhaven National 
              Lab.  The  goals  of  the  combined effort will be to  solve  important 
              unanswered   questions  in  fulleride  superconductors   and  polymers:   the 
              nature  of  the  electron-phonon  coupling,  importance  of electron-electron
              correlations, the  identity  of  the  antiferromagnetic resonance in AC60 
              (spin  density  wave   vs.  3-D  magnetic  order)  and  the  importance   of 
              interchain  coupling. This highly interdisciplinary  project  will  involve  a 
              graduate student who  will  pursue  thesis  research  at  both  laboratory
              locations, and  will  receive  excellent   training  beneficial  to  a  future 
              career   in  industry, government or academia.  %%%  This   interdisciplinary 
              experimental   research   project,  involving  a  major  collaborator in
              Budapest,  Hungary,  is  concerned  with  electrical conduction  in  novel 
              compounds  solid compounds known as fullerides. These compounds have as  basic 
              building block the carbon-60 (C60) molecule, commonly  referred  to  as  the 
              Buckyball.  To  make  the  conducting  compounds alkali metals such as
              Rubidium, which easily  give  up  an electron, have been used. It has been
              found that  the  resulting compounds can be superconducting up to about  30K, 
              which  is  higher  than  any  of the  convention al  familiar  superconductors
              such as Pb or NbTi, and the reasons for this  interesting  and potentially
              useful behavior are imperfectly  understood. The collaborative research project
              is especially  appropriate  because  one  PI  is  expert  in   making   and 
              characterizing  these  compounds,  and  the  other,  who  is  located in
              Budapest, has developed and is expert in the  use  of  a novel electron spin
              resonance instrument which will be  especially   useful  to  study  the 
              electronic   conduction  processes. The collaborative research will involve 
              training  of  a graduate student who will work in the laboratories  of  both 
              PI's,  and  thereby obtain an unusually  international  educational 
              experience. This student, and others  that  may  also be involved, will receive
              excellent training beneficial  to a future career in industry, government or
              academia.  ***
