Title       : Theory of Liquid Crystals and Related Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 13,  1999   
File        : a9730405

Award Number: 9730405
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : February 28,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom C. Lubensky tom@dept.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMR-9730405  Lubensky  Liquid crystals are materials that possess properties,
              such  as the ability to flow, associated with liquids, and  properties, such as
              optical anisotropy, associated with  crystalline solids.  New liquid
              crystalline materials, new  realizations of familiar phases, and even entirely
              new  liquid crystalline phases are continually being discovered.  In this grant
              theoretical research will be carried out on  two general aspects of the physics
              of liquid crystals:  chirality and layered structures.    Chirality of the
              mesogens is reflected in a rich variety of  equilibrium phases that include the
              cholesteric phase, the  blue phases, ferroelectric smectic-C* phase, and the A
              and C  twisted grain boundary phases. This research seeks to  elucidate the
              relationship between the structural chirality  of these phases and chirality at
              a microscopic level. Other  problems that will be studied that are related to
              chirality  include: chiral structures in columnar phases, chiral  pathways from
              the nematic to smectic-A phase, and phase  transitions to the twisted grain
              boundary C phase.    A major part of the reseach will be devoted to the study
              of  2D smectic lattices that form from DNA segments that are  intercalated
              between lipid bilayers.  Coulomb forces lead to  interactions between lattices
              in adjacent layers. These  structures are important in gene-therapy research. 
              A major  focus of the proposed research will be to study the  statistical and
              structural properties of these complexes.  Models for these phases that
              interpolate between one-  dimensional smectic and two-dimensional columnar
              phases and  show promise of predicting new equilibrium phases  characterized by
              orientational but not positional  correlations between 2D DNA lattices will be
              explored.  Phases exhibited by free standing smectic films will also be 
              studied.  %%%  Liquid crystals are materials that possess properties, such  as
              the ability to flow, associated with liquids, and  properties, such as optical
              anisotropy, as sociated with  crystalline solids.  New liquid crystalline
              materials, new  realizations of familiar phases, and even entirely new  liquid
              crystalline phases are continually being discovered.  Lubensky will continue
              his theoretical inquiry, in close  connection with experiments, into
              traditional and novel new  liquid crystalline materials.  A central theme of
              this  research involves the investigation of many of the rich  variety of
              phases that occur in these materials and how  fundamental symmetries, such as
              whether or not a molecule  can be superimposed on its mirror image, and
              properties at  the molecular level, influence macroscopic properties of 
              observed phases. Of particular interest are novel phases  involving DNA
              segments that play a major role in gene-  therapy research and how a phase
              responds to an externally  applied electric field. This research will also
              contribute  to the training of the next generation of experts in these 
              technologically promising materials.  ***
