Title       : The Bureaucratic Construction of Legal Meaning: Welfare, Work, and the Rights of
               the Poor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  1998        
File        : a9730821

Award Number: 9730821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89556              (Estimated)
Investigator: Evelyn Z. Brodkin e-brodkin@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Welfare law substantially affects the scope and content of rights accorded to
              poor families, both a claimant on the state and a citizens subject of state
              protection. In August 1996, Congress passed the Temporary Assistance for Needy
              Families program that profoundly alters the legal status of poor families,
              ending the federal guarantee of case assistance and shifting welfare's
              fundamental purpose from that of assuring income to transforming welfare
              recipients to workers.  Yet, formal provisions of law do not fully define
              welfare rights or settle rights questions.  They establish new boundaries
              within which struggles over the elaboration, interpretation, and production of
              practical legal meaning occur as law is translated into actions.  Practical
              legal meaning refers to law as it is produced by the public bureaucracies that
              implement and interpret law:  the politics of informal lawmaking.  This
              research seeks to understand the bureaucratic construction of legal meaning,
              the factors that shape it, and its substantive implications for the rights of
              the poor under new welfare law.  The study uses field interviewing and
              observation  in four welfare offices in Chicago.  The offices are categorized
              to represent differences in caseload demographics, location, caseload size, and
              the research sites then  randomly selected .  Patterns of practice and social
              explanations of behavior will be used to test theories of the development and
              implementation of informal legal meaning.  %%%  Welfare law substantially
              affects the scope and content of rights accorded to poor families, both a
              claimant on the state and a citizens subject of state protection. In August
              1996, Congress passed the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program that
              profoundly alters the legal status of poor families, ending the federal
              guarantee of case assistance and shifting welfare's fundamental purpose from
              that of assuring income to transforming welfare recipients to workers.  Yet,
              formal provisions of law do not fully define welfare rights or settle rights
              questions.  They establish new boundaries within which struggles over the
              elaboration, interpretation, and production of practical legal meaning occur as
              law is translated into actions.  Practical legal meaning refers to law as it is
              produced by the public bureaucracies that implement and interpret law:  the
              politics of informal lawmaking.  This research seeks to understand the
              bureaucratic construction of legal meaning, the factors that shape it, and its
              substantive implications for the rights of the poor under new welfare law.  The
              study uses field interviewing and observation  in four welfare offices in
              Chicago.  The offices are categorized to represent differences in caseload
              demographics, location, caseload size, and the research sites then  randomly
              selected .  Patterns of practice and social explanations of behavior will be
              used to test theories of the development and implementation of informal legal
              meaning.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
