Title       : Accomplishment Based Renewal of: Autoregressive Conditional Duration, Arch,
               Common Features, and Cointegration
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2002     
File        : a9730062

Award Number: 9730062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Engle rengle@ucfd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9730062  Engle    As computers increase in power and memory it becomes feasible
              to collect and analyze data at higher and higher frequencies.  Data sets that
              record every transaction - the highest frequency possible - now exist for many
              financial data sets as well as microeconomic transactions such as telephone
              calls and credit card purchases that are recorded by computers.  The analysis
              of such data sets poses new and interesting economic challenges, one of them
              being the choice of the proper interval of time within which to aggregate the
              data so as to generate a data set with observations spaced evenly part.  The
              problem with fixed interval analysis is that it can leave the investigator with
              many uninformative data points or disguise the periods of most interest.   This
              Accomplishment Based Renewal continues the study and application to financial
              microdata of an alternative to fixed interval analysis developed by the
              investigator.  This approach is called Autoregressive Conditional Duration
              (ACD).  Instead of selecting a fixed interval for analyzing the data, the
              interval between transactions becomes a random variable to be analyzed.  Thus
              the data set becomes a list of durations and characteristics of each
              transaction.  This procedure models the time intervals directly without using
              auxiliary data or imposing assumptions on the causes of the time flow.  The
              previous grant used the ACD model to analyze the price, volume and duration
              process of stock transactions.  The timing of transactions, order submissions
              and quote revisions are the focus of new proposed econometric studies.  From
              these analyses it is possible to infer key behavioral aspects of financial
              markets.      The term liquidity is often used to describe effectively
              functioning markets.  With more precise empirical measures of market quality
              such as the bid ask spread, the depth of the market and the price impact of
              trade, it is possible to examine the ebb and flow of market liquidity.  This is
              clearly important for assessing the s tability of markets and for institutions
              seeking to trade large volumes.  Using TORQ, TAQ, QEX options, S&P Futures and
              potentially other data sets, this project measures various dimensions of market
              liquidity, examines the time series behavior, forecastability, and economic
              determinants of these measures.        ??
