Title       : Suppliment: Parasitism of Bloom-Forming Dinoflagellates: Host Specificity and
               Ecological Implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a9730695

Award Number: 9730695
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204957             (Estimated)
Investigator: D. W. Coats   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Chespke Res Consrtium Inc
	      P.O.Box 1280
	      Solomons, MD  206881280    301/261-4190

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9117,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                                        Increasing  concern over the global spread of red
              tides produced  by  toxic  and non-toxic dinoflagellates has focused research
              interest on physical and  biological  interactions that influence the
              accumulation, persistence,  and  demise  of bloom-forming species. The harmful
              effects imposed by red  tides  on  marine  fauna  and  associated risks to
              public  health  and  commercial  fisheries  have  also  prompted interest in
              means to detect,  predict,  and  potentially  control harmful algal blooms.
              Recent studies have  shown  that  microparasites, including viruses, bacteria,
              and protozoa, are abundant  in  marine    environments.   Furthermore,  
              parasite-induced   mortality    of  bacterioplankton  and phytoplankton can
              cause population level  changes  in  host  abundance  on  time scales of hours
              to days.  Infection  of  red-tide  dinoflagellates  by their parasitic relative
              Amoebophrya ceratii  has  been  linked  to rapid declines in host populations.
              This parasite has also  been  implicated as an important factor in preventing
              bloom formation. while  all  such  infections of free-living dinoflagellates
              have been attributed  to  a  single  species  of  parasite, recent data suggest
              that  A.  ceratii  is  a  species  complex  composed  of  multiple 
              host-specific  parasites.    This  research  will further the understanding of
              red-tide ecology by considering  the  interplay  between  host specificity and
              parasitism  of  bloom-forming  dinoflagellates in Chesapeake Bay. It will also
              help define the  complexity  of host-parasite interactions in planktonic
              systems and provide new insight  on  the  role of parasitism in microbial
              food-web dynamics.  Five  specific  hypotheses   will  be  tested  using 
              state-of-the-art  morphological   and  molecular methods.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
