Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Production of Rift Valley Fever Diagnostic
               Reagents for Laboratory Use
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  1997  
File        : a9730762

Award Number: 9730762
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23600              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. M. Botros   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U.S. Naval Medical Researc
	      PSC 452, Box 5000
	      Cairo, EG      202/284-0576

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 5944,9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                Description: This award is for support of a cooperative project by Dr. Boulos
              A.M. Botros, Acting Head, Virology Branch, at the Naval Medical Research Unit
              -3 (NAMRU3) in Cairo, Egypt, and Dr. Ahmed Mahmoud Daoud, Director, Veterinary
              Serum and Vaccine Research Institute (VSVRI), Agricultural Research Center,
              Ministry of Agriculture, Cairo, Egypt.  The two collaborators plan to establish
              the technology for the production of Rift Valley Fever (RVF) diagnostic
              reagents.  NAMRU3 will develop required protocols for the production of
              antigens and control antisera for the diagnosis of RVF infection in humans and
              animals.  NAMRU3 will also conduct quality control tests of produced reagents. 
              The VSVRI will propogate RVF virus in susceptible cell cultures and prepare the
              required antigens and control antisera according to developed protocols. 
              Scope:  This project will involve two laboratories with complementary
              capabilities to conduct research and development work of mutual benefit to the
              USA and to Egypt as well as to other developing countries.   There is definite
              need for antigens and control antisera for RVF diagnosis in emerging disease
              epizootics.  The VRF virus is extremely biohazardous, so the work requires high
              containment facilities to handle live virus in the preparation of reagents. 
              The VSVRI has long experience in this area.   NAMRU3 staff has been involved in
              preparation and modification of existing protocols, and is therefore in a good
              position to advise in the production  of targeted RVF diagnostics, and in
              carrying out quality control and safety testing of the products.  Targeted
              diagnostics include: RVF cell lysate antigen (CLA) for the detection of
              anti-RVF IgM antibody; RVF virus infected cell supernatent antigen (SA) for the
              detection of RVF IgG antibody; and hyper-immune specific anti-RVF control
              serum.  This proposal meets INT objective of supporting US-foreign
              collaboration in areas of mutual benefit.  The project was generated as a
              result of a workshop on biotechnology organized by the National Institutes of
              Health (NIH) and the Egyptian Government.  NIH was involved in the evaluation
              of the project and in recommending its support.  This project is being
              supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, administered by the US
              Department of State, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out cooperative activities.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                 
