Title       : The Bermuda Testbed Mooring (BTM) Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2000     
File        : a9730471

Award Number: 9730471
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Lawrence Clark                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $729433             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tommy D. Dickey tommy.dickey@opl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1680      OCEAN TECH & INTERDISC COORDIN
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1315,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9730471  Dickey    Renewed support is provided for the Bermuda Testbed Mooring  
              (BTM) project.  The BTM project deploys and maintains for   community use, a
              deep-sea mooring which is available for   long-term testing of oceanographic
              sensors and systems. The   project is has three major complementary facets: 1) 
               technology development, 2) facilitation of the BTM for other   groups
              developing and testing new technologies, and 3)   scientific studies. The
              premise is that newly developed   technology and instrumentation should be
              synergistic with   scientific applications. Interdisciplinary time-series data 
               collected from the mooring may be compared, calibrated, and   interpreted
              using comprehensive shipboard data sets   routinely collected near the site.
              Many of the sensors and   systems developed and tested on the BTM will be
              suitable for   deployment on other platforms such as drifters, autonomous  
              underwater vehicles, and offshore structures. BTM is   deployed near the
              Bermuda Time Series (BATS) station, a site   that has been sampled continuously
              for over 15 years and   provides a rich historic data base at the location. The
                mooring was first deployed in June, 1994 and has been used   by a variety of
              scientists since its first deployment, as   evidenced by numerous letters of
              support.    In addition to maintaining the mooring as a testbed   facility, two
              new instrument systems, SAFIRE and HiROS will   be tested. SAFIRE measures
              spectral fluorescence and   absorption and will be useful for optically
              characterizing   and discriminating particulate components and dissolved  
              organic constituents. The HiROS system will allow high   resolution
              characterization and quantification of inherent   optical properties. A new
              real-time data telemetry system   under development will be tested as well. The
              PIs will   continue to solicit new BTM users, to facilitate the usage   of the
              BTM for all investigators, and to provide baseline   interdisciplinary
              measurements.
