Title       : An Empirical Examination of the Direct Benefits and Costs of Environmental
               Regulation and the Indirect Effects of Regulation on Firm Investment Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 19,  2000       
File        : a9730212

Award Number: 9730212
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $281073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Chay kenchay@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9197,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Due to the lack of convincing empirical evidence on the costs and benefits of
              environmental regulation, debates about the future direction of environmental
              policy are often based on conjecture and hyperbole. The first objective of the
              project is to inform the debate by using pollution categories established by
              the EPA after the 1977 Clean Air Act Amendment to quantify some of the direct
              costs and benefits of primary air pollution regulation. Specifically, the EPA
              assigned each county either attainment or non attainment status for four
              criteria pollutants if the national ambient air quality standards were met or
              not met, respectively. Firms in non attainment counties faced greater
              regulatory oversight than those designated as attainment.  This division of
              counties sets up an interesting quasi experiment for measuring some of the
              direct effects of regulation. In principle, it is possible to identify the
              impact of regulation by comparing changes in outcomes in non attainment and
              attainment counties. To estimate the costs of regulation, the investigators
              will examine the effect of attainment/non attainment status on total
              employment, wages of production workers, and capital stock. To measure the
              benefits of regulation, the investigators will focus on the impact of county
              level attainment status on county level air quality, rates of morbidity and
              mortality related to air pollution, and property values. One result of the
              analysis is that it will be possible to calculate the trade off between the
              costs of regulation borne by workers and the benefits received in the form of
              better air quality and health.  The second objective is to provide empirical
              evidence on some of the indirect effects of regulation by analyzing two
              theoretical firm level investment behaviors and their responses to regulation.
              Increased regulation may have distorted the investment decisions of firms
              through two indirect channels by: 1) increasing uncertainty about the return to
              a project, and 2) providing incentives for certain firms to invest
              strategically to gain an economic advantage. The investigators will evaluate
              the size of the first effect by developing a plant level index of regulatory
              uncertainty and comparing investment patterns across plants before and after
              the regulatory regime shift. The analysis will investigate the second effect by
              developing an index of increased regulatory pressure faced by each firm and
              comparing changes in investment after the regulatory shift across more and less
              competitive industries.  The research will contribute to the established
              literature in a number of ways. First, it will use cutting edge econometric
              methods and a variety of unique and comprehensive establishment level and
              county level data sets to provide new empirical evidence on the direct benefits
              and costs of regulation. It will also evaluate the potential indirect effects
              of regulation on firm investment behavior. In the process, it will identify two
              theoretical investment behaviors that have not previously been documented
              empirically and measure some of the indirect costs of regulation. The results
              should provide guidance on the optimal design of policy.                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
