Title       : Determinants and Effects of Fiscal Consolidations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  2001      
File        : a9730691

Award Number: 9730691
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186585             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alberto Alesina aalesina@harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Perotti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For a variety of reasons, fiscal consolidation is the order of the day in many
              industrialized and developing countries. The purpose of this research is to
              investigate the determinants, macroeconomic effects, political effects, and
              durability of fiscal consolidations.  The project is organized around three
              main sets of issues.  First, the macroeconomic effects of fiscal adjustments. 
              Recent work in this area has shown that these are likely to depend on the
              composition of the adjustment.  This issue is analyzed via a systematic
              investigation based on relatively unstructured vector auto regressions using
              both quarterly and annual data on 20 OECD countries.  In addition, the role of
              policies   such as monetary and exchange rate policies   that have accompanied
              fiscal consolidations is investigated .  Furthermore, this research will go
              deeper into the composition of consolidations by using a more refined breakdown
              than has been done so far.  Second, the political consequences of
              consolidations.  This is obviously an issue of primary importance.  Hence, what
              happened to governments that consolidate is analyzed, with particular regard to
              the effects of spending cuts vs. tax increases.  Third, the political
              determinants of consolidations, with particular regard to the notion of
              fragmentation of the executive and the role of budget institutions, both of
              which have played and important role in the theoretical literature are
              investigated in a systematic way.  All these issues are investigated for  OECD
              countries and  US states and localities.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
