Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Effect of Democratic
               Deliberation on Political Tolerance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1998      
File        : a9730769

Award Number: 9730769
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5739               (Estimated)
Investigator: Walter J. Stone stonew@sobek.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                How much the public should be involved in politics is an enduring question for
              democratic theory.  Deliberative democratic theorists support involvement
              because it can educate citizens.  However, they do not believe in expanding all
              forms of political activism.  Instead, deliberative theorists support expanding
              what they call democratic deliberation - - a special form of political
              discussion that is cooperative, noncoercive, and among equals with diverse
              opinions.  Overall, deliberative theorists argue that deliberation extends
              civic education beyond the classroom.  One possible educative effect of
              deliberation is enhancing political tolerance.  Political tolerance is the
              attitude of individuals towards extending civil liberties such as freedom of
              speech and assembly to potentially unpopular minority groups.  However, it has
              not been examined whether deliberation actually can increase individuals'
              tolerance.  To begin to assess the relationship between deliberation and
              tolerance in American politics, this study conducts an experiment that
              simulates deliberation in order to examine its effect on tolerance.  Subjects
              for the experiment will be asked to engage in either a competitive or
              cooperative discussion about a particular policy towards and unpopular group. 
              The expectation is that subjects in the cooperative discussion groups will be
              more likely to converge on their attitudes and become more tolerant while the
              subjects' initial attitudes in the competitive discussions will be reinforced. 
              In other words, engaging in political discussion about a policy issue may lead
              to attitude change, eventhough it is the policy and not the attitude that is
              the topic of discussion.  This experiment allows the investigator to create an
              environment that is as close to deliberation as possible in order to ascertain
              what its effects might be if it were adopted to a greater extent in America.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
