Title       : Nonstationary Economic Time Series and Panel Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  2000        
File        : a9730295

Award Number: 9730295
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Phillips peter.phillips@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9730295  Phillips    This project is concerned with modelling, estimation
              and inference for nonstationary economic data.  It consists of three parts: 
              nonlinear and nonparametric analysis for integrated time series data, panel
              cointegration analysis, and spurious regression analysis.  Each part involves
              theoretical research and empirical applications.   Nonstationary time series
              arising from autoregressive models with roots on the unit circle have been an
              intensive study of econometric research in the last decade and there is now a
              fairly complete theory available for linear time series regressions.  As in
              other regression contexts, linear models can be restrictive and they eliminate
              many interesting cases of practical importance where there are nonlinear
              responses.  This project provides the first systematic study of time series
              with unit root or near unit root nonstationarity to nonlinear regression,
              kernel regression and nonparametric density estimation contexts.  The work
              involves new methodological developments that utilize discrete time estimates
              of the local time for continuous stochastic processes such as Brownian motion,
              i.e., the occupation density for the time spent by the process in the spatial
              vicinity of a certain part.  This quantity turns out to be important in
              analyzing nonlinear functions of nonstationary data and in the development of
              an asymptotic theory of nonlinear regression.    The second part is concerned
              with the development of a regression limit theory and associated inferential
              methods for nonstationary panel data sets with large numbers of cross section
              and time series observations.  Several interesting panel structures are
              possible allowing, for instance, for no time series cointegration,
              heterogeneous cointegration, homogeneous cointegration, or even
              near-homogeneous cointegration.  Since panel data can distinguish effects that
              time series of cross section data alone cannot identify, there are exciting
              possibilities for the use of such methods in studying imp ortant empirical
              economic issues such as the growth convergence where nonstationary data can
              play a central role.    The third part continues the investigator's work on
              spurious regression.  His earlier work helped to explain "spurious" statistical
              significance in regression by the development of an asymptotic theory of the
              regression.  More recently, the investigator has shown than an alternative
              asymptotic theory can be developed that justifies the same regression in terms
              of the representation of one function (possibly, stochastic function) in terms
              of others.  In this project these tools of analysis will be extended to develop
              a theory of approximating regression functions, including approximately
              cointegration functions, and to develop an associated inferential theory.    ??
