Title       : Does Turbulence Create Small-Scale Patchiness of Phytoplankton?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 28,  1997  
File        : a9896055

Award Number: 9896055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyle D. Squires squires@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9409073  SQUIRES  This research project will focus on the interaction between
              small-  scale turbulence and the spatial distribution of phytoplanktonic 
              particles. Preliminary results from Direct Numerical Simulations  (DNS) of
              incompressible, isotropic turbulence have shown that  particles of a density
              similar to that of algae develop non-random  spatial distributions including
              aggregates at peak number densities  of 40 times the global mean value when
              suspended in a simulated  flow field. Laboratory tests to determine whether
              actual algal  particles in real turbulent flow form patches and whether they 
              behave as predicted from numerical simulations will be undertaken.  A special
              apparatus which creates reproducible grid-generated  turbulent flow and which
              allows for direct observation of suspended  algal particles will be constructed
              and calibrated. The effect of  particle size, shape, buoyant density, and
              inherent motility  ("swimming" capacity) on particle spatial distributions will
              be  evaluated. Empirical data will be compared to DNS predictions  derived from
              a refined model. Results will provide pioneering  insight into the role of
              small-scale fluid dynamics in influencing  phytoplankton spatial distributions:
              such insight is essential for  understanding the dynamics of resource
              acquisition by algae and  herbivore-algal interactions in oceans and the Great
              Lakes.  ***
