Title       : An Investigation into the Origin of the Inca State
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1998      
File        : a9896256

Award Number: 9896256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 19,  1998  
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15450              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon F. McEwan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cuzco Archeology Inst Inc
	      2942 Evergreen Parkway
	      Evergreen, CO  80439    303/791-4002

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              With continuing  National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gordon McEwan and his
              colleagues will conduct an additional field season of excavation at the site of
              Chokepukio which is located in the Valley of Cuzco in highland Peru. The
              capital of the Inca empire was located as Cuzco and the goal of Dr. McEwan's
              research is to trace the origins and development of this early state.
              Chokepukio covers a low hill and adjacent region. Based on the distribution of
              architectural and ceramic remains it extends over approximately one square
              kilometer. Dominating Chokepukio is a series of huge enclosures which cover the
              crest of the hill in the center of the site. The buildings are, in prehistoric
              terms, truly enormous - the largest enclosure measuring 60 by 80 meters. Many
              of the walls are preserved to a height of 10 to 12 meters. Associated with
              these structures are large numbers of small and moderate-sized houses. Based on
              his previous work at the site, Dr. McEwan knows that the buildings were
              constructed during the Wari period, likely occupied during the ca. 500 year
              interval between the fall of the Wari and the rise of the Inca empires and
              continued to be used during the Inca period. Thus they span the interval when
              the Inca stated developed and will permit insight into the relationship between
              Inca and Wari peoples. Based on ethnohistoric data archaeologists know that
              Inca public buildings were designed to make symbolic statements about social
              organization and therefore through their analysis it is possible to gain
              insight into how this prehistoric society functioned. It appears that the same
              use of architecture held true in Wari times. In his excavation, Dr. McEwan will
              expose several buildings and analyze both architectural form and the artifacts
              recovered with this reconstructive goal in mind.  Since the Inca empire was a
              functioning entity when the first Spanish explorers arrived and written
              descriptions of it exist, the final stages of the Inca are well known. However
              the Inca lacked writing and relatively little is understood about the origins
              and development of this entity. What is particularly intriguing are the
              similarities between the preceding Wari and Inca empires. Although they appear
              to share architectural features in common, they are separated by approximately
              500 years in time and it is difficult to understand how one may play a role in
              the rise of the other. Since Chokepukio spans this entire interval, the site
              has the potential to shed light on this question.  This research is important
              for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists.
              It will shed new light on one of the largest pre-Columbian states in the New
              World and increase our understanding of how social complexity arises.          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
