Title       : A National Model for Photonics Proficiency in Undergraduate Electrical
               Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 2,  1998   
File        : a9896118

Award Number: 9896118
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77813              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guifang Li li@mail.creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
               Photonics is becoming a pervasive technology, with applications ranging from
              consumer products (CD players and laser printers) to social infrastructure and
              defense (intelligent highways and optically controlled radars). As a result,
              photonics is being recognized as an integral part of the electrical engineering
              (EE) curriculum. Because it has not been traditionally offered in undergraduate
              EE to date, most universities still regard photonics education as curriculum
              enrichment. As such, different aspects of photonics are emphasized in different
              universities, largely following the expertise or research interests of the
              faculty members, a situation that may not address effectively students'
              long-term career abilities and industrial needs.   The growing importance of
              photonics technology and its needs in industry dictate that every undergraduate
              EE student should acquire a minimum standard proficiency in photonics. In this
              vein, this project is shifting the paradigm in undergraduate photonics
              education in EE. Instead of treating it as an enrichment, photonics will be
              taught as a requirement. A photonics proficiency standard_a collection of
              knowledge and technology base_is being identified and incorporated into a
              required course in photonics involving both classroom instruction and
              laboratory experience. The preliminary photonics proficiency standard includes
              laboratory safety, geometrical and physical optics, lasers and detectors,
              lightwave modulation, and optical communications. A series of 10 labs, each
              associated with particular areas of photonics applications, is being developed
              to complement and, moreover, synergize with classroom instructions. The
              photonics proficiency standard and the curriculum are being refined in the
              course of this project so as to serve as a national model for photonics
              education in EE. Finally, an undergraduate textbook with a companion laboratory
              manual can be published for dissemination.
