Title       : Mathematical Sciecnes: Boundary Variations and Analytic Continuation in
               Electromagnetic and Acoustic Scattering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1998       
File        : a9896237

Award Number: 9896237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21915              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Reitich reitich@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9622555  Reitich    This project deals with analytical and computational issues
              in  electromagnetic   and acoustic scattering problems. It relates to a new
              method for  the  solution of such problems, based on high-order boundary 
              perturbation  and analytic continuation techniques, that was introduced by the 
              principal investigator in the context of diffraction gratings.  There,  the
              numerical algorithms produced, in many cases, results with  substantially
              improved accuracy over that given by classical  approaches.  The proposed
              research concerns new applications of the method in  other  challenging areas
              of current interest in electromagnetics and  acoustics and the further study
              and improvement of the numerical  properties of the resulting algorithms. Both
              the forward and  inverse   scattering problems will be investigated for a
              variety of  configurations, including scattering by electrically large  bounded
               bodies and in ocean waveguides. In particular, the benchmark  problems  of
              electromagnetic scattering by three-dimensional cubes and of  sound  
              propagation in oceans with rough surfaces will be treated. Based  on  some
              preliminary studies, it is expected that the performance of  the  method in
              these areas will be of a quality comparable   to the one it exhibited in prior
              implementations.  %%%    The ability to predict the shape of the
              electromagnetic or  acoustic  field scattered as an incident wave encounters an
              obstacle or  interface has been long recognized as having major implications 
              in a  great number of scientific and engineering disciplines. Indeed,  much of 
              what we "see" --be it through visible light or x-rays,   radio or microwaves--
              or "hear" reaches us through a complicated  combination of phenomena among
              which scattering is, in most  cases, an   essential element. As such, a better
              understanding of how light  and  sound waves propagate and diffract has led, in
              the last few  decades,  to substantial advances in a variety of fields; these
              include  communications, monitoring, s eismic profiling, tomography and  target
                detection, to name just but a few. An important role in these  advances  was
              the one played by mathematical modeling and, with the advent  of   computers,
              that of computational science. The present and future  needs, however, demand
              the development of more efficient,  accurate and  reliable algorithms to deal
              with complex geometries and media.  Indeed,  the resolution of the scattering
              in such situations (such as when  dealing with human tissue or undersea
              topography) often entails  calculating a highly oscillatory field. When using
              most classical  algorithms these oscillations translate into high computational
               costs,  as these methods attempt to capture the variations of the field  at 
              each point in time and space. Therefore, alternative approaches  whose  
              complexity does not correlate to that of the field under study  become  very
              desirable. The present project relates to one such approach,  that  was
              successfully developed by the principal investigator in the  context of
              micro-optical devices. The proposed research concerns  new   applications of
              this novel method in other challenging areas of  current interest in
              electromagnetics and acoustics where it is  expected to provide a valuable
              computational tool.  ***
