Title       : VPW: Mathematical Analysis of the Early Events in Cell Signaling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9896314

Award Number: 9896314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44057              (Estimated)
Investigator: Carla Wofsy wofsy@math.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 9225      VISITNG PROFESS FOR WOMEN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research uses methods of mathematics and statistics, in  conjunction with
              experimental work in two cell biology  laboratories, to clarify the first
              responses of cells to  extracellular "signaling" molecules.  Hormones,
              cytokines, immune  complexes and antigens all initiate cellular responses
              through  interactions with specific cell surface "receptors."  Diverse  systems
              have in common the two initial events in cell signaling  that this project
              addresses, the aggregation of cell surface  receptors, followed by the
              phosphorylation of tyrosine on receptors  and non-receptor proteins.    The
              first collaboration investigates mechanisms and effects of  receptor
              aggregation through the analysis of molecular point  patterns on electron
              microscope images.  The second collaboration  focusses on mechanisms by which
              aggregated receptors mediate  tyrosine phosphorylation.  A proposed model
              appears to be  consistent with previously obtained data and makes additional 
              testable predictions.    Interactive activities include:  teaching a graduate
              course on  "Stochastic Models in Biology and Chemistry," and organizing 
              special visits of women with active research programs in  Mathematical Biology,
              Biostatistics, Biophysics, and related  sciences.  Activities aimed at
              fostering interactions of students  with the visitors include preparatory
              seminars preceding the  visits, a student-oriented talk as part of each visit,
              and  organized discussions between students and visitors.
