Title       : Dissertation Research: Parental Effects of Offspring Fitness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1998   
File        : a9896115

Award Number: 9896115
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $2252               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmund D. Brodie edb3@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Abstract    IBN 96-23840  Brodie & Maple    Parental Effects on Offspring
              Fitness         The proposed research will demonstrate and describe the 
              influence that Dendrobates pumilio parents on their  offspring s fitness
              through parental behavior.  Parents may  influence their offpring s fitness
              directly by influencing  offspring survival, or indirectly by influencing
              offspring  phenotypes.  A combination of field manipulations and  natural
              controls will be used simultaneously to obtain  estimates of natural variation
              in parental behavior, the  direct and indirect effects of parental behavior on 
              offspring fitness, and the strength of selection acting on  parental behavior
              through offspring fitness.  D. pumilio  display a discreet form of bi-parental
              care in which males  care for the eggs until they hatch and females care for
              the  tadpoles from hatching through metamorphosis.  This research  will
              investigate the effects of distinct male and female  parental behaviors
              (manipulated and natural) on offspring  growth, development, and survival.  In
              Project 1, the  frequency of feeding events and number of nutritional eggs 
              provided per feeding event will be manipulated to determine  the effects of
              variation in these natural behaviors on  offspring.  In Project 2, experimental
              manipulations in  field enclosures will be used to investigate the effects of 
              parental behaviors including hydration, protection from  fungal infection, and
              defense against predators and  parasitoids on egg development and survival.
