Title       : Power-Efficient Ad Hoc Mobile Networking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 6,  2000   
File        : a9896343

Award Number: 9896343
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Suresh P. Singh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Consider the problem of establishing a temporary network in a region  hit by
              some natural disaster. Such a network would, for example, allow  medics in the
              field to retrieve patient history from hospital  databases, allow insurance
              companies to file claims from the field,  etc. Ideally, setting up such a
              network should involve no more than  equipping medics with PDAs (Personal
              Digital Assistants) that have  radio capability and providing one or more
              ``gateways'' that connect  this ad hoc network with the outside world.    A
              fundamental problem in setting up such a network is routing packets  between
              nodes in the ad hoc network. Why is this a difficult problem?  The primary
              reason is that as nodes move about the network topology  changes and thus
              routes need to be constantly updated. Furthermore,  natural obstacles may have
              the effect of partitioning the network for  brief periods of time. Thus,
              packets enroute to a destination that no  longer lies in a partition may be
              dropped (even though the partition  is short-lived). Finally, an overreaching
              constraint on any solution  is the problem of very limited battery life at each
              mobile. Thus,  while a specific protocol may route packets optimally, it may
              cause an  inordinate amount of power drain causing mobiles to run out of power 
              quickly.    In this research, we will develop routing protocols that are 
              power-efficient (i.e., the battery life of mobiles is maximized) while  still
              providing near-optimal routing functionality. In addition, these  protocols
              will support Quality of Service (QoS) guarantees by performing  demand-based
              route discovery. Other protocol support for QoS, such as  loss profiles for
              dynamic adaptation to bandwidth changes, will also  be incorporated. Finally,
              the routing protocols will implement  cache-and-forward packet routing to deal
              with short-lived network  partitions.    Papers and other documents related to
              this research project may be  found at http://www.cs.sc.edu/~singh/adhoc.html.
