Title       : Research Equipment: A Phase and Amplitude Noise Measurement System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9896228

Award Number: 9896228
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Mink                              
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58604              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guifang Li li@mail.creol.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Feng Tian  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lutfur Rahman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9622298  Li  The Department of Electrical Engineering at Rochester Institute of
              Technology will purchase a  phase and amplitude measurement systems which will
              be dedicated to support research in engineering.  The equipment will be used
              for several research projects, including in particular:   1. "A Novel FM
              Microwave Fiber-Optic Link for Antenna Remoting and    Phased Arrays'   2. "An
              Ultra Wideband Microwave Fiber-Optic Transmitter Based on Laser    Diodes with
              Short External Cavity"   3. "All-Optical SCM and WDM-SCM Multi-Access Networks"
               These research projects share a key innovation in generating
              microwave/millimeter-wave subcarriers on an optical carrier exploiting
              "instabilities" of nonlinear optical systems.  Specifically, the
              microwave/millimeter-wave subcarriers are generated all optically using the
              optical current controlled oscillator (CCO) which systematically exploits
              inherent nonlinear dynamics, mainly the formation of  periodic orbits.    The
              phase and amplitude noise of the subcarrier determines, to a large extent, the
              signal-to-noise ratio (bit-error rate) of the analog (digital) links or
              communication networks.  The equipment requested will be used in combination
              with theoretical investigations to determine the dependence of the amplitude
              and phase noise as functions of device parameters and operating conditions. 
              Subsequently strategies for reducing these noises will be formulated. 
              Ultimately, low-noise optical CCO's will be inserted in microwave fiber-optic
              links as well as SCM and WDM-SCM multi-access fiber-optic networks.  ***
