Title       : RUI: Investigations of Interfacial Adsorption of Antifreeze Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1998      
File        : a9896174

Award Number: 9896174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 5,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145314             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffry D. Madura madura@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrzej Wierzbicki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9723271  Madura  The overall goals of this work are to advance the understanding
              of the interactions of antifreeze proteins (AFP) at the ice/water interface by
              performing explicit and implicit ice/AFP/ water computer simulations, study
              experimentally ice crystal growth and its modification by AFPs, and the
              development and testing of synthetic analogs.  Due to the great complexity of
              the molecule-interface interactions in this system the success of this project
              is only possible through a complementary computational and experimental
              approach.  To achieve the objectives, work will focus on the following tasks: 
              The simulation of two similar AFPs (winter flounder and shorthorn sculpin) 
              Cryogenic microscopy procedures for studying and analyzing antifreeze activity
              will be explored to probe the interactions between AFPs and ice.  Using the
              simulation data and cryomicroscopy results, antifreeze analogs will be
              synthesized and tested for noncolligative antifreeze activity.  These synthetic
              analogs will be studied in simulation experiments as well as by splat cooling
              and nanoliter osmometry.      The overall significance of this work will be the
              development of a comprehensive, unified theory for the mechanism of action for
              antifreeze proteins.  In addition the results from this work will provide a
              basic understanding how proteins and polypeptides can modify crystal growth. 
              Finally, the results from this study will have an enormous impact on society. 
              Areas of impact include the food industry (food preservation, etc.),
              agricultural industry: frost sensitive crops (fruits and vegetables) antifreeze
              fuel additives, and aircraft industry (de-icers).  ***
