Title       : Distributed Queueing and Synchronization Dynamics in Parallel Processing Systems
               Analysis and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9896202

Award Number: 9896202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ronald L. Rardin                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas Bambos bambos@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5514      OPERATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9634681  Bambos   This research investigates key dynamical aspect of parallel
              processing systems, including those pertaining to distributed queueing,
              synchronization and coordination, and real-time task scheduling and resource
              allocation.  The objective of the research is the development and articulation
              of a systematic general parallel processing queueing paradigm that goes beyond
              the current queueing network paradigm, which has had limited success in
              capturing synchronization and coordination aspects in a dynamic framework.  The
              emphasis of the research is on general canonical models and analysis techniques
              that will result in systematic design principles and methodologies.  
              Applications will focus on selected parallel processing architectures in
              manufacturing and computing systems. The research will include an investigation
              of queueing and synchronization in environments with randomly modulated service
              as well as systems of "interacting events" that exhibit critical phenomena.   
              While primarily theoretical in nature, this work holds promise for extending
              our understanding of the complex dynamics inherent in many modern
              telecommunications and manufacturing systems.  To date, no satisfactory
              mathematical theory has been proposed that comprehends all of the intricacies
              of material flow in these systems.  New mathematical techniques, including
              those proposed here, are essential in extending the methodological frontiers of
              research, with the ultimate goal of providing useful modeling and analysis
              techniques for the design, operation, and optimization of these systems .
