Title       : Postdoc: Molecular Simulation of Liquid-Liquid Equilibrium in Pores
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9896107

Award Number: 9896107
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Van Rosendale                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins keg@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This project will study the effect of confinement in small pores on
              liquid-liquid transitions and on the solubilities of dilute components.  These
              transitions are strongly influenced by the fluid-pore interactions, and the PIs
              will investigate the effects of pore shape and size, and the nature of the
              fluid-pore interactions.  This project will be composed of two different but
              related approaches to the problem  The first, which will be aimed at
              understanding the fundamental features of such transitions, will focus on
              Lennard-Jones model mixtures using the Gibbs Ensemble Monte Carlo (GEMC)
              technique.  The PIs will determine the liquid-liquid coexistence curves for a
              variety of interaction parameters and pore structures at many different state
              points.  They will also use the quench-MD methods to determine the shapes of
              the liquid-liquid interfaces in these systems.  Because of the high liquid
              densities in the pores, long runs with biased sampling MC methods will be used
              to improve convergence.  The second part of the study will focus on realistic
              potential models for mixtures (e.g. nitrobenzene/n-hexane) that are being
              studied experimentally in controlled pore glass.  These simulations will be
              directly compared with the experimental results.  For the second study, large
              calculations will be computationally demanding, and will require the parallel
              implementation of advanced Molecular Dynamics and Monte Carlo methods on large
              parallel computers.
