Title       : Lamb Wave Sensors for Inspecting Civil Infrastructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1999       
File        : a9896182

Award Number: 9896182
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tribikram Kundu tkundu@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Prasanna Karpur  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Karpur  9523342  Ultrasonic techniques have been  found to be very effective in 
              detecting small defects in  comparatively small samples.  However, in big civil
               infrastructure type specimens such  as bridges, columns, poles and  pipelines
              use of ultrasonic  techniques has been limited because  of high absorption and
              scattering  of body waves (longitudinal and  shear waves which are  used in 
              ultrasonic experiments) in such big  objects.  In this project  unconventional
              Lamb waves at very  low frequencies (30 kHz - 200 kHz)  will be used to detect
              internal  defects in civil infrastructures.  Initial investigations have shown 
              that for detecting weak bonds and  partially damaged internal  interfaces, Lamb
              waves are much  more efficient than body waves.  However, Lamb wave sensors
              have not  been developed yet to its full  potential because of the lack of 
              expertise in this field in sensor  industries.  In this research the  theory
              necessary to develop  efficient Lamb wave or guided wave  sensors will be
              developed first.  Then the new sensor will be  fabricated with the help of 
              transducer manufacturing  industries.  These sensors will be  tested at the
              Wright-Patterson  Material Laboratory and will be  used to detect internal
              damages in  concrete and metal slabs and  pipeline type civil  infrastructures.
                 Two companion projects are  supported to carry out the above  described
              research:  University of  Arizona which will develop the  basic lamb wave
              theory and conduct  initial sensor design and testing,  and University of
              Dayton/Wright-  Patterson Laboratory which will  test the fabricated sensors
              and  evaluate the results.  ***
