Title       : Cryogen Spray Cooling for Spatially Selective Photocoagulation of Biological
               Tissues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  1998    
File        : a9896101

Award Number: 9896101
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131032             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bahman Anvari anvari@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9634110  Anvari  In many therapeutic applications of lasers, it is desirable to 
              induce photothermal destruction of subsurface targeted structures  without
              damaging the overlying tissue.  For example, successful  laser treatment of
              certain skin disorders such as port wine  stains (PWS), and hemangiomas
              requires selective destruction of  subsurface targeted blood vessels while
              protecting the normal,  overlying skin structures from thermal injury.  The
              objective of  the proposed research is development and optimization of cryogen 
              spray cooling (CSC) to deliver short spurts of a cryogen (on the  order of
              milliseconds) in conjunction with laser irradiation to  protect superficial
              skin structures from thermal injury, while  achieving photothermal destruction
              of subsurface targeted blood  vessels.  Further development of CSC in
              conjunction with laser  irradiation will provide substantial relevant data to 
              investigators interested in therapeutic procedures utilizing the  laser or
              other radiative sources to induce spatially selective  thermal damage in
              multi-layered composite structures.    The specific objectives of this proposal
              are: 1) development of  mathematical models to assist in optimization of CSC
              and laser  irradiation parameters; 2) in-vivo, and in-vivo experimentation 
              using collagen film and chicken comb models, respectively, to  verify accuracy
              of the mathematical modeling, and demonstrate  utility of CSC in conjunction
              with laser irradiation for  spatially selective thermal damage; 4) design and
              construction of  a compact, and portable prototype instrument to: a) allow 
              delivery of cryogen and laser light through an optical fiber; and  b) perform
              diagnostic measurements that determine depth of  targeted blood vessels prior
              to selection of appropriate CSC and  laser irradiation parameters; and 5)
              expansion of the Bio- and  Biomedical-Engineering (BBME) concentration at
              Harvey Mudd  College (HMC) engineering department.    The preceding tasks will
              be accomplished through a joint effort             with the Beckman Laser
              Institute  and Medical Clinic (BLIMC) at University of California, Irvine      
                   (UCI).  Scientists at BLIMC will  collaborate on the development of a
              diagnostic procedure to  determine depth or subsurface chromophores. 
              Furthermore,  facilities and instrumentation necessary for successful 
              completion of the proposed research are available at BLIMC.  The  educational
              objectives will be achieved  by student participation  in algorithm and
              instrumentation development, in-vitro  experimentation.  The interdisciplinary
              nature of the project  will allow development of educational materials for BBME
              courses  at HMC that would include such topics as biomedical optics, heat 
              transfer, laser-tissue interactions, biomedical instrumentation,  and numerical
              optimization techniques.  ***
