Title       : Computer Simulations Versus Real Experiments in a Portable Engineering Mechanics
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9896053

Award Number: 9896053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger E. Salters                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200966             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Behr behr@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7428      CCLI-ADAPTATION AND IMPLEMENTA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                  Laboratory instruction is under siege because space, capital
              equipment funds, and faculty time are all in short supply. In response,
              computer simulations commonly replace hands-on laboratory experiences. Computer
              simulations are powerful tools, but they must be linked directly to physical
              phenomena if they are to teach the physical realities of engineering.          
                                                                        The purpose of this
              project is to develop simulation software and matched experiments that will
              enable students of statics and mechanics of materials courses to conduct
              side-by-side, real time comparisons of Analytical and Experimental results of
              small-scale model tests in a portable, PC-controlled laboratory called "ANNEX."
              ANEX has been developed and implemented successfully in junior-level structural
              analysis courses at UMR and the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor. Newly
              developed software and matched experiments (called "MECH-ANEX") will extend
              ANEX to address a broader audience of lower-division undergraduates, thus
              increasing the utility of ANEX stations and the probability that ANEX will make
              a national impact on undergraduate laboratory instruction.                     
                                                             MECH-ANEX software will include
              lecture reinforcement and case study modules tailored to several engineering
              disciplines that typically require statics and mechanics of materials courses
              in their curricula. In addition, a complete set of matched, bench-scale
              experiments will be developed. MECH-ANEX will be integrated into the UMR
              curriculum, assessed over a multi-semester trial period, and presented in a
              series of national seminars and workshops. This project will produce an
              innovative model for lecture and laboratory integration with potential
              applications across the engineering and science disciplines.
