Title       : Role of Serotonin in Cerebellar Cortical Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2000       
File        : a9896348

Award Number: 9896348
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Sonya K. Sobrian                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 1,  1998        
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105975             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda Larson-Prior ljlp@ccpm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Touro College
	      30 West 44th Street
	      New York-New York, NY  100366604    212/575-0190

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9514844  Larson-Prior    The cerebellar cortex is an area of the brain known to 
              receive  multi-modal sensory information which it uses to organize  appropriate
              motor  outputs. Incoming sensory information is processed, in part,  by 
              neurotransmitters whose actions can be modulated by  serotonin.  At this time, 
              the cellular mechanisms by which the cerebellar cortical  circuit organizes and
               integrates incoming sensory data to produce appropriate  motor commands are
              not  well understood.  In some systems, modulation of  neurotransmission is
              known to  produce a reorganization of the underlying circuitry which  results
              in the  generation of different neural responses.  The ability of  serotonin to
              effect  such changes in the cerebellar cortical circuit will be  examined in
              these  studies.  It is hypothesized that serotonin provides a  global
              modulatory signal  that is independent of the type of sensory data being 
              processed.  Thus, serotonergic input may signal changes in a global  manner
              that is of  equal relevance to all activated sensory systems.  Under  these
              circumstances,  cells which project information to the cerebellum utilizing 
              serotonin as a  transmitter could regulate the level of motor response  evoked
              by any given  sensory signal dependent upon the state of the organism.  By 
              providing  information on the manner in which serotonin modulates  cerebellar
              processing,  these studies will add significant new information  concerning the
              mechanisms  by which the brain coordinates and controls movement.
