Title       : Research Linkages Between Faculty at Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions
               and NSF-Funded Materials Research Faculty
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1998      
File        : a9896246

Award Number: 9896246
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Elaine Hoagland elaine@cur.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nancy S. Mills  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Neal B. Abraham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Wenzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Helminger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Council on Undergrad Rsch
	      734 15th Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051013    202/783-4810

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9704719  Stevens  This grant is one of this year's awards by the Division of 
              Materials Research (DMR) to integrate research and education.  It  is cofunded
              by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences  directorate's Office for
              Multidisciplinary Activities.  In  particular, this grant establishes a
              resource center for  information on the availability of research opportunities
              for  faculty in predominantly undergraduate institutions with DMR  supported
              grantees.  The Council on Undergraduate Research has  developed databases of
              research activity and interests of  departments and individual faculty members
              at undergraduate  institutions under its National Information Center on 
              Undergraduate Research.  The grant will help foster exploratory  and reciprocal
              site visits to identify topics of mutual interest  which can then form the
              basis of Research Opportunity Awards.  The grant will help in intellectual
              growth of faculty at  undergraduate institutions and generate research
              opportunities  for undergraduate students in the general area of Materials 
              Research.  %%%  This grant from the Division of Materials Research is one of
              the  first awarded in its attempt to integrate research and education.  It is
              also cosponsored by the Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities of the
              Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate.  The grant will help in
              intellectual growth of faculty at  undergraduate institutions and generate
              research opportunities  for undergraduate students in the general area of
              Materials  Research.  ***
