Title       : In Vivo Muscle Mechanics during Locomotion - II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2001   
File        : a9896332

Award Number: 9896332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1998  
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $111000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew A. Biewener abiewener@oeb.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Harvard University
	      1350 Massachusetts Ave.
	      Cambridge, MA  021383826    617/495-1000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The research proposed by the PI will investigate how animals use their muscles
              to power their movement, both during flight and terrestrial gait.  Muscle
              function will be analyzed in relation to the mechanical role of tendons for
              elastic energy savings and the design and loading of bone elements to which
              they attach.  These studies will be carried out using state-of-the-art
              techniques that allow direct measurements of muscle force, muscle shortening
              and bone strain to be made in living animals.  These in vivo measurements will
              allow the PI to test assumptions about muscle function, such as uniform fiber
              shortening, that have had to be made using more traditional indirect
              approaches.  The research objectives will yield important basic information
              concerning how muscle function during animal movement relates to the strucutral
              organization and physiological properties of the muscle's fibers.  This
              information will have importance for developing a better understanding of
              exercise-related influences on musculoskeletal function in vertebrate animals
              and the neuromuscular basis for controlling movement.  It is also likely to
              yield important technological insight into applied areas, such as robotics and
              the design of physical therapeutic devices.
