Title       : Partial Support for the Department of Energy National Teacher Enhancement
               Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9896200

Award Number: 9896200
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Wayne Sukow                             
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $101697             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marjorie G. Bardeen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel P. Bowen  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : FERMI Nat Accelerator Lab
	      
	      Batavia, IL  60510    /   -

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9253358  Bowen    The National Teacher Enhancement Project (NTEP) is a 
              collaborative five-year effort of the Department of Energy  (DOE) national
              laboratories to improve science education in  grades K-8.  The project is
              designed to create cadres of  lead teachers who will serve as role models and
              mentors for  their colleagues and who will be district leaders in  systemic
              reform initiatives.  Several additional  laboratories will be included in the
              current effort.  The  laboratories will optimize their impact on science and 
              mathematics education by strengthening their growing  collective efforts and by
              providing regional teachers with  access to resources through the DOE national
              network.   During this project over 240 teachers will receive direct  training
              at the laboratories, and each of them will conduct  inservice programs for
              other teachers in their schools, this  impacting a large number of teachers
              nationally.    This proposal is appropriate for teacher enhancement because  it
              is a leadership project which will bring elementary  teachers into the science
              community, provide extensive  networking among teachers and the National
              Laboratories, and  leverage effective synergy among the participating 
              Laboratories through its truly collaborative design.  It is  also consistent
              with FCCSET and other national efforts to  coordinate, facilitate, and
              strengthen efforts to improve  science education.     Non-NSF cost-sharing is
              approximately 120% of the amount  requested from NSF.  ***
