Title       : An Investigation of the Evolution of Mechanical Properties of Materials During
               Metalworking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1998      
File        : a9896058

Award Number: 9896058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104378             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. R. Rajagopal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Owen Richmond  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Arun R. Srinivasa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9617227  Rajagopol       Metalworking   processes  such  as  rolling,   forming,
               forging, extrusion, stamping etc. are a multibillion  dollar  industry  in 
              the  USA.   In the recent  years,  metalworked  products  are being
              increasingly used to make a  variety  of  products  ranging  from food
              containers to  automobile  body  panels.  The metalworking processes have a big
              impact on the  performance  and  reliability  of  these  products  because, 
              microstructural    effects    (such    as    evolution    of  crystallographic 
               texture,   dislocation   structures   and  precipitates) and residual stresses
              which are induced during  the  metalworking process play a vital role  in 
              determining  their mechanical properties.       The  goal  of this proposal is
              to examine the evolution  of  the  mechanical  properties of  metals  with  a 
              special  emphasis  on  the  prediction of evolving anisotropy  during  sheet  
              rolling  and  forming  processes.   This   will   be  accomplished  by first
              developing a constitutive  theory  to  model the effect of rolling and sheet
              forming on the salient  mechanical  properties  (such  as  the  yield  surface)
               the  material.   The  principal idea of the theory  is  that  the  response 
              of  the  material depends upon  the  evolution  of  multiple   structures 
              (such  as  the   lattice   structure,  dislocation  networks etc.) These are 
              modeled  by  assuming  that  the material possesses more than one evolving 
              natural  configuration.  As far as the elastic response and the yield  function
               are concerned, the evolving natural configurations  are  the  stress-free
              configurations of the material.   This  notion allows for a detailed discussion
              of the evolution  of  the anisotropy of the elastic  response and the yield
              surface.         The  yield  behavior is the most significant aspect  mf  the  
              mechanical  behavior  of  the  material   -.3ince   it  determines  the
              formability, necking behavior etc.,  of  the  material.  Even a slight error in
              the modeling of the   yield  behavior  significantly  degrades the  prediction 
              of  these  vital parameters.  For the past three years, there has  been  a 
              collaboration  between Scientists at the Alcoa  Technical  Center   and   the 
              University  of  Pittsburgh  to   develop  comprehensive  constitutive
              assumptions to accurately  model  the  changing anisotropy.  The current
              proposal builds  upon  this  effort and takes it to the next stage, namely
              detailed  experimentation and validation of the constitutive theory.        
              The  predictive capabilities of the theory are expected  to  provide
              researchers with some of the tools necessary  to  make  reliable  estimates of
              mechanical  properties  of  the  sheet   metal   product  from  information  
              regarding   the  manufacturing  processes  that it  has  undergone.   In  the 
              process,  it  will  help  graduate  students  to  gain  both  industrial and
              academic training.
