Title       : NSF Young Investigator: Volume Holography for Optical Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1998        
File        : a9896197

Award Number: 9896197
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gernot S. Pomrenke                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $122276             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire X. Gu claire@cse.ucse.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1519      INTEGRATIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9358318 Gu The objective of this research is to investigate the applications of
              volume holographic materials for optical computing. Specifically, we propose to
              investigate two optical systems, one for 3 dimensional optical storage and the
              other for parallel optical matrix processing.  Although memory and matrix
              processor perform different functions in computing, the two optical systems
              rely on many common properties of volume holography.  For example, the
              fundamental geometrical limit determines the capacity of both systems, and the
              grating degeneracy causes crosstalk noise in storage but plays a key role in
              matrix multiplication.  Therefore, it is important to understand the
              fundamental properties of volume holography and material response. Preliminary
              investigation has demonstrated that photorefractive crystals are promising
              candidates for both storage and matrix multiplication.  However, practical
              problems such as noise sources, fixing technique and response time remain to be
              solved.  We propose to carry out the investigation on volume holography in
              photorefractive materials. At the same time, we plan to explore the
              opportunities of other volume holographic media and compare their optical
              properties with those of photorefractives. We will also investigate the
              possibility of incorporating the optical memory and matrix processor into
              existing electronic computers. Furthermore, new concepts for optical computing
              will be developed during this investigation. ***                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
