Title       : The Genome Radio Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1999      
File        : a9896028

Award Number: 9896028
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $423324             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barinetta Scott bariscot@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith Thilman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SoundVision Productions
	      2991 Shattuck Avenue
	      Berkeley, CA  94705    510/486-1185

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                9626954  Scott    The Genome Radio Project, through the Pacifica Foundation,
              will produce nine one-hour radio documentaries and a live two-hour Town Hall on
              current genome research.  The goals of the project are:    o to provide
              background information on the theories and techniques of human genetic science,
               o to raise the social, ethical, and legal issues and concerns associated with
              human genetic research, and  o to provide an opportunity for the public to
              interact with the scientific experts and policy makers.    The specific
              programs include:    o DNA and Behavior:  Is Our Fate in Our Genes?  o Prenatal
              Genetic Testing:  Better Babies Through Science?  o Gene Testing;  Do You
              Really Want to Know Your Future?  o Gene Therapy:  Medicine For Your Genes.  o
              DNA and the Law  o The Commercialization of Genetic Information  o Eugenics,
              Past and Present  o Race, Evolution, and Philosophy in the Age of Genetics  o
              The Human Genome Project:  Roadmap to the Human Body    The radio programs will
              be supplemented by a variety of printed and electronic ancillary materials
              exploring the science, ethics, and social impact of human genetic research.   
              The project will be under the Bari Scott who will serve as PI.  She has most
              recently been Executive Producer for The Telecommunication Radio Project.  The
              Co-PI's will be Mat Binder, an Independent radio producer and instructor at the
              University of California, and Jude Thilman, the Project Director/Host of The
              communications Revolution, the nationally syndicated, live series on new
              telecommunications technologies.  The principal consultants responsible for the
              science content of the project will be Sylvia Spengler, Deputy Director of The
              Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Human Genome Center and Lane Conn, Coordinator of
              the Human Genome Education program at the Stanford University Human Genome
              Center.  The science consultants and production staff will work closely with
              approximately thirty genome scientists nationwide who have formally agreed to
              advise the projec t.
