Title       : Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing: Environmentally Conscious Plasma Arc
               Processes for Enhanced Metal Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1998   
File        : a9896109

Award Number: 9896109
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85065              (Estimated)
Investigator: Uday B. Pal upal@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9528635   Szekely     During smelting of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, ionic
              melts such as slags, fluxes or mattes react with gases and metals.  These
              reactions are electrochemical in nature involving charge transfer between ionic
              an electronic species and are often diffusion limited in the slag phase.  Since
              slags, fluxes and mattes are primarily ionic melts, the diffusion process is
              controlled by the slower moving electronic species.  The objective of this
              research is to enhance the slag-metal reaction by using a plasma to provide an
              electronic pathway in the slag and assess the magnitude of its impact on
              processing ferrous melts in terms of lowering iron oxide (FeO) content and
              volume of the slag, and increasing yield, refractory life and recovery of
              alloying elements.  Preliminary results indicate a potential reduction of ten
              fold in the percent of FeO needed for decarburization of iron-carbon melt.   
              Annual world production and consumption of metals is close to 750 million tons,
              of which iron is ninety-five percent.  Extraction, smelting, refining and
              reclaiming processes associated with metals produce large quantities of both
              hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and thus have a significant impact on the
              environment.  This project could revolutionize steelmaking by dramatically
              reducing both the volume and the iron content of the slag that must be disposed
              of.  It could also open other opportunities in the removal of copper and zinc
              from ferrous scraps and in the matte smelting of copper,  which would also have
              a major economic and environmental impact.
