Title       : Two Problems: Nonlinear Wave Equations and Mathematical Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1997  
File        : a9896077

Award Number: 9896077
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11298              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary C. Pugh mpugh@math.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The project consists of two completely separate parts: a largely  analytical
              study of a particular nonlinear wave problem and a  computational and modelling
              study of orientation tuning in the  mammalian visual cortex.  The first part
              considers a particular  coupled system of nonlinear PDEs which the PI and M.
              Shelley  have already computationally shown to have finite time  singularities
              of "pinching type".  The system is a model for the  flow of a pair of
              immiscible irrotational inviscid fluids in two  dimensions.  The singularity,
              in which one of the two evolving  functions goes from being strictly positive
              to positive except  for vanishing at a point, corresponds to a strand of fluid
              being  broken in two.  Questions of existence and regularity of  strictly
              positive solutions will be considered, as will  energy-methods to prove a
              finite-time singularity.  In the  second part, the PI will work with
              experimentalists B. Shapley  and D. Ringach on various aspects of orientation
              tuning.  Providing experience in modelling and computation, various  models
              will be compared to experimental results, with the added  possibility of the
              computational results being used to suggest  further experiments.
