Title       : Quaternary Paleoclimate Record from Tropical South America: Lake Titicaca
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  2001   
File        : a9896152

Award Number: 9896152
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David J. Verardo                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $175759             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Dunbar dunbar@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1530      PALEOCLIMATE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract  ATM-9616972  Baker, Paul A.  Duke University    ATM-9708257  Dunbar,
              Robert B.  William Marsh Rice University    ATM-9708256  Fritz, Sherilyn C. 
              LeHigh University    ATM-9708258  Seltzer, Geoffrey  Syracuse University   
              Title: Quaternary Paleoclimate Record from SOuth America: Lake  Titicaca    A
              long and continuous paleoclimate record from tropical South  America is needed
              to answer several persistent and important  questions.  This award supports the
              recovery of such a record by  coring the deep basin of Lake Titicaca on the
              northern Altiplano of  Peru and Bolivia.  Through the preliminary analysis of a
              series of  short, mini-piston cores, it is demonstrated that the sediments of 
              the lake are suitable for climatic reconstruction.  Also, high-  solution
              seismic reflection profiling has shown that there are many  excellent
              localities for siting much longer piston cores and for  obtaining even older
              sediments via offset coring.  Previous studies  revealed large-amplitude
              fluctuations of lake level in the Holocene  and Pleistocene, implying that
              effective moisture (and probably  temperature) has likewise varied drastically.
               Siting of a series  of long cores will be aided by medium-resolution, deeper 
              penetration seismic reflection profiling with uniboom and water gun  sound
              sources.  The cores will be subsequently analyzed for  chronology (AMS
              radiocarbon), sedimentology (X-ray diffraction and  optical petrography),
              physical properties (porosity, density,  magnetic susceptibiity), geochemistry
              (stable isotopic analysis and  minor-element chemistry of ostracodes; stable
              isotopic analysis of  organic carbon and cellulose; determination of organic
              and  inorganic phosphorous, and biogenic silica; strontium isotopic  analysis
              of ostracodes) and paleobiota (ostracode and diatom  species compositions), 
              This record will allow us to examine in  detail the timing and mechanisms of
              tropical forcing of high-  latitude climate (and vice versa), as well as the
              linkage between  the climate of the  Altiplano and the Amazon basin
