Title       : RUI: Identification of tRNA Maturation Proteins in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2001   
File        : a9896313

Award Number: 9896313
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cindy L. Wolfe cwolfe_1999@yahoo.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tougaloo College
	      
	      Tougaloo, MS  39174    601/956-4941

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9723045  Wolfe  Transfer RNA is synthesized as a precursor in the nucleus where
              it undergoes a series of maturation steps that include the cleavage of 5' and
              3' sequences, base modifications, the removal of intervening sequences, and the
              addition of the oligonucleotide CCA to the 3' terminus. Transfer RNA is then
              exported to the cytosol where additional bases are modified and the 3'CCA
              terminus is repaired. In the mitochondria, precursor tRNA undergoes a similar
              maturation process.  Many of the components of the maturation pathway in both
              the nucleus and mitchondria have not yet been identified.  This research will
              identify new components of the tRNA maturation pathway, examine the
              organization of these proteins in a putative tRNA maturation complex, and to
              study protein interactions important to efficient maturation of tRNA. 
              Crosslinking and immunoprecipitation experiments will utilize known maturation
              proteins as anchors to isolate and identify other components of the tRNA
              maturation pathway.  Since Trm1p, Mod5p and Cca1p function in the maturation of
              nuclear and mitochondrial pre-tRNA they will be utilized as anchors to
              biochemically isolate chemical amounts of tRNA maturation complexes from both
              organelles.  Crosslinking techniques will allow the isolation of proteins that
              along with the anchor protein interact with pre-tRNA. Components of these
              complexes will be identified by peptide sequence analysis. Peptide sequence
              information will then be used to search the yeast genomic data base for the
              corresponding gene. A two hybrid selection will be employed to determine the
              pattern of interactions between the newly identified proteins in the tRNA
              maturation complex. Genetic experiments will be conducted that exploit the
              central role of Ccalp in tRNA metabolism.  ATP(CTP): tRNA nucleotidyhxansferase
              (Ccalp) is the only tRNA maturation enzyme characterized thus far that is
              essential for maturation of all cellular tRNAs. Ccalp localizes to the nucleus,
              mitochondria, and cytosol where it catalyzes  the addition of the
              oligonudeotides CCA to the 3' end of nuclear and mitochondrial precursor tRNA.
              In the cytosol Cca1p repairs CCA end-shortened tRNAs. A genetic synthetic
              lethal screen will be carried out to identify essential Ccalp interactions that
              occur in a specific cellular compartment but may not be detected by biochemical
              means. Experimental data obtained from these biochemical and genetic approaches
              will yield new information concerning the identity of tRNA maturation proteins,
              the organization of tRNA maturation complexes and the protein interactions
              essential to tRNA metabolism in the cell.    Transfer RNA is synthesized as a
              precursor in the nucleus where it undergoes a series of maturation steps.  In
              the mitchondria, precursor tRNA undergoes a similar maturation process.  Many
              of the components of the maturation pathway in both the nucleus and mitchondria
              have not yet been identified.  Data obtained from these biochemical and genetic
              experiments will yield new information concerning the identify of tRNA
              maturation proteins, the organization of tRNA maturation complexes and the
              protein interactions essential to tRNA metabolism in the cell.
