Title       : Holocene Paleoenvironmental Change Along the Antarctic Peninsula: A Test of the
               Bi-Polar/Solar Signal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2000      
File        : a9896175

Award Number: 9896175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41951              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert B. Dunbar dunbar@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Domack: OPP 9615053  Manley: OPP 9615670  Banerjee: OPP 9615695  Dunbar: OPP
              9615668  Ishman: OPP 9615669  Leventer: OPP 9714371      Abstract  This award
              supports a multi-disciplinary, multi-institutional  effort to elucidate the
              detailed climate history of the Antarctic  Peninsula during the Holocene epoch
              (the last 10,000 years).  The  Holocene is an important, but often overlooked,
              portion of the  Antarctic paleoclimatic record because natural variability in 
              Holocene climate on time scales of decades to millennia can be  evaluated as a
              model for our present "interglacial" world.  This  project builds on over ten
              years of prior investigation into the  depositional processes, productivity
              patterns and climate regime  of the Antarctic Peninsula.  This previous work
              identified key  locations that contain ultra-high resolution records of past 
              climatic variation.  These data indicate that solar cycles  operating on
              multi-century and millennial time scales are  important regulators of meltwater
              production and  paleoproductivity.  These marine records can be correlated with
               ice core records in Greenland and Antarctica.    This project will focus on
              sediment dispersal patterns across the  Palmer Deep region.  The objective is
              to understand the present  links between the modern climatic and oceanographic
              systems and  sediment distribution.  In particular, additional information is 
              needed regarding the influence of sea ice on the distribution of  both biogenic
              and terrigenous sediment distribution.  Sediment  samples will be collected
              with a variety of grab sampling and  coring devices.  Analytical work will
              include carbon-14 dating of  surface sediments using accellerator mass
              spectrometry and  standard sedimentologic, micropaleontologic and magnetic 
              granulometric analyses.  This multiparameter approach is the most  effective
              way to extract the paleoclimatic signals contained in  the marine sediment
              cores.  Two additional objectives are the  deployment of sediment traps in
              front of the Muller Ice  Shelf in  Lallemand Fjord and seismic reflection work
              in conjunction with  site augmentation funded through the Joint Oceanographic 
              Institute.  The goal of sediment trap work is to address whether  sand
              transport and deposition adjacent to the ice shelf calving  line results from
              meltwater or aeolian processes.  In addition,  the relationship between sea ice
              conditions and primary  productivity will be investigated.  The collection of a
              short  series of seismic lines across the Palmer Deep basins will fully 
              resolve the question of depth to acoustic basement.    The combination of
              investigators on this project, all with many  years of experience working in
              high latitude settings, provides  an effective team to complete the project in
              a timely fashion.  A  combination of undergraduate, graduate and post-graduate
              students  will be involved in all stages of the project so that educational 
              objectives will be met in-tandem with research goals of the  project.
