Title       : ESR Dating at Archaeological Sites in Europe and Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9896289

Award Number: 9896289
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $161555             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bonnie A. Blackwell bonnie.a.b.blackwell@williams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Anne F. Skinner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel I. Blickstein  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Williams College
	      
	      Williamstown, MA  01267    413/597-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Drs. Bonnie Blackwell and Anne Skinner will conduct a series of laboratory
              experiments to improve the electron spin resonance (ESR) technique and then
              apply it in a variety of field contexts. ESR provides a method to date teeth
              and appropriate categories of stone artifacts which date between ca. 20,000 and
              possibly as much as 4,000,000 years old. Because both categories of artifacts
              are common in archaeological sites and because many such occurrences are not
              datable by other available techniques, ESR, if properly developed, can provide
              an important anthropological tool. The technique depends on the fact that
              buried objects absorb small amounts of uranium from the soil and the internal
              as well as external bombardment by disintegration byproducts creates time
              dependent displacement of electrons within the sample. ESR provides a method to
              measure the extent to which this has occurred. When the dose rate has been
              determined, it is then possible to calculate age. Many prehistoric peoples
              heated lithics before they fashioned them into tools because the structural
              changes caused by heating made the material easier to work. Luckily, heat also
              sets the electron displacement clock to zero thus making heat treated pieces
              amenable to ESR analysis.  While it is feasible in principle and has produced
              intuitively reasonable dates, ESR is not well developed and the results are
              treated with understandable caution. Uranium uptake rates are hard to determine
              and several different models have been proposed. Blackwell and Skinner's
              research focuses on technique development. They shall compare tooth enamel with
              dentine and cementum and adjacent sediment to gain insight into uranium
              absorption. They shall also perform calibration tests through analysis of teeth
              and lithics from sites which have been securely dated by other techniques.
              Finally they shall examine and date materials from a series of important sites
              in both Europe and Southern Africa.  The research therefore will both help to
              develop an important dating technique and yield data which will improve our
              understanding of the emergence of humans.                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                 
