Title       : Icosahedral Virion Scaffolding Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1999      
File        : a9896189

Award Number: 9896189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153609             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bentley A. Fane bfane@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9604680  Fane  The main objectives of this study are to elucidate the critical
              interactions during viral assembly, and to define the structural domains of the
              responsible macromolecules, the scaffolding proteins, in Microviridae viruses.
              A combination of genetic, biochemical and structural approaches including X-ray
              crystallography will be employed. The results of these analyses may provide
              further insights into the assembly of viruses and the design of recombinant
              proteins. The Microviridae internal scaffolding proteins, gpB, share many
              properties with molecular chaperones. Prior results indicate that the internal
              scaffolding proteins either possess inherent flexibility or interact with their
              substrates in nonspecific manners, perhaps via interfaces. Determining the
              atomic structures of hybrid procapsids, containing foreign scaffolding
              proteins, will directly address this question. For those instances in which
              foreign scaffolding proteins do not cross function, genetic analyses will be
              employed to define domains which may confer substrate specificity. Gain of
              function mutations in viral coat proteins, allowing for the utilization of
              foreign scaffolding proteins, have been isolated and will be examined.  The
              atomic structure of the external scaffolding proteins, gpD, of Microviridae
              suggests that they also share many features with molecular chaperones. They
              bind other proteins in many different ways using various surfaces, the
              specificity for a particular viral coat protein may thus reside in specific
              domains. Unlike the internal scaffolding proteins which exhibit a great deal of
              divergence in primary structure, the external scaffolding proteins share 75%
              sequence identity. The inability for Phi X174 protein to productively direct
              the assembly of other Microviridae virions is therefore attributable to the
              divergent residues localized its NH2-termini, which forms a large alpha-helical
              structure. This hypothesis will be tested with chimeric polypeptides, and the
              plasmid-based cross complementation  system will be used.  ***   All viruses
              must assemble themselves by means of multiple macromolecular interactions, the
              assembly is often dependent on proteins  known as scaffolding proteins. 
              Analogous to scaffoldings used in the construction of buildings, scaffolding
              proteins are found in virus  assembly intermediates but not in the mature
              viruses. Two different scaffolding proteins, external and  internal, are
              required for the    assembly of the Microviridae family of viruses. With these
              viruses it is possible to purify viral intermediates which still include  the 
              external scaffolding protein. By examining the atomic structure of the external
              scaffolding protein and performing genetic analyses with both the internal and 
              external proteins, it has been determined that different regions of the
              scaffolding proteins may have specific and     identifiable functions. The main
              objectives of this research are to refine the atomic structures of these
              proteins and to test hypotheses regarding their various functions by
              constructing hybrid Microviridae  scaffolding proteins. The results of these
              analyses will provide further insights into viral assembly.
