Title       : Genetic Diversity in Insular Southeast Asia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1998      
File        : a9896110

Award Number: 9896110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $147364             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ranjan Deka   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark D. Shriver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Nilmani Saha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The survey of human genetic diversity and similarity is an important issue which
              addresses the  very basic question of human evolution and history.  In this
              study, the researchers will study the  extent of genetic diversity among the
              populations of insular Southeast Asia for the following  principal reason. This
              region of the globe has witnessed several major developments in the  evolution
              and dispersal of humans.  However, questions such as whether the Austronesians
              are  the most likely founders of Polynesian Islands need to be addressed in
              greater detail. Also, the  question arises whether there is any genetic link
              between the island Southeast Asians and the  New Guinea populations in spite of
              their linguistic differences. Although recent studies using  mitochondrial DNA
              variation have addressed some of these issues, our knowledge will remain 
              incomplete in the absence of information using nuclear DNA polymorphisms, as
              these  researchers will do.   Two significant strengths of this proposal are:
              (1) they already possess a large repository of DNA  samples collected from the
              representative populations of the area, which can be analyzed  immediately to
              achieve the specific aims of this study; (2) via existing and prospective 
              collaborations with other investigators, who are studying mitochondrial DNA
              variation in the  same populations and at the same nuclear DNA loci in the
              populations of Oceania and Australia,  this study will bring about a combined
              effort which will yield important insights into population  structure and
              evolutionary history of the greater Pacific region.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                  
