Title       : Calibrating Orogenic Denudation using Detrital Mineral Geochronology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  1998 
File        : a9896048

Award Number: 9896048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas W. Burbank   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Burbank  9627865   Traditional methods of defining hinterland deformation and
              associated denudation typically have involved site-by-site calibration of
              bedrock cooling histories and/or P-T-t paths.  Results from a few sites are
              then sometimes extrapolated regionally in order to speculate on broader
              deformational/denudational histories.  The ability to date individual detrital
              minerals has provided a new technique to calibrate deformation and erosion,
              whereby ages are generated for populations of detrital minerals which were
              collected from strata of known age in a basin adjacent to a range.  The
              measured temporal difference between the time of cooling below an annealing or
              closure temperature and the time of deposition can be interpreted as
              representing the time required to uplift a mineral through its
              annealing/closure isotherm to the erosional surface, transport it across the
              cooling and erosional history from an entire drainage basin.  Recent Himalayan
              studies have shown that some grains in nearly every sample have experienced
              very rapid cooling, erosion, transport, and deposition (often <1-2 My from
              cooling to deposition).   At present, the interpretation of detrital mineral
              studies is strongly limited by numerous uncertainties.  The detrital record
              integrates age information from all tributary basins.  Often the drainage
              catchment contributing to a given site in the past is unknown, changing through
              time, or poorly defined.  The relative importance of point sources (perhaps
              rapidly uplifting and denuding) within a catchment is unknown.  The impact of
              topographic and climatic variability on the total detrital contribution for any
              given catchment is unknown.  These uncertainties permit detrital age data to be
              reliably analyzed only in broad, generalized terms.  If the relationships among
              spatial contributions, and downstream mixing were known, much more useful
              information could potentially be extracted from detrital age populations.    
              We propose a baseline calibration of age distributions of  detrital minerals
              and related topography, geomorphology, and climate in order to understand the
              interactions among factors which control the detrital age populations as
              observable today.  We will study a Himalayan drainage that extends from the
              modern foreland to the Tibetan drainage divide and that includes areas with
              strong climatic and topographic contrasts, areas for which marked differences
              in bedrock uplift rates have been inferred or observed, and areas in which the
              bedrock geology is quite well known and dated.  The catchment is largely
              covered by a 90-m digital elevation data set that provides a basis for analysis
              of topographic effects.  Through documentation of the changing detrital age
              population along the river course and the contributions from tributary
              catchments, we will assess the dependence of the detrital signal on bedrock
              ages, inferred or defined bedrock uplift or erosion rates, topographic
              characteristics, and climatic influences.  This calibration will allow us to
              assess the key controls exerted by these interacting factors in a tectonically
              dynamic landscape and will form a conceptual basis for improved interpretation
              of subsequent detrital mineral age studies.  Moreover, this integration should
              permit us to evaluate the potential for utilizing detrital mineral ages to
              extract relative bedrock erosion rates:  a key problem in geomorphic studies. 
              Given the global climatic effects attributed to Himalayan and Tibetan uplift,
              as well as tectonic significance of the Himalayan collision, a firmer basis for
              interpreting integrated uplift and erosion histories is clearly needed.
