Title       : ADP-Ribosylation and Regulation of Cellular Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  1997    
File        : a9896003

Award Number: 9896003
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23583              (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Payne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : UNT Hlth Sci Ctr at Fort W
	      Camp Bowie at Montgomery
	      Fort Worth, TX  76107    817/735-2000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Currently there is reasonably convincing support for the hypothesis            
              that reversible modification of proteins by ADP-ribosylation plays             
              a significant role in regulation of cellular functions and signal              
              transduction in eukaryotes.  The overall objective of this research            
              is to elucidate at the molecular level the role(s) of ADP-                     
              riblosyltransferases (ADPRTases) in signal transduction and                    
              regulation of cellular functions.  To achieve this goal, it will be            
              necessary to (1) understand how the activity of these enzymes is               
              regulated, (2) identify the proteins which serve as physiologically            
              relevant targets for this post-translational modification, and (3)             
              determine how the modification of these specific proteins controls             
              cellular functions.  Progress toward these goals is hampered by the            
              lack of immunological and molecular genetic reagents for studying              
              the modifying enzymes and target proteins involved in ADP-                     
              ribosylation reactions.  For example, no gene for an endogenous                
              ADPRTase has yet been cloned or sequenced.  Likewise, no target                
              protein for in vivo ADP-ribosylation has been identified.  One                 
              specific goal of this proposal is to generate immunological and                
              molecular genetic reagents to use as probes in addressing some of              
              the important questions surrounding these post-translational                   
              modifications of proteins.  The parallel and complementary aims of             
              this study are (1) generation of antibodies that specifically                  
              recognize ADPRTases and ADP-ribosylated proteins and (2) molecular             
              analysis of these proteins and their genes.                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Many proteins are structurally modified after synthesis by addition            
              of various small molecules.  In some cases these modifications have            
              been shown to play a pivotal role in the mechanism of action of the            
              protein.  For example, in many cellular responses to external                  
              stimuli the mechanism of signal transduction often involves the                
              activation of an enzyme that adds or removes a phosphate group from            
              some protein.  Another type of protein modification is the addition            
              of a molecule, known as adenosine diphosphoribose, derived from a              
              vitamin and a sugar, to specific proteins.  This chemical reaction             
              is carried out by an enzyme known as adenosine diphosophoribosyl-              
              transferases (ADPRTases).  The overall goal of this research is to             
              elucidate at the molecular level the role(s) of ADP-                           
              ribosyltransferases in signal transduction and regulation of cell              
              functions.  The near term objectives are to characterize ADP                   
              ribosyltransferases and to identify and characterize the                       
              physiologically important protein substrates of the ADPRTases.                 
              First it is necessary to develop biochemical and immunological                 
              tools to proceed with these studies.  The results of this research             
              should be an important contribution to understanding of the                    
              molecular mechanisms by which cells respond to external stimuli.
