Title       : Western Apache Grammar and Dialectology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1998       
File        : a9896227

Award Number: 9896227
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Catherine N. Ball                       
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem J. de Reuse   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of North Texas
	      P O Box 305250
	      Denton, TX  762035250    940/565-3940

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                de Reuse       This project consists of linguistic fieldwork to be carried out
               on Western Apache, a Southern Athabaskan language spoken on the four 
              present-day Apache reservations and communities of Arizona (San  Carlos, Fort
              Apache, Payson (Tonto-Apache), and Camp Verde (Yavapai-  Apache)).  The
              fieldwork will lead to a reference grammar of the  Western Apache (WA)
              language, with particular attention to dialectal  variation, and containing
              illustrative morphologically analyzed texts  in various dialects.  An attempt
              to document the remnants of the  Chiricahua Apache language on these Apache
              reservations will also be  made, if speakers can be located.       The
              resulting reference grammar of the Western Apache language  will contribute to
              the field of descriptive linguistics by providing  documentation of this
              typologically interesting language.  It will  emphasize points of current
              theoretical interest, such as: underlying  representations in tonal languages;
              the derivation of the linear  ordering of morphemes and the need for position
              class morphology; and  the function of the yi-/bi- alternation and its
              interaction with  definiteness and specificity.  It will also contribute to
              comparative  and historical Athabaskan, especially in view of the fact that WA
              has  phonological peculiarities reminiscent of the Northern Athabaskan 
              languages of Canada, which do not occur in Navajo, its closest  Southern
              Athabaskan relative.       Finally, this work will be relevant to theoretical
              work on  variation intralinguistically (i.e. variation within the WA language) 
              and interlinguistically (i.e. when WA is compared to other Athabaskan 
              languages).
