Title       : Cognitive Mechanisms in Complex Skill Acquisition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1998   
File        : a9896112

Award Number: 9896112
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Hal R. Arkes                            
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 16,  1997  
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91612              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ruth Kanfer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              An information-processing, resource-allocation theory is used to               
              investigate motivational and self-regulatory mechanisms as they                
              affect the acquisition and maintenance of complex decision-making              
              performance in jobs demanding highly skilled performance.  Air                 
              traffic controllers will be used at the target skill group in this             
              project.  Key determinants of self-monitoring strategies and                   
              competency judgments, their interrelations, and their associations             
              with performance are evaluated using an integrative                            
              aptitude/treatment interactions approach.                                      
                                                                                             
              Three studies examine the influence of the information environment             
              on self-regulatory activities and task performance.  These studies             
              have implications for the development of training interventions to             
              maximize on-task attentional effort and skill development in                   
              cognitively demanding, information-rich jobs.  A second series of              
              studies examines cognitive ability, task conception, and                       
              motivational determinants of individual differences in competency              
              judgments of aspects of performance.  The findings of these studies            
              have implications for understanding the role of conative processes             
              in skill acquisition, as well as for the development of more                   
              precise non-cognitive selection measures for the prediction of                 
              performance in complex jobs involving protracted training.  The use            
              of a high-fidelity work task simulation permits the integrations of            
              laboratory findings with results obtained in two longitudinal field            
              studies, and provides critical information for ultimate                        
              implementation in training and on-the-job situations.
