Title       : Numerical Studies of Three-Dimensional Turbulence in Small Aspect Ratio Domains
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1998      
File        : a9896183

Award Number: 9896183
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121490             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie M. Smith lsmith@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              CTS-9528491  Smith     This is a study of three dimensional turbulence in small
              aspect ratio (SAR) domains, where the vertical height, H, is small compared to
              the length, L, in the horizontal direction.   The objective is to solve the
              incompressible Navier Stokes equations using a pseudo-spectral code in a
              periodic domain for varying resolutions.  The study will be aimed at bridging
              the gap between turbulence research and geophysical applications.  Of special
              interest is the transition from two dimensional to three dimensional turbulence
              and related fundamental issues such as the change in the energy cascade.
              Two-dimensional turbulence is characterized by an inverse cascade of energy to
              large scales whereas the direction of the energy flux in three-dimensional
              turbulence is in the direction of smaller scales.  The interest in the SAR
              domain is the apparent lack of detailed study in spite of the relevance to
              geophysical phenomena such as atmospheric turbulence.  One of the unique
              features of this study is to consider SAR turbulence where the vertical
              velocity is not small in comparison to the horizontal turbulence at small
              scales.  this would allow the modeling of phenomena that are inaccessible to
              quasi-geostrophic models, such as atmospheric large scale motions that are
              partially driven by vertical convection at relatively small scales.  The
              interaction of coherent structures with background forcing in SAR domains is
              one of the objectives of the research.     The research addresses an important
              aspect of turbulence dynamics that has not received adequate attention in the
              past.  The results of this research will have an important impact on our
              ability to predict geophysical flows.
