Title       : GOALI/IUCRP: Solid State Amperiometric Sensor for In-Situ Monitoring of Melt
               Composition in High Temperature Metallurgical Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1998      
File        : a9896079

Award Number: 9896079
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Uday B. Pal upal@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9424069  Pal   A solid state sensor will be designed and built to in-situ
              monitor oxide (slag) melt composition encountered in smelting and refining of
              ferrous and non-ferrous metals.  In this device, the oxygen ion conducting
              stabilized zirconia solid electrolyte will physically separate the cathodic
              compartment, exposed to the melt, from the anodic compartment, exposed to a
              reference gas.  Possible choices for electrode materials include refractory
              oxides such as the lanthanum and yttrium chromites, doped zirconia and various
              inert metal-zirconia cermets.  A negative potential sweep, will be applied to
              sensing electrode (cathode) with respect to the counter electrode (anode). 
              When the dissociation potential of an oxide in the melt is reached, the oxide
              will reduce at the cathode and the oxygen ions will be driven through the solid
              electrolyte to the anode, where they will liberate electrons and an ionic
              current through the device will be detected.  If the oxides in the melt, which
              are to be detected, have dissociation potentials that do not overlap and are
              lower than that of zirconia, then these oxides can be sequentially dissociated
              and distinguished by this device.  Once an oxide is dissociated, the potential
              sweep will result in an ionic current peak which will give a measure of its
              concentration.  By using a single device one could detect and measure the
              concentrations of the oxides of iron, manganese and chromium in ferrous
              smelting and refining slags.   The sensor will be tested on three well defined
              slag systems, CaO-SiO2-Al2O3-Feo, CaO-SiO2-Al2O3-FeO-MnO, and
              CaO-SiO2-A12O3-FeO-MnO-CrOx.   The industrial partner will package this slag
              sensor for on-site testing in steelmaking facilities.  Proper real time
              detection of FeO and MnO in steelmaking and ladle refining slags and also CrOx
              in stainless steelmaking slags is key to improving the recovery of iron and
              alloying elements and decreasing non-metallic inclusions through better process
              control.   For optimum process control of ferrous  and non-ferrous smelting and
              refining operations, concentration of some critical components in slags need to
              be monitored in real time at various stages during the process.  Currently, all
              slag composition analyses in these processes are performed with expensive
              analytical equipment on samples removed from the melt and they take a
              relatively long time.  If in-situ monitoring of slag composition can be
              performed using a relatively inexpensive sensor it would be widely used for
              smelting and refining process control, resulting in improving the quality of
              the product, increasing productivity and thereby decreasing the overall
              manufacturing cost.
