Title       : Calcium Signaling in the Brain of Behaving Zebrafish
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1998      
File        : a9896131

Award Number: 9896131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roy L. White                            
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $92304              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald M. O'Malley domalle@lynx.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 1192      NEURONAL AND GLIAL MECHANISMS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9514777  O'Malley    Calcium is a key signaling molecule in the nervous system
              of  all animals.  In vertebrate animals, calcium levels inside  nerve cells
              increase when the cells are stimulated.  Increased calcium levels have many
              different actions inside  nerve cells, ranging from the immediate regulation of
              the  electrical excitability of the cell to very long term  changes in the
              cell's behavior, which may be mediated  through alterations of gene expression.
               Recently a  technique was developed that allows the imaging of calcium 
              activity in nerve cells in the brain of intact zebrafish.  This allows
              measurement of cellular calcium activity in  response to a variety of sensory
              stimuli and also allows the  investigation of any correlations between these
              calcium  signals and the behavior of the fish.  This approach  demonstrated
              that calcium signals in one particular  identified nerve cell in the hindbrain
              of the zebrafish, the  Mauthner cell, were dramatically enhanced after
              repetitive  sensory stimulation.  One principal aim of this proposal is  to
              determine the conditions required to produce this novel  form of enhancement. 
              This will be accomplished by varying  the timing, intensity and modality of
              sensory stimulation.  A second major aim is to understand the cellular
              mechanisms  underlying these large calcium signals. A third aim takes 
              advantage of the fact that the Mauthner cell is a behavioral  command neuron,
              which triggers the animal's escape behavior.  This cutting-edge project will
              demonstrate the molecular  basis for a behavior in a living animal.  The
              potential  implications are enormous, both for the understanding of the 
              molecular basis of animal behavior and for the development  of non-invasive
              measuring techniques in living animals.
