Title       : RUI: Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Lipid Bilayer Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1998       
File        : a9896211

Award Number: 9896211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156418             (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott E. Feller fellers@wabash.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wabash College
	      301 West Wabash
	      Crawfordsville, IN  47933    317/362-1400

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9728206  Feller  Atomic-level computer simulations will be used to probe the
              structure and dynamics of bilayer membranes containing a variety of
              phospholipids, as well as small solutes, nonionic surfactants, and peptides. 
              Because of the inherent disorder in the liquid-crystalline phase in which
              lipids exist at physiological temperature, atomic level structural data are
              extremely difficult to obtain experimentally.  Thus these simulations will
              complement the existing body of experimental data.  These experimental data
              will be used in two ways for this project.  Where possible, comparison will be
              made between properties observed in the simulation with those obtained
              experimentally in order to test the validity of the work.  Secondly, many of
              the analyses of these simulations have as their goal the extraction of bilayer
              properties which can be utilized in the interpretation of experiments.  The
              specific objectives of this research are the determinations of the volumes of
              fragments of lipid molecules with a precision not available experimentally. 
              These data will be used to introduce packing models into the interpretation of
              membrane diffraction experiments.  The fraction of free or void volume
              associated with each fragment will be determined.  This will address the role
              played by specific parts of the lipid in the permeation of the membrane by
              small solutes.  This project has biological relevance because of the importance
              of bilayer membranes to cell structure and function.  This work will provide a
              detailed picture of bilayer systems at the atomic level, and will provide
              information on the roles of specific parts of the lipid in permeation.   ***
