Title       : Neural-Immune Interactions in the Beluga, Delphinapterus leucas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  1998    
File        : a9896315

Award Number: 9896315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara K. Zain                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $10942              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Felten   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy Romano  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Vito Quaranta  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Loma Linda University
	      P O Box 2000
	      Loma Linda, CA  923540200    909/558-4531

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9317267  Felten  Prior NSF support and an extraordinary arrangement between the 
              Canadian Department of Fisheries and Oceans, native Canadian  hunters, the
              Naval Command, Control and Ocean Surveillance Center  R,D,T, and E Division
              (NRaD) have permitted these investigators to  obtain fresh tissue specimens
              from beluga whales, Delphinapterus  leucas, taken during sanctioned hunts. 
              These tissues were  collected at a relatively short postmortem interval with
              excellent  preservation of antigens for immunocytochemical localization of 
              neurotransmitters and neuropeptides in these organs.  These tissues  have been
              used for the first detailed study of the general  morphology of Beluga lymphoid
              organs, providing the foundation for  investigating neural-immune interactions
              in these mammals.  The  next goals of this research are to continue to obtain
              fresh tissue  specimens of the immune and nervous systems from beluga whales
              and  to use cells dissociated from fresh thymus, spleen and lymph nodes  to
              carry out in vitro immunological assays to test the hypothesis  that
              norepinephrine and neuropeptides found in these nerves in  beluga lymphoid
              organs can influence functional characteristics and  responses of cells of the
              immune system.  Monoclonal antibodies  against cetacean lymphocyte antigens
              will be generated to identify  cellular compartments in lymphoid organs
              according to specific  subsets of cells, and compare overall organization with
              that of  other mammals.  The monoclonal antibodies will be used with flow 
              cytometry to monitor percentages of lymphocyte subsets and to  separate
              populations of cells for functional assays.  A number of  in vitro functional
              assays will be developed and used to study the  effects of noradrenergic
              agonists, antagonists, or neuropeptides on  lymphocytes and leukocytes from
              beluga peripheral blood, thymus,  lymph nodes, and spleen.    %%%  The long
              term goal of this research is to understand the structure  and function of the
              immune system in a marine mammal, the beluga   whale, and to determine how the
              nervous system and immune system  may interact in regulating the normal health
              and well being of  these unique animals.  Prior NSF support and special
              arrangements  with the Canadian government, native Canadian hunters, and the US
               Navy have enabled these investigators to obtain tissue samples from  whales
              killed by native Canadian hunters in sanctioned hunts.   Using these samples,
              the structure of the major lymphoid organs was  described and it was
              demonstrated that the sympathetic nervous  system has  nerve branches which
              contact major lymphocyte-  containing areas of these organs.  This suggests
              that the nervous  system may be involved in regulating immune function in these
               animals as has been suggested for other mammals.  The next goals of  this
              research are to define more precisely the cell types involved  in the whale
              immune response, and to develop the technical tools  needed to study how
              neurotransmitters may affect their function.   The results of these studies
              will provide the groundwork of basic  knowledge that should make it possible,
              in the longer term, to  develop rational approaches to promote optimum health
              of marine  mammals in captivity and for conservation of these unique species. 
              ***
