Title       : Labor Market Dynamics and Public Policy During the Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1998      
File        : a9896023

Award Number: 9896023
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Terrell terrell@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Ham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Svejnar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Davidson Institute
	      724 East University
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091234    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              SBR-9512001  Katherine Terrell      This project will extend previous NSF-funded
              work on the transition to a market economy and its effect on the labor market. 
              The project will take advantage of a "natural experiment" involving the Czech
              and Slovak Republics.  The two countries began with common institutions, laws,
              policies, regulations, currency, prices, wages and labor productivity, yet have
              followed very different paths away from communism.  The Slovak Republic has
              seen its unemployment rate soar while the Czech Republic has experienced among
              the lowest unemployment rates in Europe.  Finding the causes of these very
              different experiences is an important policy question since chronic high
              unemployment has begun to threaten the viability of the newly democratic
              governments in the former Soviet bloc.  This project will build on previous
              work that focused on unemployment duration and the flow out of unemployment by
              looking also at the flows between unemployment, employment, and out-of-the
              labor force as well as job-to-job flows.  The project will also look at wage
              adjustment and its effects on the labor flows.    An important part of this
              project is the creation of new data sets on labor market experiences of workers
              in the two countries.  A follow-up questionnaire on a randomly selected set of
              6,000 newly unemployed workers will look at their destination after
              unemployment.  In addition, a retrospective questionnaire will be administered
              to 5,000 individuals in both republics.  Those sampled will be asked for a
              retrospective employment history going back to 1991.  This will allow the P.I.s
              to distinguish employment in jobs held under communism from employment in new
              jobs created since the transition to democracy and free markets.
