Title       : ALGEBRA BY DESIGN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1998  
File        : a9896126

Award Number: 9896126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anthony E. Kelly                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $438279             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jere Confrey jere@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 7258      RESEARCH IN TEACHING & LEARNIN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9453876    "Algebra by Design"  is a three year project in which researchers 
              and teachers will create design activities for middle school  students
              introducing them to functions and algebraic thinking.   Researchers will study
              students engaged in open-ended design  challenges requiring them to use their
              creativity to build  structures, design devices and create vidual displays form
              the  fields of mechanical engineering,physics, art geometry and  environmental
              sciences.  these design challenges will present  middle school students with a
              problem, a purpose, constraints,  materials and means of evaluation. 
              Interactive technological tools  such as function Probe, Shape Shifter,
              Macmotion, Interactive  Physics and Geometer's Sketchpad will be available for
              students to  analyze their projects.  Review panels of peers and experts will 
              provide feedback on the projects.  projects will be selected for  their appeal
              to success in assisting students in learning to work  effectively in algebra. 
              Small group interactions among groups of  students and teachers will be studied
              first as researchers find  ways to bridge from design activities to algebraic
              thinking and  back.  A set of selected projects will then be used in a year
              long  teaching experiment in a combined technology and algebra class with 
              heterogeneous grouping.  Research will be conducted on effective  policies for
              implementing reform, necessary teacher development and  improving student
              outcomes.
