Title       : Pleistocene Sea-Level and Glacial Fluctuations, Coastal Ahklun Mountains,
               Southwest Alaska
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1998       
File        : a9896260

Award Number: 9896260
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83125              (Estimated)
Investigator: Darrell S. Kaufman Darrell.Kaufman@nau.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Arizona Univ
	      100 Babbitt Administrative Ctr.
	      Flagstaff, AZ  860114130    928/523-4880

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                    Recent work in the south part of the west coast of Alaska (eastern Bristol
              Bay, 59oN) demonstrates that glaciers experienced extensive advances during the
              late Pleistocene.  In northwestern Alaska (Seward Peninsula, 65oN, and western
              Brooks Range, 67oN), on the other hand, early Wisconsin glaciers were
              restricted to the highest mountain valleys and occupied an area approximately
              an order of magnitude less extensive than during middle and early Pleistocene
              advances.  The most-recent major advance of glacier ice to the coast in 
              southwestern Alaska was at least 300,000 yr younger than the last advance of
              ice to the coast in northwestern Alaska.  To understand the cause and
              significance of this apparent glacial- geologic and paleoclimatological
              incongruity, the following must be addressed:  (1) Where and over what distance
              along the coast between eastern Bristol Bay and Seward Peninsula does the
              cross-over between late Pleistocene glacial maxima and middle Pleistocene
              maxima occur? (2) To what extent to valley hypsometries control the extent of
              ice from the different source areas?  (3) What does the geographic distribution
              of late-Wisconsin and pre-late-Wisconsin ice imply about equilibrium line
              altitude (ELA) lowering and equilibrium line altitude (ELA) gradients, and
              consequently, moisture sources and other climate variables?  Solving these
              questions will require extensive field, aerial photographic, and geochronologic
              research in the only glaciated region between eastern Bristol Bay and Seward
              Peninsula-the Ahklun Mountains.  It will depend on a multi-disciplinary effort
              to obtain numerical-age control on the deposits.  State-of-the-art
              geochronologic and sedimentologic techniques will be applied to reconstruct the
              spatial and temporal pattern of Pleistocene sea-level and glacier fluctuations.
               This work will improve the understanding of the paleoclimatological controls
              of glaciation across western Alaska and their relation to the global climate
              system;  should enable to address whether gl aciation in southwestern Alaska is
              synchronous with Northern Hemispheric ice-sheet fluctuations, or whether major
              glaciations here precedes ice build-up at lower latitude.
