Title       : Photochemical Ozone Budget of the Eastern North Pacific Atmosphere (PHOBEA)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9896270

Award Number: 9896270
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Anne-Marie Schmoltner                   
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Jaffe djaffe@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1524      ATMOSPHERIC CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9529604   Jaffe     This project addresses the formation of tropospheric ozone
              and the abundance and origin of ozone precursors. Observations of surface and
              free tropospheric ozone in the northern hemisphere show a spring maximum.
              Previous measurements in Alaska and model simulations indicate that some of
              this peak can be explained by photochemical production from winter accumulated,
              anthropogenic, ozone precursors. In this regard, the most important ozone
              precursor is peroxyacetyl nitrate (PAN). Measurements also show an important
              role for vertical transport in warming of air masses and causing thermal
              decomposition of PAN in the boundary layer. This anthropogenically caused ozone
              production may contribute to the long-term increases in ozone which have been
              observed at several northern hemispheric locations during spring and summer.   
              In this project, ground-based measurements of ozone, nitrogen oxides, total
              reactive nitrogen, PAN, carbon monoxide, radiation, radon, and reactive radical
              species, as well as aerosol properties, ultraviolet radiation, and
              meteorological parameters will be measured by the PI in collaboration with
              other researchers at the Cheeka Peak research site in Washington. In addition,
              aircraft-borne measurements of the abundance of ozone, nitric oxide, PAN, and
              carbon monoxide will be performed in the spring of 1997 in conjunction with the
              ground-based measurements. 0- and 1-dimensional models will be employed. The
              data will provide answers to questions including: (1) What is the ozone budget
              in this region; (2) What are the conditions that give rise to air mass warming
              and PAN composition, leading to enhanced ozone formation; (3) What is the
              influence of Asian emissions on air masses which arrive at the West Coast of
              the US; and (4) What is the influence of cloud types and heights on the
              ozone/nitrogen oxide photochemistry.
