Title       : Pollinator Guild Composition and Habitat Fragmentation: The Bees of Larrea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  2000 
File        : a9896150

Award Number: 9896150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jack Hayes                              
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $162200             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Cane jcane@biology.usu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Contracts and Grants
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9652599  Cane    As  natural habitats become increasingly isolated and
              fragmented,  species composition and abundance on these "islands' change.   We 
              presently lack the biological information needed to predict which  species 
              will go extinct or remain unaffected, and the  influence  that  these  changes
              have on other species and their interactions  in  an  ecosystem.  This project
              examines whether common features  of life history and ecology of bee species
              can be used to predict  their persistence or extinction in habitat fragments of
              different  sizes and degrees of isolation.  Most previous work in this  area 
              has   been  done  with  birds  and  mammals.   Bees  are  crucial  pollinators
              in many plant communities.  We focus on the bees that  visit  creosote bush. No
              plant species attracts more bee  species  (120+)  than creosote bush.  This bee
              fauna exhibits a  diversity  of ecological and life history features.  The
              plant dominates the  southwestern  deserts  of  the United  States;  its 
              20,000  year  advance with desertification is clearly documented by the  fossil
               record.   These  attributes together provide a  model  for  other  communities
               that  are  less diverse, less  understood,  or  more  difficult  to study. 
              Because of this shrub's broad distribution,  the  results  of this habitat
              fragmentation study  for  a  desert  basin  in  southern  Arizona  can  be 
              applied  to  regional  and  subcontinental  processes.  Combined  with  its 
              historic  spread  throughout  much of the western United States, the creosote 
              bush  and its bee guild can be used as an exemplary model for ecosystem 
              response to global change.
