Title       : RESEARCH LINK-The Development of Research-based Labs for Introductory Biology
               and a WWW Site to Support Nation-wide Exchange and Discussion of Experimental
               Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1999      
File        : a9896223

Award Number: 9896223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194200             (Estimated)
Investigator: K. Elaine Hoagland elaine@cur.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              John G. Stevens  (Principal Investigator former)
              Lisa M. Baird  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mary M. Allen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James D. Hoerter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John K. Haynes  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Council on Undergrad Rsch
	      734 15th Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051013    202/783-4810

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The Council on Undergraduate Research, a national organization of almost 4,000
              members that provides support and networking for faculty at over 850 primarily
              undergraduate institutions, will provide the leadership for organizing
              RESEARCH-LlNK--a national center for the development and exchange of
              research-based labs for introductory biology. RESEARCH-LINK will establish a
              formal network of undergraduate students and faculty that will permit
              collaboration in designing experiments, sharing data, and interpreting results
              via a WWW HomePage. Currently, a major obstacle preventing the introduction of
              research-based labs is the lack of a national clearinghouse continuously
              accessible to faculty, that provides models of experimental systems and
              field-tested laboratories that can be easily incorporated into a general
              biology laboratory that will allow students, during 3-4 lab sessions, to think
              and act like scientists. RESEARCH-LINK will permit faculty to communicate
              directly with authors of field-tested labs to work out problems and answer
              inquiries. The network will include faculty peers on the campuses of primarily
              undergraduate institutions across the country and selected mentor/consultants
              from the cadre of those now taking the lead in building and sustaining
              curricula with a strong research-based component. A series of workshops will
              select, develop, and disseminate a group of field-tested RESEARCH CORES that
              will consist of a collection of research-based labs in genetics, cell biology,
              plant and animal physiology, ecology/behavior, and evolution that faculty can
              select for integration into an introductory biology course. The project will be
              guided by the overriding principle that 3-4 weeks of any standard general
              biology laboratory should be devoted to teaching the nature of science and
              introducing students to the thought processes and methods of science such as
              formulating and testing hypotheses, designing and conducting experiments,
              analyzing and interpreting data, and communicating results.
