Title       : Three-Dimensional Crack Initiation and Propagation in Transparent Rock-Like
               Material Subject to Compression
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2002      
File        : a9896136

Award Number: 9896136
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1998   
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $148400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid N. Germanovich leonid@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              9622136    This work, a collaboration between researchers at Cornell  University
              and  the University of Oklahoma, is focused on developing  understanding about 
              the mechanisms of rock fracture in compression.  The  research involves 
              formulation and testing, with unique experiments and  computer simulation, 
              necessary to identify the evolution rules for the stable  growth of 
              three-dimensional cracks of arbitrary shape in brittle and  rock materials.  A
              laser will be used to induce three-dimensional cracks in  transparent 
              specimens.  These specimens will be tested under compressive  loading to 
              induce stable growth and crack interactions.  With  transparent material, 
              structural instabilities can be easily observed.  Based on  the test  results,
              three-dimensional crack propagation criteria will  be formulated.  An existing
              computer simulator will be applied and extended  for fully  three-dimensional
              crack growth and interaction.  Evolution  rules for crack  growth will be
              programmed into this simulator, which allows  arbitrary  trajectories of single
              internal cracks, cracks interacting  with free  surfaces, and with each other. 
              The hypothesis to be tested  within this  objective is that, using computer
              simulation, an acceptable  rule is one  that will be able not only to reproduce
              experimental  observations, but also  will be able to predict evolving crack
              shapes in additional  proof tests  before performing them.  ***
