Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research (INRIA): Structuring of Proof Search in the
               Logic Programming Paradigm
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1998  
File        : a9896139

Award Number: 9896139
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16029              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale A. Miller dale@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in logic
              programming between Dale A. Miller of the University of Pennsylvania and Pierre
              Deransart of the French National Institute for Research in Computer Science and
              Applied Mathematics (INRIA), Rocquencourt, France.  The objective of their
              research is to update and improve Prolog, a programming language designed from
              logic programming principles.  Although Prolog offers many novel programming
              possibilities, it does not incorporate software principles of modules, types,
              higher-order programming, and data abstraction.  The investigators will use two
              approaches to address these deficiencies:  intuitionistic theory of logic
              programming and modularity in logic programming.  The U.S. investigator and
              colleagues bring to this collaboration considerable expertise in the
              development of logic programming languages that encompass modular programming.
              This is complemented by the research at INRIA-Rocquencourt on modular
              programming in logic programming and application and theory of the
              intuitionistic theory of clauses.  The project will advance development of a
              module system for logic programming and enhance understanding of language
              design with modular constraints.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                
