Title       : Regulated Proopiomelanocortin Expression in the Skin
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 8,  1999   
File        : a9896030

Award Number: 9896030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith A. Verbeke                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105851             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrzej T. Slominski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Loyola U School of Med
	      2160 South First Street
	      Maywood, IL  601533304    /   -

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9604364  Slominski    The most important response to stress is the activation of
              the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA)axis, which is composed of the
              corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH), the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) derived
              peptides including ACTH and MSH and of a feedback inhibitory mechanism executed
              by glucocorticoids.  Recent data provide evidence that above factors are
              produced by skin.  Therefore, the PI  will test the hypothesis that cutaneous
              homeostasis is regulated through a local immunoneuroendocrine loop involving
              activation of the CRH-POMC axis and its termination by glucocorticoids.  The PI
              will also investigate a relation between local (skin) and systemic endocrine
              systems.  To address those problems the PI will use the C57BL/6 mouse model in
              which the cyclic activity of the hair follicle affects the metabolic state of
              the skin.  It has been already postulated that local production of POMC
              peptides may be a part of signals regulating physiological responses of the
              skin, for example hair growth, or represent deregulated circuits in pathologic
              conditions, for example inflammatory diseases and cancer.  In this proposal, a
              complex neuroendocrine regulation will be studied in depth in a simple model
              such as the rodent hair cycle so that the larger questions of environmental
              regulation of biological rhythms and neuroendocrine and neuroimmunological
              functions by POMC peptides and CRH receptors in the skin can be elucidated. 
              ***
