Title       : Gravitational Lensing Geometry and Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  1998      
File        : a9896274

Award Number: 9896274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $211254             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arlie O. Petters   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract    Proposal:  DMS-9734586  Principal Investigator:  Arlie Petters   
              This project centers on two mathematical programs dealing with the  optical
              caustics created by gravitational fields.  One program  investigates the
              magnification cross sections of caustic-curve  networks due to generic
              multiplane weak-field gravitational lens  systems.  The other program studies
              the links between the global  geometry of the optical caustic surfaces in a
              spacetime (e.g., along  our past light cone or about rotating black holes) and
              the  singularities of the associated spacetime metric.  These issues point  to
              a new and promising direction in the mathematical theory of optical  caustics. 
              Furthermore, their rigorous treatment may also lead to a  deeper understanding
              of the flux enhancement of gravitationally lensed  quasars and their
              overdensity around foreground galaxies, and rapid  X-ray variability in active
              galactic nuclei.  Equally important, such  investigations may reveal new and
              powerful ways of understanding and  organizing fundamental physical concepts in
              gravitational lensing, and  can provide a theoretical check on results from
              numerical simulations.      Gravitational lensing is the deflection of light
              from a distant source  (e.g., quasar, extended galaxy) by an intervening matter
              distribution  (e.g., galaxy, cluster of galaxies).  When foreground galaxies
              magnify  background quasars, it causes an ``amplification bias'' in certain 
              quasar samples.  This has led to a mathematically difficult and  physically
              important problem in gravitational lensing: Determine the  probability that a
              light source is magnified greater than some  specified amount.  A rigorous
              study of this problem directly bears on  the the issue of ``magnification
              bias.''  Another important problem is  to investigate gravitational lensing by
              dynamical lenses (e.g.,  rotating black holes).  This is physically relevant
              since most  galaxies seem to have black holes at their centers.  Moreover, 
              gravitational lensing by a rotatin g black hole may account for rapid  X-ray
              variability in active galactic nuclei.  The aforementioned  problems will lead
              me to interact with astrophysicists and astronomers  for physics discussions
              and latest observations, computer scientists  for sophisticated numerical codes
              running on high-performance  computers, and mathematicians for issues in
              singularity theory and  differential geometry.  Also, implicit with this
              general aim is  isolating and studying the underlying mathematical structures
              invoked  by gravitational lensing.  Once determined, these structures can then 
              be made available as potential mathematical tools for other physical  systems
              (possibly shock formation in fluids) that may call upon them.
