Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Extremal Problems for Eigenvalues, Heat Kernels and
               Energies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 10,  1997  
File        : a9896042

Award Number: 9896042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Laugesen laugesen@math.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Abstract  Laugesen    The research will attempt to establish the conjectures:
              (a) that the trace of the heat kernel (under Dirichlet boundary conditions) of
              a simply connected plane domain is minimal   when the domain is a disk, given
              that the domain has a fixed conformal mapping radius at the origin, and (b)
              that acoustical standing waves attain their maximum displacement at the
              boundary.  The proposed treatment of these two problems is unified by the
              technique of variation of a metric within a conformal class.  Next, an open
              energy--minimization problem for a Ginzburg--Landau energy functional will be
              considered; here the solution ``ought'' to be a certain radial vector field,
              but the difficulty is that current rearrangement methods for vectors are
              decidedly inadequate.  Note that the methods to be applied to all these
              problems are mathematical, though every problem has physical meaning as well.  
               Problems of vibration and heat flow have been studied for thousands of years,
              since at least the time of the ancient Greeks.  Today, vibration and heat
              problems remain challenging and important, as scientists grapple with new and
              old materials on extreme scales and under extreme conditions.  The history of
              20th century science shows, though, that progress on seemingly practical
              problems relies very often on the methods and insights developed in basic
              research.  This proposal addresses several questions in the basic theory of
              heat flow and sound vibration for which the "answers" seem intuitively obvious;
              these answers can even be confirmed by computer in certain cases. The puzzle,
              and the challenge, is that no-one can explain logically why these "answers" are
              correct.    Finding such a logical explanation of the answer is sure to
              profitably enhance our understanding of and capabilities with problems of
              vibration and heat flow.  To be a bit more specific, the first problem in the
              proposal deals (roughly speaking) with estimating how much heat remains in a
              region after the heat is allowed to dissipat e for a certain period of time. 
              The conjecture here is that a particular disk loses its heat   fastest.  (This
              conjecture can also be re-stated in terms of quantum mechanics.)  The next
              problem concerns the location of the loudest point in a sound wave, such as the
              road noise inside an automobile.  The conjecture is that the sound is loudest
              at the edge of the region,   rather than inside the car, say.  The third
              problem considered by the proposal is a simply--stated but still--unsolved
              problem arising from the theory of super-conductivity, an area of immense
              practical possibility of which we have a sadly incomplete theoretical
              understanding.  Finally, to those who say that theoretical mathematics is dead
              (or should be) in the age of the computer, one should respond that theoretical
              mathematics   consistently provides insight where computers fear to tread.  And
              what is more, theoretical mathematicians are often cheaper to operate.
