Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Real Analytic Geometry and Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 23,  1998  
File        : a9896225

Award Number: 9896225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51147              (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher L. Miller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State University
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/422-6446

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Miller will continue his research on o-minimal structures, concentrating mainly
              on further developing the model theory and analytic geometry associated with
              o-minimal expansions of the ordered field of real numbers (and their
              corresponding geometric categories).  This has been a rapidly-developing area
              for the last several years, with many contributions from---and cooperation
              between---model theorists and analytic geometers. Miller hopes to build further
              interdisciplinary links by investigating possible connections and applications
              of o-minimality to control theory and variational calculus.   Many results of
              so-called classical mathematical analysis and geometry are very general; they
              apply to a wide variety of 'input', so one must expect to have to deal with a
              correspondingly wide variety of 'output'.  However, one could hope that if the
              input is, in some respect, particularly well behaved, then the output would be
              similarly well behaved.  This turns out to be true in many important cases, but
              to see this usually requires new, more constructive, proofs of classical
              results, as well as a deeper understanding of the 'good' properties of the
              input.  Before such projects can be begun, though, it is necessary to have some
              way of deciding which mathematical objects (inputs) should be considered as
              well behaved, and those which should be considered as troublesome. (This can be
              a difficult matter.) The theory of o-minimal structures on the real field, a
              sub-discipline of mathematical logic, has been developed in large part to deal
              with this issue. Recent years have seen rapid growth of the subject. 
              Applications and connections have been found in neural-net learning theory and
              theoretical economics, as well as several areas of pure mathematics.
