Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Low-Dimensional Topology and Gauge Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1998 
File        : a9896376

Award Number: 9896376
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai N. Saveliev   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tulane University
	      6823 St. Charles Avenue
	      New Orleans, LA  701185665    504/865-4000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9704204  Saveliev       The research is concerned with a topic which is central
              to the theory  of smooth 4-dimensional manifolds, namely the homology cobordism
              group of  integral homology 3-spheres.  The long-term goal is to make progress
              in  solving the long-standing problem of R. Kirby about the existence of
              elements  of order two in this group carrying the Rohlin invariant.  The
              investigator  concentrates his attention at the elements represented by the
              links of  algebraic singularities, in particular, Seifert fibered homology
              spheres.  His approach is based on application of the methods of modern gauge
              theory to  investigation of the invariant introduced in the 70's by W. Neumann
              and L.  Siebenmann for the so-called graph homology 3-spheres.  This
              application is  threefold.  First, he uses some special resolutions of
              singularities to  construct a 4-cobordism of an algebraic link with the
              prescribed intersection  form, and he then applies the gauge-theoretical
              results which prohibit  certain integral bilinear forms as intersection forms
              of such a resolution if  the link bounds a homology ball.  The result of this
              investigation is further  applied to show that Rohlin invariant one algebraic
              links cannot have order  two in the homology cobordism group.  Second, the
              investigator uses the  instanton Floer homology to introduce a new invariant
              for arbitrary homology  3-spheres, and he proves that it agrees with the
              invariant of Neumann and  Siebenmann when the latter is defined (graph
              manifolds).  This result also  gives new insights into Floer homology, in
              particular, answers positively  M. Atiyah's question whether there is a Milnor
              fiber description of Floer  homology of certain algebraic links, and whether it
              is related to the complex  conjugation action on the homology of the Milnor
              fiber.  Finally, the  investigator applies his new invariant to investigate
              Kirby's problem for  general homology spheres.  The first step in this
              direction is to prove that  his invariant should vanish on all hom ology
              3-spheres that bound a homology  ball with just one 1-handle (and a 0- and
              2-handle).  His technique is to use  the Floer exact triangle to keep track of
              the Floer homology along the  cobordism.       One of the central objects of
              investigation in both mathematics and  theoretical physics is a smooth
              n-dimensional manifold.  Although this object  looks locally like an
              n-dimensional Euclidean space, its global structure may  still be very rich and
              complicated.  Most major results about 2-dimensional  manifolds were obtained
              in the 19th century.  Manifolds in dimensions greater  than or equal to 5 were
              successfully classified in the 1960's.  Though some  major questions about
              3-manifolds remain unanswered, it is manifolds of  dimension 4, the dimension
              of relativity theory, that occupy the most special  place in the manifold
              hierarchy.  On the one hand, they are not "big enough"   to apply to them the
              arguments that proved to be so useful in higher  dimensions.  On the other
              hand, their dimension is too big to apply more  intuitive methods that work
              effectively in lower dimensions.  Progress has  been slow here for a few
              decades until recent developments that involved the  application of ideas from
              the physics of gauge theories.  The main results  are due to S. Donaldson, who
              initiated the whole program in the early 1980's,  and most recently to N.
              Seiberg and E. Witten.  The gauge-theoretical  approach proved to be very
              fruitful and led to the solution of many hard  problems.  The investigator is
              applying these modern methods to make progress  on yet another long-standing
              problem in topology, the structure of the  homology cobordism group of homology
              3-spheres, which would provide new  insight into manifold structure.  ***
