Title       : Turbulent Mixing Near the Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9896006

Award Number: 9896006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231532             (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence Padman padman@esr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earth and Space Research
	      1910 Fairview Avenue East
	      Seattle, WA  98102    /   -

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                 This study concerns the formation processes of Weddell Sea Bottom Water, a
              very cold and saline water mass found at the continental shelf edge of the
              southernmost Weddell Sea.   The formation process is believed to involve saline
              but warm Circumpolar Deep Water, and extremely cold but relatively fresh Ice
              Shelf Water, however little is known about the process itself.  Weddell Sea
              Bottom Water is important since it is a precursor to Antarctic Bottom Water, a
              dense, globally distributed water mass.   The outflow of Ice Shelf Water from
              beneath the Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf has been the subject of a continuing
              international field program.  In February and March of 1998, a British
              Antarctic Survey (BAS) cruise on board H.M.S. Endurance will focus on the
              oceanic and atmospheric exchange processes within the open water at the face of
              the ice shelf.  This study is an integral part of the scientific program of the
              cruise and will  concern the mechanisms responsible for the mixing of Ice Shelf
              Water with other regional water masses as it emerges from under the ice shelf. 
               The measurements that will form the basis for the analysis include vertical
              profiles of temperature, conductivity, and velocity microstructure; acoustic
              Doppler current profiles, and rapidly-sampling temperature sensors mounted on
              BAS current meter moorings.  Data sets collected by other participants in the
              cruise will include atmospheric measurements, a regional survey of the
              hydrographic structure of the upper ocean, and satellite-based remote sensing
              products.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                         
