Title       : Experimental Analysis of Alternative Male Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1999       
File        : a9896226

Award Number: 9896226
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John A. Byers                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $171730             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barry R. Sinervo sinervo@biology.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                        ABSTRACT    Experimental Analysis of Alternative Male
              Strategies    PI:  SINERVO, Barry  IBN 96-31757    Three color polymorphism s
              of males are correlated with  distinct behavioral strategies in the
              side-blotched lizard,  Uta stansburiana:  (1) orange-throated males are very 
              aggressive and defend large territories with many females,  (2) blue-throated
              males tend to be monogamous and guard  their mates, but defend small
              territories, and (3) yellow-  throated males do not defend territories, but are
              sneakers  and mimic the behaviors of females if challenged by other  males. 
              Long-term field studies indicate that the three male  types are cycling in
              frequency within the population.  Orange is replaced by yellow, yellow males
              are, in turn,  vulnerable to blue mate-guarding males,  and blue males are,  in
              turn, vulnerable to ultra-dominant orange-throated males.  It is predicted that
              each morph has a fitness advantage when  it occurs at a very low frequency. 
              Because throat color is  heritable, the initial morph frequency will be
              manipulated  in small isolated subpopulations. When offspring mature, DNA 
              paternity analysis will be used to determine the  reproductive success of each 
              male offspring in the three  experimental frequency manipulations.  In a final 
              experiment, blood testosterone concentrations will be  manipulated to determine
              if the high testosterone levels  that have been observed in orange males is
              also responsible  for both their success against blue males, and their 
              susceptibility to the yellow male strategy.
