Title       : Theoretical Studies of Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2000    
File        : a9896233

Award Number: 9896233
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $269485             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hua Guo hguo@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Hua Guo at the University of Toledo is supported by the NSF Theoretical   and
              Computational Chemistry Program for theoretical investigations of   chemical
              reaction dynamics.  His two major areas of research are   iterative methods for
              solving generalized eigenproblems and classical   trajectory simulations of
              surface photochemical processes.  New efficient   numerical methods will be
              used to calculate both bound and resonant   spectra of systems of atmospheric
              and combustion interest, as well as   absorption spectra of predissociative
              systems.  Surface-aligned   photochemical processes will be studied with
              classical trajectory   simulations of adsorbate-adsorbate and
              adsorbate-substrate interactions.  The concern of this work is understanding
              the spectroscopic and dynamical   properties of large molecular systems, in the
              gas phase and on surfaces.    The details of photo-induced chemistry, in
              general, and of   photodissociation, in particular, depend on the interaction
              energies   among the atoms in the system. However, it is not simple to
              correlate   these to the identity of the reaction products and to the energy  
              distribution over these products.  The studies being carried out in this  
              project will enhance the understanding of the relevant relationships and  
              stimulate new experimetnal explorations.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                          
