Title       : US-Czech Engineering Research on Inelastic Behavior of Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  2001   
File        : a9896043

Award Number: 9896043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnie Thompson                         
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44900              (Estimated)
Investigator: K. R. Rajagopal   (Principal Investigator current)
              Arun R. Srinivasa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              INT 9515470  Rajagopal      The primary objective of this U.S.-Czech research
              project between K. R. Rajagopal of the University of Pittsburgh and Jan
              Kratochvil of the Czech Technical University is to develop a unified theory and
              coherent model that can explain a range of inelastic phenomena in solid
              materials.  Specifically, the researchers intend to address the details of
              microstructure and their impact on the evolution of mechanical properties in a
              body, which may possess more than one stress-free configuration.  In the
              process, the researchers plan to incorporate in this theory their experimental
              observations concerning: 1) dislocation structures and non-local effects due to
              such dislocation structures; 2) "fading memory" for stress based on a "path
              length" measure in strain space; and 3) maximized dissipation.   Their findings
              should contribute to our understanding of the basic physical properties of
              mechanics and yield results that can benefit current technology where
              inelasticity in materials such as metals or polymers presents persistent
              manufacturing and infrastructural problems.    This mechanical engineering
              research project fulfills the program of objective of advancing basic
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
              Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in
              areas of mutual interest and competence.           ??
