Title       : CAREER: Fundamental Electrical and Thermal Limitations of Patterned Thin Film
               Multilayer Magnetic Field Sensors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  2001       
File        : a9896128

Award Number: 9896128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan L. Burkett SBURKETT@boisestate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boise State University
	      1910 University Drive
	      Boise, ID  837250001    208/385-1011

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9702419  Burkett  Advances in magnetic materials research have had a remarkable
              impart on the data storage industry in the last decade. As the demands for
              faster operation and increased density intensify, it is clear that device
              dimensions must be reduced. Future increases in density will require radical
              new developments.  However, the advent of any new major technology brings with
              it a wide variety of technical problems.  In the case of magnetoresistive (MR)
              field-sensing devices, a number of these problems are materials related. One
              such problem, receiving surprisingly little attention, is that of
              electromigration.  Other problems of interest in the application of MR
              technology are the origins of electrical noise and of thermally induced
              spurious output signals.    An improved microscopic understanding of the
              failure modes of electronic conduction in magnetic multilayers of small
              dimensions that may be used in magnetoresistive sensing devices has vast
              technological implications. Additional studies include investigation of thermal
              integrity of patterned multilayers, and a special multilayer structure, the
              "spin-valve" as well as signal to noise ratio (SNR) measurements on patterned
              multilayers for evaluation of the relationship between noise, microstructure,
              and absolute physical size of field-sensing elements.  The primary objectives
              in the proposed career development plan include: development of
              photolithographic techniques for magnetic materials, the study of
              electromigration effects under high current densities, evaluation of related
              thermal degradation effects in magnetic multilayers, noise measurements in
              mesoscopic multilayers, integration of research topics to the engineering
              curriculum, creation of research projects to aid in educating
              undergraduate/graduate students, and provision of adequately trained engineers
              for placement in the magnetics industry.    ***
