Title       : Heat, Salt, and Momentum Fluxes Through the Pycnocline in the Eastern Weddell
               Sea
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 21,  1997   
File        : a9896008

Award Number: 9896008
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bernhard Lettau                         
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Laurence Padman padman@esr.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Murray D. Levine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Earth and Space Research
	      1910 Fairview Avenue East
	      Seattle, WA  98102    /   -

NSF Program : 5113      ANTARCTIC OCEANS & CLIMATE SYS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9317321  Padman  The proposed work is part of an integrated research program 
              ("Anzflux") into the oceanographic structure of upper mixed layer  of the
              eastern Weddell Sea.  It is to be carried out from the RVIB  Nathaniel B.
              Palmer in the austral winter of 1994.  The work  proposed here is an effort to
              measure high frequency vertical  profiles of velocity and temperature using a
              Rapid Sampling  Vertical Profiler, a tethered sensor system developed by the 
              principal investigator that free falls through the upper 250 meters  of the
              ocean.    The objective is to study the dynamics of momentum and energy  fluxes
              in the upper mixed layer, and to investigate the processes  that determine the
              stability of the pycnocline.  Particular  emphasis will be placed on the
              response of the pycnocline to the  mesoscale velocity field, internal waves,
              and other coherent  turbulence features.    These measurements, in conjunction
              with other concurrent  experiments to quantify the energy brought to the
              underside of the  ice, will form the basis of a regional study of the processes
               responsible for the relatively thick upper mixed layer and thin ice  cover. 
              It is believed that these conditions are only marginally  stable, and are
              maintained by a relatively high upward heat flux,  which, if interrupted, could
              lead to deep vertical convection, and  a significant change in the oceanic
              climate.  ***
