Title       : U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Femtosecond Nonlinear Spectroscopy of
               Photosynthetic Light Harvesting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9896148

Award Number: 9896148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Edwards                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Graham R. Fleming fleming@cchem.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9723840  Fleming    This award supports a two-year collaborative research 
              project between Dr. Graham Fleming of the University of  Chicago and Dr.
              Minhaeng Cho of Korea University on  "Femtosecond Nonlinear Spectroscopy of
              Photosynthetic Light  Harvesting."  The goal of the project is to extend
              current  theories of nonlinear spectroscopy, such as the photon echo,  to
              include the influence of molecular dynamics.  The three  pulse echo peak shift
              method will be studied theoretically  and applied experimentally to bacterial
              and plant systems to  investigate: 1) degree of electronic delocalization, 2) 
              energy transfer mechanisms, and 3) how the couplings of  chromaphores to the
              protein environment influence electronic  coupling.    The collaboration
              between Dr. Fleming and Dr. Cho will  enable a combined experimental and
              theoretical study of  nonlinear spectroscopy applied to photosynthetic light 
              harvesting.  Dr. Fleming's laboratory has the capability of  generating
              experimental data on the bacterial and plant  antenna photosynthetic systems,
              while Dr. Cho has the  theoretical expertise to develop the theoretical
              formalisms  and computer codes to model these data.  The study is timely 
              because of the rapid advances in the structural biology of  photosynthetic
              systems and in the techniques of nonlinear  spectroscopy.  It is expected that
              this study will result in  a better understanding of the photosynthetic process
              and  will form the basis for applying nonlinear spectroscopy as a  probe of a
              wide range of chemical and biological dynamics.  ***
