Title       : Nitrification in Aquatic Sediments: Interactions with Methane and Hydrogen
               Sulfide
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1998       
File        : a9896216

Award Number: 9896216
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140640             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samantha B. Joye   (Principal Investigator current)
              James T. Hollibaugh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9521983  Joye    Nitrification, a central process in the nitrogen cycle, may 
              significantly alter partitioning of the regenerated nitrogen flux  between
              release from sediments to the water column as ammonium  versus loss as
              dinitrogen gas via coupled denitrification.   Nitrogen release from freshwater
              sediments consists of comparable  amounts of dinitrogen gas and ionic forms,
              suggesting that coupled  nitrification-denitrification is more efficient in
              freshwater than  in marine environments.    This team of investigators will
              examine the effects of methane and  hydrogen sulfide, which differ in
              concentration and distribution  between marine and freshwater environments, on
              nitrification.  They  hypothesize that co-metabolism affects the spatial and
              temporal  distribution of nitrification in aquatic sediments, particularly in 
              freshwater environments.  They will examine the role of competitive 
              (substrate) interactions and the effect of variations in the  oxidizing
              bacterial community composition (presence of nitrifying  vs. methane-oxidizing
              bacteria) on nitrification.  They also  hypothesize that hydrogen sulfide, a
              potent inhibitor of  nitrification, may affect the spatial and temporal
              distribution of  nitrification in marine sediments.    Understanding the
              relationship between bacterial community  composition, bacterial physiology and
              geochemically-driven changes  in physiology will improve our understanding of
              nitrogen cycling in  sediments and will provide a conceptual framework for
              improved  predictive models of coupled nitrification-denitrification.
