Title       : Spatial Organization of Resistance and Plant-Pathogen Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1998      
File        : a9896135

Award Number: 9896135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $137989             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie A. Real lreal@bio.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We are investigating the forces generating the spatial pattern of infection by
              looking at the plant Phlox paniculata and the powdery mildew.  Diseased plants
              may be clumped because of a spatial pattern of resistance to the disease,
              because of environmental patchiness, or because the limited dispersal ability
              of the pathogen prevents distant plants from getting infected.  We will examine
              this question by constructing and comparing spatial maps of disease resistance,
              environmental conditions, and disease occurrence in an intact Phlox population.
               In addition, we will determine if spatial patterns of disease resistance are
              created because near neighbors are close relatives which share similar
              resistance.  Genetic relatedness will be determined by DNA analysis.  Disease
              resistance will be determined by inoculation tests.  Environmental factors will
              be monitored using computer controlled sensors, and disease occurrence will be
              monitored by weekly censusing.  By understanding the factors controlling
              disease spread in Phlox paniculata, we will better understand how all plant
              diseases spread.
