Title       : Collaborative Research: Silica Cycling in the Central North Pacific Gyre: Role
               of Rhizosolenia Mats and Suspended Diatoms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9896160

Award Number: 9896160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : March 15,  1998     
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110232             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tracy A. Villareal tracy@utmsi.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                9414372  Villareal         Global mass-balance consideration, vertical
              nutrient  profiles, and seasonal nutrient cycle data all indicate that  the
              large subtropical mid-ocean gyres may account for the  majority of the global
              oceanic production of biogenic  silica.  Although diatoms can become abundant
              during spring  blooms in these regions, the available evidence suggests  that
              most of the annual silica production in summer and  autumn.  This may be
              especially true in the oligotrophic  North Central Pacific which does not have
              a strong seasonal  cycle of phytoplankton production due to Persistent 
              stratification.  The surface waters of the Central North  Pacific contain the
              highest concentrations of silicic acid  of any oligotrophic gyre.  It is
              unknown whether this  greater availability of silicic acid results in higher
              rates  of silica production in this region compared to other mid  ocean
              systems.  Siliceous biomass in this region has been  reported to be
              overwhelmingly dominated (>90%) by centimeter-  sized mats are not effectively
              sampled by traditional water  bottle samplers and are typically collected by
              divers.  This  give rise to a unique situation where silica cycling  in  this
              region, which is likely to be significant in global  terms, may be dominated by
              large rare sells that would be  essentially invisible to investigations which
              employ  traditional sampling methods.         This project will be the first
              study of the production  and dissolution of biogenic silica in the oligotrophic
               Central North Pacific Ocean.  Our study will combine  traditional water column
              sampling using water-bottle  samplers with collections of mats made by divers
              to compare  the relative roles of these large mats and suspended  diatioms in
              the cycling of biogenic silica in the surface  waters of this  region.  This
              study will have two major  objectives:  (1) to evaluate of the magnitude of
              silica  production in the North Central Pacific Gyre, and (2) to  assess the
              relative contribution mats of Rhizosolen ia two  cruises out of Hawaii.
