Title       : Chemotropic Mechanisms of Growth Cone Guidance: Molecular Genetic Dissection of
               Drosophila Netrins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a9896095

Award Number: 9896095
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis M. Higgins                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $245565             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark A. Seeger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              IBN-9604504    PI:  SEEGER    One of the great challenges of modern neurobiology
              is to explain how complex nervous systems with millions of specialized
              connections are properly "wired" during development.  We now appreciate that
              neuronal growth cones utilize a variety of cues to navigate along stereotypical
              pathways as they extend and locate their specific synaptic targets.  These cues
              are diverse and can influence growth cones through either attractive or
              inhibitory mechanisms and can function as short-range, contact mediated factors
              or as long-range, diffusible signals.  Although this basic framework for growth
              cone guidance is well established, our understanding of how any of these
              different signals actually work is at best quite limited.  In particular,
              little is known about the actual mechanisms of chemotropic axon guidance.  Dr.
              Seeger proposes to investigate the function of two chemotropic guidance
              molecules, called Netrins, during the development of the Drosophila (fruit fly)
              central nervous system.  Netrins are an evolutionarily conserved family of
              chemotropic guidance molecules.  Vertebrate Netrins play an important role in
              the attraction of commissural growth cones to the floor plate in the developing
              spinal cord.  UNC-6, the first member of this protein family, is required for
              the normal circumferential migration of axons and other cells in the nematode,
              C. elegans.  The identification of Netrins in Drosophila provides an excellent
              opportunity for a detailed molecular genetic dissection of this chemotropic
              guidance pathway by capitalizing on the many advantages that Drosophila offers
              as a model developmental genetic system.  Results from the experiments outlined
              in this proposal will provide insights into the molecular mechanisms by which
              these chemotropic signals influence neuronal growth cones.
