Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Chemical Determinants of an Operational
               RNA Code for Amino Acids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  1997  
File        : a9896051

Award Number: 9896051
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 15,  1997  
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20552              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul R. Schimmel schimmel@scripps.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : The Scripps Research Inst
	      10550 North Torrey Pines Road
	      La Jolla, CA  920371027    /   -

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports graduate students and other junior  members of the research
              group of Professor Paul Schimmel at  the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
              to collaborate in  biochemical genetics research with Professor Volker Erdmann 
              and members of his research group at the Institute of  Biochemistry of the Free
              University of Berlin, Germany.  They are investigating the early development of
              the genetic  code, by studying the chemical groups which are functional 
              determinants of the operational RNA code for the amino acid  alanine.  Their
              joint effort on the alanine system benefits  from the complementary expertise
              of the German group in  chemical synthesis and characterization of novel RNA 
              molecules combined with the expertise of the U.S. group in  functional analysis
              of aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetases.  The genetic code is an algorithm which
              specifies a  relationship between trinucleotides and amino acids.  This 
              universal code is established by a process that attaches a  specific transfer
              RNA (tRNA) to a given amino acid, and the  process in turn is catalyzed by a
              group of twenty enzymes  known as aminoacyl tRNA synthetases.  These enzymes
              are  believed to be among the earliest proteins to emerge from an  RNA world to
              establish the genetic code.  This collaborative  work will improve
              understanding of these very fundamental  steps that led to the assembly of the
              genetic code.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
