Title       : SGER: Computer Aided Robotic Burn Debridement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1998     
File        : a9896196

Award Number: 9896196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1998      
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bartholomew O. Nnaji nnaji@engrng.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9628840  Nnaji   This Small Grant for Exploratory Research award investigates
              ways that technologies used in manufacturing automation can be used in health
              fields, specifically in the treatment of burns.  Burn debridement is the
              process where burn damaged skin is removed to determine the depth of a burn and
              the presence of viable skin tissue.  Today a surgeon uses lasers to perform
              this task by vaporizing burned tissue.  This is a tedious task for the surgeon
              and dangerous for an already weakened patient because of the difficulty in
              controlling the depth of penetration of the laser.  This award will investigate
              the integration of technologies used in manufacturing to perform the burn
              debridement task.  The technical approach uses structured light scanning to
              construct a Non-Uniform Rational B-Spline (NURBS) model of the treatment area,
              NASA developed sensing technology for burn depth sensing, and Numerical Control
              (NC) programming to guide the surgical laser mounted on a robotic end effector.
                  The high risk, high payoff aspects of this research are the technical
              challenge of being able to use the scan data, even with a surgeon's
              interaction, to determine the required treatment and laser energy levels, and
              once that is determined assure a constant stand off distance if the patient
              moves, however, the payoff is faster and less traumatic wound preparation. 
              This also presents a new opportunity for designers and integrators of
              manufacturing automation equipment and systems.
