Title       : Analytic Self Maps of the Disk and Related Operators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1998  
File        : a9896337

Award Number: 9896337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26848              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pietro Poggi-Corradini pietro@math.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                      ABSTRACT   Pietro Poggi-Corradini.    The research of Professor Pietro
              Poggi-Corradini stretches across the fields of complex analysis and functional
              analysis. The objects of study are on the one hand the analytic maps defined on
              the unit disk that are bounded by one in modulus, and on the other hand, the
              composition operators that these maps induce on classical function spaces of
              the disk. The motivations and the questions come from the theory of operators,
              but the tools used are drawn from complex analysis (harmonic measure, extremal
              distance, hyperbolic metric,   etc...). The results, at least in the case when
              the map is one-to-one and has the origin as an attracting fixed point, are
              twofold. While  describing properties of the associated composition operator,
              such as the spectrum and the essential spectral radius, new properties of the
              analytic map, such as the dynamical behavior near the boundary of the unit
              disk, were discovered. The link between the map and the operator is given by
              the linearization map near the fixed point provided by iteration theory, i.e.
              the Koenigs map. Properties of the Koenigs maps which had not been considered
              before, such as their Hardy   class, are determined and these in turn shed
              light on the inner workings of the subject. P. Poggi-Corradini intends to
              continue his study in three different directions. The first consists in
              dropping the requirement that the maps be one-to-one.  A second topic of
              inquiry is to ask similar questions on the Bergman spaces instead of the Hardy
              spaces. Many fundamental aspects of the theory of Bergman spaces have received
              much attention lately.  A third line of research deals with the general problem
              of describing the spectrum of composition operators. It is clear that the
              properties of the spectrum and the linearization theory both depend on the
              location of the Denjoy-Wolff point. The results mentioned above only dealt with
              the case when this point does not have modulus one and the multiplier there is
              non-vanishing. So ther e is space for generalizing the techniques used to new
              situations. Finally, this study might help answer a question of M. Heins about
              generalizations of the Denjoy-Wolff Theorem to arbitrary Riemann surfaces and
              some questions of J. Cima about Cauchy-Stieltjes integrals. On a wider level,
              since, in recent years, both composition operators and complex dynamics have
              been studied intensively in the context of several complex variables, it would
              be interesting to see if the interplay between spectral theory of composition
              operators and the dynamics of analytic maps at the boundary of the disk carries
              over to self-maps of the ball or the polydisk.      More generally, the
              research of P. Poggi-Corradini tackles fundamental issues in a classical
              mathematical field known as function theory, which has many applications to
              engineering and the applied sciences (e.g. iterative methods, aerodynamics,
              control theory, etc...). Much of the classical theory is devoted to the study
              of a single function or transformation. The innovative point of view is to
              extract information about a single transformation by iterating it repeatedly
              and analyzing the behavior "in the limit" of the ensuing dynamical system.
