Title       : CAREER: A Partial Evaluation Tool Set for Automatically Customizing Adaptable
               Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a9896354

Award Number: 9896354
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jon S. Rugaber                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130700             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Hatcliff hatcliff@cis.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9701418  Partial evaluation is an automatic tool for program  specialization,
              customization, and optimization.  The goal  of this project is to establish
              partial evaluation  technology as the key component of a new methodology for 
              constructing and customizing adaptable software written in  modern imperative
              programming languages.  Despite successful  applications, current partial
              evaluation technology is  unable to satisfactorily treat modern imperative
              languages  that include object-oriented, multitasking, and exception-  handling
              features.  Moreover, partial-evaluator construction  does not begin to approach
              the maturity of compiler  construction where well-organized tools sets
              dramatically  ease the burden of designing, building, and modifying  systems. 
              The project focuses on the construction of a  language-independent tool set for
              building partial  evaluation systems that can handle features found in modern 
              imperative languages.  This tool set will be built on top of  the IRIS language
              processing facilities developed in the  Arcadia project. The core of the tool
              set will be a general-  purpose specialization environment for Ada 95.  The
              tool set  philosophy will be validated by reusing artifacts in  (a)  the
              construction of a special-purpose specializer for one or  more application
              domains, and  (b) the construction of a  second general-purpose specializer for
              a minimal core of a  second language supported by the IRIS tools.  ***
