Title       : Design of Constrained Model-Predictive Control Systems with Increased Autonomy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  2001       
File        : a9896231

Award Number: 9896231
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143207             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Nikolaou nikolaou@uh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Nikolaou - 9615979    Constrained model predictive control (MPC) is a
              technique that uses a process model in an on-line optimization scheme to meet
              various control objectives for a process whose inputs and outputs are
              constrained.  There are always discrepancies between the model that MPC uses
              and the real world.  Such discrepancies may arise from inaccuracies in the
              initial model used by an MPC system, or from variation of a process with time. 
              Increased MPC autonomy, the main thrust of this project, refers to the
              capability of an MPC system to handle, with minimal human intervention, a wide
              range of situations where a process model could be inaccurate.      Situations
              that will be addressed in this research are:  o Time-invariant processes for
              which an inaccurate linear of nonlinear model and bounds on the inaccuracy are
              available or need to be developed.  o Time-varying processes under constrained
              MPC feedback.    More specifically, the following problems will be
              investigated:  o How MPC systems can be structured and tuned (off- or on-line)
              to ensure robust performance for a certain level of process/process-model
              mismatch.   Conversely, how much modeling accuracy is required for robust MPC
              performance.  o How a constrained MPC systems that monitors its performance,
              can modify itself if necessary, e.g., by performing simultaneous control and
              closed-loop process identification.
