Title       : Culture and Motivation: A Cross-Cultural Study
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1998      
File        : a9896147

Award Number: 9896147
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 31,  1997    
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan G. Miller jgmiller@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The goal of the investigation is to examine cultural influences on the
              development of  motivation to be responsive to the needs of others.  Three
              experimental studies will be undertaken  among samples of American and Hindu
              Indian adults and elementary- school aged children.  The first  study examines
              the development of  individuals' perceived reasons for being responsive to the
              needs of  their peers, with a focus on the structure of these reasons and on
              their relationship to individuals'  socio-emotional functioning.  The second
              study assesses whether the presence of role-related  interpersonal
              responsibilities reduces endogenous motivation for helping behavior and
              degrades its  quality.  The third study evaluates  the impact of normative
              expectations to render aid on intrinsic  motivation and on the quality of
              individual behavioral performance. The research is expected to  demonstrate
              that, reflecting their contrasting culturally based views of self,  Americans
              maintain a  less self-determined motivational orientation  toward interpersonal
              responsibilities than do Indians.  Thus, it is hypothesized that whereas among
              Americans, normative expectations to help others will lead  to the diminishing
              of endogenous forms of motivation and will be associated with less adaptive 
              behavioral functioning, they will not have such effects among Indians.  The
              research is also expected  to document respects in which the dominant
              psychological theories of internalization are culturally-  bound.  These
              theories link acting out of a perceived sense of obligation to feelings of
              pressure or  coercion.  However, such a linkage is hypothesized not to occur
              among Indians whom it is anticipated  do not perceive an antithetical
              relationship between self-determined forms of motivation and social  duty. 
              Finally, the project is anticipated to reveal that the direction of
              developmental change in  interpersonal motivation is culturally variable, with
              Americans developing a relatively exogenous view  of  interpersonal
              responsibilities and Hindu Indians retaining a relatively endogenous view.     
               The  investigation will contribute to an understanding of ways in which social
              development is affected by  the beliefs and values of the larger cultural
              context.  A series of experimental studies will be  undertaken contrasting the
              motivation to help others among adults and elementary school aged children 
              sampled from the United States and India.  Substantively, the research is
              expected to identify  respects in which the individualistic emphasis of
              American culture leads Americans to develop less  self-determined perspectives
              toward helping others than arise in cultures emphasizing more  collectivist
              conceptions.  It also will provide much needed data on ways  that the
              contrasting  culturally grounded motivational orientations that develop in the
              two cultural contexts affect  adaptation in school and friendship
              relationships.  Regarding developmental implications, the research  focus on
              the social perceptions and behavior of children from markedly different
              cultural backgrounds  will make it possible to identify both common and
              culture-specific aspects of child development.  Finally, on a theoretical
              level, the investigation will contribute to the refinement of existing 
              psychological models of motivation by identifying respects in which these
              models may reflect  culturally-specific assumptions and may need to be modified
              to account for interpersonal motivation in  more collectivist cultures.        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
