Title       : High Pressure Studies of Cr and Mn Near-Infrared Solid State Cover Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9896146

Award Number: 9896146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182613             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin L. Bray kbray@ovonic.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1775      ELECTRONIC MATERIALS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                9629990 Bray  This research project investigates the energy levels and
              vibronic interactions of transition-metal dopants in ionic crystals focusing on
              high-pressure photoluminescence studies of recently discovered Cr4+ -activated
              solid state laser materials.  The theme of the proposed research is to address
              uncertainties surrounding the properties of Cr4+ materials through high
              pressure luminescence, excitation, and lifetime measurements to relate
              luminescence properties to crystal field strength, and to understand the effect
              of interstate mixing on luminescence properties. Related studies of
              isoelectronic Mn5+ , currently known to occur only as a strong field ion in a
              few oxides will also be considered in the project. %%% The project is
              interdisciplinary combining fundamental materials chemistry and materials
              science synthesis and processing studies with advanced characterization tools
              and analysis methods to address forefront issues in a topical area of strong
              technological relevance and high potential payoff.  The research will
              contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level to several
              aspects of advanced photonic devices critical to high bandwidth communications
              technology.  Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this
              research project is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the
              performance of advanced devices and communications systems by providing a
              fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved
              materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature of the program is
              the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***
