Title       : Deforestation and Carbon Cycling in Oligotrophic Ecosystems: The Role of
               Heterogeneity, Succession, and Patchiness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 23,  1997   
File        : a9896014

Award Number: 9896014
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : February 28,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52261              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilio F. Moran moran@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9310049  MORAN       Clearance of large tracts of tropical forests like those in
               the Amazon Basin has potential impacts on many processes ranging  from loss of
              biological diversity to changes in atmospheric  chemistry that affect global
              temperature and precipitation  patterns.  Considerable attention has been
              devoted to identifying  rates and patterns of deforestation, but much less
              scholarly  inquiry has been given to assessing the degree to which native  tree
              species reestablish themselves in cleared areas.  The  investigative team
              undertaking this research project have engaged  in research on regeneration
              rates in two parts of the Amazon  Basin where soils are relatively rich in
              nutrients.  This project  will expand the comparative framework for this line
              of research  by using similar methods to investigate three sites with soils 
              containing fewer nutrients.  Two of the sites are in the Zona  Bragantina of
              Brazil; the other is in the Rio Negro Basin in  Colombia.  Thematic Mapper
              digital data from Landsat satellites  will be analyzed in concert with
              field-based investigations of  land-use change and management practices in the
              study sites to  identify spatial and temporal patterns of clearance and 
              regeneration.       This project will make contributions to general knowledge 
              from both substantive and methodological perspectives.  It will  add to
              understandings about the processes of forest clearance and  regeneration in
              different environments, thereby providing the  basis for making more accurate
              regional adjustments in models of  carbon exchange.  It also will continue
              exploration of new ways  to integrate remotely sensed and ground-based data for
              large  areas, a methodological thrust that will enhance and expand 
              capabilities for data acquisition across large areas.  ***
