Title       : Multi-University Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Health
               Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2000      
File        : a9896385

Award Number: 9896385
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176306             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Shortell   (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin R. Gillies  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                  Abstract  EEC-9604480  Shortell    The Center for Health Management Research
              was designated as an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center by the
              National Science Foundation in July 1992.    The initial goals of the Center
              for Health Management Research were:  1) to develop a research agenda in
              collaboration with corporate members; 2) to undertake research, development,
              and evaluation projects on behalf of the corporate members; 3)to disseminate to
              the members findings of health services research; 4) to identify and
              disseminate to the members successful innovations and management practices from
              other health care organizations; and 5) to identify and disseminate to the
              members relevant research findings successful innovations and management
              practices from other industries and countries.    The vision of the Center
              continues to be refined in order to support its corporate members as they seek
              to adapt to a complex, challenging, and turbulent environment.    This award
              provides funding to expand the Center for Health Management Research. 
              Continuing discussion with NSF, researchers from Northwestern University, and a
              number of noteworthy health care organizations has led to a decision to join
              the Northwestern-based group to the Center for Health Management  and become an
              affiliated research site, governed by a single Industry Advisory Board.     
              The resultant Center for Health Management Research would substantially
              increase its complement of corporate members and its attendant financial
              support base.  The influence of the research would likely be enhanced through
              this larger base, our academic colleagues gain access to a larger set of
              high-quality organizations, and corporate members have a larger set of
              colleagues with whom to share experiences and learnings.
