Title       : TQO Fast Product Innovation and Product Quality: Strategic Alliance or Tradeoff?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 29,  1997  
File        : a9896078

Award Number: 9896078
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan R. Sanderson                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $133793             (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara B. Flynn Barb.Flynn@mba.wfu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              E. J. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger G. Schroeder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wake Forest University
	      300 South Hawthrone Road
	      Winston-Salem, NC  27109    336/716-5000

NSF Program : 8243      TRANS TO QUAL ORG PROG-PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This research addresses the question of whether quality management and fast
              product innovation represent a tradeoff, or whether quality practices can
              enhance the speed of product innovation.  Specific research propositions to be
              investigated include 1) reduced development time and reduced ramp-up time
              contribute to fast product innovation, 2) firms which pursue fast product
              development in the absence of a well-established quality management initiative
              will achieve inferior results, and 3) the use of overlapping product
              development stages will lead to less design rework and faster product
              innovation.  Both exploratory and confirmatory research methods will be used. 
              In the exploratory phase, eight case studies will be developedusing structured
              interviews, site tours, archival sources, and qualitative data analysis
              techniques.  In the confirmatory phase, themes, concepts, and relationships
              emerging from the exploratory work will be tested using large-scale survey
              methods and quantitative analysis techniques.  Companies participating in this
              study include Texas Instruments, Honeywell, Unisys, and Medtronic.             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
