Title       : Management and Scientific Services in Support of the U.S. JGOFS Southern Ocean
               Study: Nutrients
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1999  
File        : a9896290

Award Number: 9896290
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : July 1,  1998       
Expires     : January 31,  2000    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1024690            (Estimated)
Investigator: Walker O. Smith wos@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 5111      ANTARCTIC BIOLOGY & MEDICINE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              95-30382  Smith    This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean 
              Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a  better understanding
              of the fluxes of carbon, both organic  and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean,
              (2) identifying the  physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and 
              processes which regulate the magnitude and variability of  these fluxes, and
              (3) placing these fluxes into the context  of the contemporary global carbon
              cycle.    The overall objectives of JGOFS are to determine and  understand
              processes controlling the time-varying fluxes of  carbon and associated
              biogenic elements, and to predict the  response of marine biogeochemical
              processes to climate  change.  The Southern Ocean is critical in the global
              carbon  cycle, as judged by its size and the physical processes  which occur in
              it (e.g., deep and intermediate water  formation), but its present quantitative
              role is uncertain.    JGOFS objectives for the Southern Ocean study are as 
              follows:    1)  to constrain the fluxes of carbon (organic and  inorganic) and
              to place these fluxes in the context of the  contemporary carbon cycle;  2)  to
              identify the factors and processes which regulate the  magnitude and
              variability of primary productivity and the  fate of biogenic matter;  3)  to
              determine the response of the Southern Ocean to  natural climate perturbations;
              and  4)  to predict the response of the Southern Ocean to climate  change.   
              In order to successfully address these objectives, a large  field program has
              been designed to provide various  investigators the opportunity to test
              specific hypotheses  which relate to these broadly-defined objectives.  We
              expect  the field test to begin in September 1996, and last through  March 1998
              using two ships, the R.V. Palmer, and the R.V.  Thompson.  As most of the
              investigators will use  hydrographic and nutrient data from these cruises, this
               proposal requests funds for the support of the analysis of  nutrient
              concentrations during these thirteen cruis es.  A  team of oceanographic
              experts from a variety of institutions  has been assembled to complete these
              analyses; furthermore,  the data will be scrutinized for errors and provided in
              a  timely fashion to all PI's in the project, as well as to the  relevant
              oceanographic data storage facilities.  The  hydrography and coring groups have
              been put together using  the successful model for the Arabian Sea JGOFS study,
              and in  conjunction with the nutrient data (supported under a  separate
              proposal), will form a large portion of the  Southern Ocean JGOFS database
              which both field investigators  and modelers will use to clarify the role of
              the Southern  Ocean in the global carbon cycle.
