Title       : Probabilistic Approach in the Local Theory of Banach Spaces and Convex Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 15,  1999  
File        : a9896342

Award Number: 9896342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35736              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Rudelson rudelson@math.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9706835    Rudelson    Probabilistic methods constitute a very rapidly
              developing field of  Convex Geometry and Local Theory of Banach spaces. Recent
              results  in this area are connected in particular to the majorizing measure 
              approach, introduced by Talagrand. This method enabled the solution  of several
              deep problems in Combinatorics, Harmonic Analysis, and  Convex Geometry. This
              work will continue investigation of constructions  of majorizing measures as
              well as study possible applications of this  method to concrete problems of
              Local Theory and Harmonic Analysis.  Another direction is related to the study
              of convex bodies which are  not necessary symmetric. This is a new project
              inspired by recent  progress in generalization of the results of the Local
              Theory to   star-shaped bodies. It turned out to be possible to prove the most 
              important results of the Local Theory, including inverse Santalo and  
              Brunn-Minkowski inequalities, for p-convex bodies. Unlike p-convex  symmetric
              bodies, in the case of general convex bodies almost  nothing is known. The
              basic technical tools, which work for convex  and p-convex symmetric bodies, do
              not work any more if general   convex bodies are considered. Moreover, the
              known facts about  non-symmetric convex bodies suggest that there might be a
              significant  difference between their properties and the properties of
              symmetric  bodies.The aim of the project is to construct a theory of general 
              convex bodies which is parallel to the existing theory of convex  symmetric
              bodies.    Convex Geometry is a field of Mathematics which studies the
              properties  of convex bodies of high dimension. This includes finding sections
              of  a given body with certain nice properties, computing the volume of a  body,
              approximating a convex body by another one having a better  structure, etc.
              While these problems cannot be solved in general by  an explicit construction,
              it is often possible to show that a randomly  chosen section or a random
              modification of a body has the desired  prop erties. This approach enables the
              reduction of the analytic and  geometric problems to the investigation of the
              behavior of a certain  random process. The project will concentrate on
              developing a method  to analyze such processes and on the investigation of the
              structure  of general convex bodies. The results obtained in this direction are
               applicable to various problems in Harmonic Analysis and Banach   Space theory
              as well as in Computer Science, like construction of   effective optimization
              algorithms and fast computation of the volumes of   convex bodies.
