Title       : U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Technical and Empirical Foundations for
               Requirements Traceability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9896138

Award Number: 9896138
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Mark A. Suskin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15878              (Estimated)
Investigator: Balasubramaniam Ramesh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgia State University
	      University Plaza
	      Atlanta, GA  303033044    404/658-2000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This award supports Professor Balasubramanian Ramesh and a U.S. graduate student
              from the Naval Postgraduate School to collaborate in manufacturing engineering
              research with Professor Matthias Jarke and his research group of the Technical
              University of Aachen, Germany.  They are studying the technical and empirical
              foundations for requirements traceability, which is widely used as a measure of
              the quality of the systems development process, ultimately related to modern
              methods for product development. Their collaboration is built on the
              integration of complementary empirical research by Professor Ramesh and
              theoretical techniques developed by Professor Jarke and his group.  Aachen is a
              world leader in design and manufacturing engineering, and is currently
              participating in a regional European effort in the area of traceability
              requirements.      Current practices as well as the usefulness of traceability
              vary considerably across systems development efforts.  Weaknesses include the
              lack of comprehensive guidelines on what kinds of information must be captured,
              and when, and how it should be used to support various stakeholder needs. 
              Professors Ramesh and Jarke will integrate their independently developed
              traceability models, incorporate them into a prototype implementation scheme
              and conduct empirical evaluations of the research results in large scale system
              development projects.  The results of their cooperative research are likely to
              influence the design of the next generation of Computer Aided System
              Engineering (CASE) environments, to the benefit of the concurrent design
              process in many industries.                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
