Title       : PEET: Revision ofthe Cirolanidae (Crustaceae: Peracarida: Isopoda), with
               Monographs on Selected Genera and a Phylogenetic Analysis of the Family
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9896145

Award Number: 9896145
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310208             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard C. Brusca   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian F. Kensley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              9521649  BRUSCA   Isopod Crustacea are a very large and diverse group of
              invertebrate organisms that need both systematic, monographic revision and
              training of additional researchers.  The two investigators being supported by
              this award work on the family Cirolanidae (Crustacea: Peracarida: Isopida) and
              are the only systematic specialists for this group in the United States.  They
              have engaged the collaborative efforts of a European worker at the University
              of Copenhagen, who is the only other active worker on this group in the world. 
              Together they will coordinate an excellent training program, engaging students
              from the undergraduate through postdoctoral level.   It is anticipated that
              five generic revisions will be produced by student trainee workers and that
              they, collectively with the senior researchers will produce a phylogenetic
              analysis and generic level revision of family.  The research and education of
              one postdoctoral trainee and three graduate students will be supported and five
              undergraduate students will be involved and, hopefully, become interested in
              research and subsequent graduate studies in Systematic Biology.  Results of all
              research efforts will be published.  In addition, electronic dissemination of
              the research results, including data matrices, keys with digitized images of
              key characters, and bibliographic, specimen, species-level and genus-level
              databases will be developed and made available tia Internet.   Our knowledge of
              the biodiversity in this family of isopod crustacea will be markedly enhanced. 
              New young scientists will be trained in modern methods of systematic research. 
              And information will be made available that should be of utility in many other
              areas of research dealing with this group of organisms whose members include
              scavengers, predators, and even parasites of fish.
