Title       : The Insulin Receptor Homolog
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a9896162

Award Number: 9896162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $186486             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert S. Garofalo   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              IBN-9512315  Garofalo, Robert S.      The hormone, insulin, exerts its effects
              on cells by binding to a  cell surface protein called the insulin receptor. 
              This binding  causes the receptor to transmit signals into the interior of the 
              cell which result in glucose uptake and other metabolic changes.   While a
              great deal about the structure of the insulin receptor is  known, there is
              limited information about the nature of the signals  transmitted within the
              cell or the components of the signaling  pathway.  The studies proposed by Dr.
              Garofalo use an excellent  model system to study the mechanism of action of the
              insulin  receptor.  The model offers advantages over other experimental 
              systems, notably the ability to easily generate and characterize  mutations,
              and to study the effects of mutations on the function of  the insulin receptor
              in a complex organism.  Using this system, the  function of the insulin
              receptor in the development of the nervous  system and muscles, and in the
              regulation of growth will be  examined.  The proposed studies will also
              identify novel cellular  components involved in the function of the receptor. 
              The  elucidation of these components in this model system is simplified  by its
              ability to be modified genetically and characterized  biochemically.  The
              identification of components in the insulin  receptor signaling pathway is
              significant for our understanding of  the pathogenesis and treatment of
              diseases, such as diabetes and  cancer, and may suggest novel targets for
              intervention.
