Title       : ITR: Semantic Association Identification and Knowledge Discovery for National
               Security Applications (IDM Program)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0219649

Award Number: 0219649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amit P. Sheth   (Principal Investigator current)
              Budak Arpinar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Krzysztof J. Kochut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Georgia Res Fdn Inc
	      616 Boyd GSRC
	      Athens, GA  306027411    706/542-5939

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Role of information technology (IT) is recognized to be a critical component in
              the effort of improving national security, including homeland defense.
              Applications of importance to national security, such as aviation security,
              pose significant challenges to current information technology and provide
              excellent source for further research in developing next generation IT
              solutions. 

Recently, there is significant advance in applying techniques
              from database and information systems, knowledge representation, AI,
              information retrieval including text categorization, lexical and language
              analysis and others in developing a new generation of semantic technologies. 
              Semantic technologies help in associating meaning of data and in more
              meaningfully organizing data, in meaningfully correlating data, as well as in
              converting data into information for more effective decision making and in
              finding information that contextually relevant to users' needs.  They help with
              syntactic and representational as well as semantic interoperability. This
              general area of research is also getting renewed attention now that there is
              considerable excitement in the vision of the Semantic Web, characterized as the
              next phase of the Web.

Results from several of our past and continuing
              research projects have led to the development a semantic technology called
              Semantic Content Organization and Retrieval Engine (SCORE). Using SCORE's
              ability to quickly create ontology-driven agents without programming, it has
              been possible to (a) quickly create and maintain large knowledge bases (such as
              over one million entities and relationships per domain) base from multiple semi
              structured and structured sources of knowledge in largely (but not fully)
              automated ways, and (b) ability to create semantic (domain specific) metadata
              from unstructured (text), semi structured and structured sources of static and
              dynamic (e.g., query driven) content. This technology has also been
              commercialized and is being used in aviation security and intelligence
              applications. While specifics of these applications cannot be discussed due to
              government and agency regulations, and many technologically possible
              capabilities have yet to pass through policy considerations, we imagine a
              prototype application of homeland security interest that help in identifying
              and screening a passenger with respect to security risk to develop requirements
              for relevant IT research. Two important challenges posed by such an application
              include (a) rapid identification of semantic associations involving entities
              (such as a passenger or a group of passengers on a flight), and (b) knowledge
              discovery that identify semantic associations of interest (such as those that
              may pose a risk).

Our goal is to research new techniques and improving
              effectiveness of techniques to identify semantic associations and knowledge
              discovery by exploiting a large knowledge base. Specific objectives include (a)
              ontology driven lazy semantic metadata extraction (i.e., annotation) to
              complement traditional active metadata extraction techniques, and (c) formal
              modeling and high-performance computation of semantic  association discovery
              including ontology-based contextual processing and relevancy ranking of
              interesting relationships. Our approach involves bootstrapping earlier research
              on semantic metadata extraction, multi-ontology query processing and other
              tools from on-going InfoQuilt project so that we can create knowledge bases and
              metadata from publicly available sources to enable meaningful evaluation of the
              techniques.


