Title       : Optimized Structural Damage Identification through Multi-Scale Embedded Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a0219690

Award Number: 0219690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kara Peters kjpeters@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mohammed A. Zikry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1639      SENSOR TECH FOR CIVIL & MECH
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Kara Peters (PI), North Carolina State University
Mohammed Zikry (Co-PI), North
              Carolina State University
Proposal No. 0219690
Optimized Structural Damage
              Identification through Multi-Scale Embedded Sensing

The proposed research
              has as its major aim the development of a unified sensing and fracture
              methodology that will be used to identify damage at different physical scales
              in metallic structural systems.  New fabrication and processing techniques are
              used to embed multiplexed sensors in metallic systems, such that material
              mismatch impedances and residual stresses are minimized in both the sensors and
              the host structure. Displacement, displacement gradient, and strain fields from
              these sensors are then filtered and fused with recently developed
              three-dimensional constitutive and fracture methodologies to predict failure
              initiation and growth in crystalline solids. Failure modes and damage
              progression are categorized in terms of intergranular and transgranular
              fracture. A three dimensional thermo-mechanistic physically-based predictive
              framework is needed to understand interrelated effects, such as embedded
              sensors in host metallic materials, interfacial thermal, stress and strain
              gradients, and grain-boundary distributions and orientations on the structural
              response at the global level.  This results in effective life cycle predictions
              that are based on physical material mechanisms, as opposed to current estimates
              based on inadequate local strain-field distributions.  The coupling of sensor
              data fusion with the three dimensional predictive framework provides insight
              and understanding of events that are difficult, if not impossible, to
              experimentally study, such as subsurface damage and crack nucleation in
              structural systems. The realization of these interrelated research objectives
              could significantly improve engineering and scientific capabilities for
              developing a new generation of in-situ damage identification and mitigation
              systems.

