Title       : Alliance for the Production of African American Ph.D.s in the Mathematical
               Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0219737

Award Number: 0219737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1801943            (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip Kutzko pkutzko@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dean L. Isaacson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roselyn Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The projects to be undertaken here have as their goal a substantial increase in
              the number of African American Ph.D.s in mathematics, statistics and other
              quantitatively based disciplines.  Objectives include:

-Identifying of
              students at participating HBCUs who have the potential to obtain an advanced
              degree in a mathematical science or a field employing mathematical skills and
              methods.

-Providing mentoring, nurturing and research experiences for the
              students identified above throughout their undergraduate careers.

-Building
              bridges between participating HBCUs and majority institutions to provide a
              seamless transition to graduate school.

These projects will be carried out
              by the Alliance for the Production of African American Ph.D.s in the
              Mathematical Sciences, a consortium of departments of mathematics, statistics
              and testing and measurement at the three Iowa State Regents Universities and
              four Historically Black Colleges and Universities: Alabama A&M University,
              Benedict College, Florida A&M University and Jackson State University.  
              

The first project will involve the selection, mentoring and nurturing of
              eight undergraduate Alliance Scholars at each of the four participating HBCUs. 
              Each of these students will be provided with two mentors: a mentor at the
              student's home institution and an Iowa Regent mentor.  These mentors will work
              together with the student to develop an individualized course of study as well
              as a series of research projects.  Students will spend time at Iowa Regents
              Universities and will normally be offered admission and support at an
              appropriate Ph.D. program at one of these universities upon graduation.

The
              second project will be an eight-week Alliance Summer Institute to be held each
              summer at either Iowa State University or the University of Iowa.  Among the
              objectives of this project are:

-Providing information about the variety of
              research areas and career paths available to students with quantitative
              abilities and training.

-Providing a cultural and academic introduction to
              life and work at a large, majority university.

-Providing opportunities for
              interactions between students and professors at minority serving institutions
              and their counterparts at majority universities.

-Providing exposure to
              distinguished minority scholars and other longtime supporters of minority
              scholarship.

-Providing opportunities to carry out research projects, both
              alone and in groups.

Twenty-four students will be selected for the Summer
              Institute each summer.  They will be organized into research teams consisting
              of three students, one faculty member and one graduate student assistant. 
              Faculty will be drawn from a pool of Alliance faculty; graduate student
              assistants will be selected, where possible, from among the twenty-seven
              underrepresented minority graduate students in the University of Iowa
              Department of Mathematics.  Preference will be given to eligible Alliance
              Scholars; remaining positions will be filled by undergraduate students who will
              most benefit from the sort of experience provided here.  Further information
              may be obtained by calling Phil Kutzko at 319-335-0758 or sending him email at
              pkutzko@blue.weeg.uiowa.edu.

