Title       : ITR/SF&IT: Fast Multipole Translation Algorithms for Solution of the 3D
               Helmholtz Equation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0219681

Award Number: 0219681
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nail A. Gumerov gumerov@umiacs.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard C. Elman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dianne P. O'Leary  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Isaak D. Mayergoyz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramani Duraiswami  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposal concerns new improvements that have the potential to achieve
              significant speed-up for the fast multipole method (FMM) for use in solving the
              Helmholtz and other problems used to model phenomena encountered in
              electromagnetics, acoustics, biology etc. Solving larger problems holds promise
              for better design on the one hand, and elucidation of new physics/biology on
              the other. Discretizations of the partial differential equations arising from
              these equations yield large systems of equations for which both direct and
              iterative solution techniques are expensive.

The introduction by Rokhlin &
              Greengard of the FMM generated tremendous interest in the scientific computing
              community, as it demonstrated a way to generate structure and achieve fast
              solution of equations without relying on the discretization. Despite its
              promise, the algorithm has not achieved widespread implementation for many
              practically important problems that could use the promised speedups. Some
              researchers have reported that the approximate integrals both make
              implementation difficult, and in practice they have been shown to introduce
              stability problems. We have recently derived exact expressions for the
              translation and rotation of multipole solutions of the Helmholtz equation,
              which enable fast computation via simple recursions. Further we have obtained
              very promising results on the properties of the translation operators that
              enable creation of very tight error bounds. Our translations have the same
              asymptotic complexity as the standard integral expressions, but with much
              smaller coefficients. We have also found that the translation operator can be
              decomposed into the product of sparse recurrence matrices and this can be the
              basis for a T(p2) algorithm, which we propose to pursue. Based on these
              expressions, we will develop software for solution of different problems using
              the FMM. To be useful in pushing ahead the information technology revolution
              our software will be well documented and published in accessible peer reviewed
              forums. Such availability will act to improve adoption by large numbers of
              practitioners. 

