Title       : SGER: New Approach to Revolutionize a Photovoltaic Detector Performance Using
               Electron Injection-Induced Effects in AlGaN
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  2002      
File        : a0219546

Award Number: 0219546
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 15,  2002      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonid Chernyak chernyak@physics.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wide band gap GaN-based semiconductors are attracting increasing attention due
              to their importance in modern electronics. The applications of GaN necessitate
              the controlled modification of its fundamental electronic properties, in
              addition to the availability of high quality material.  

The spectral
              response of the GaN-based photovoltaic detectors is generally limited by the
              large  absorption coefficient at high energies  and the small minority  carrier
              diffusion length. Recent design changes,  to overcome these limitations,
              include the use of p-i-n instead of p-n junction [1-4], substitution of GaN by
              AlxGa1-xN [1-3] or semitransparent recessed windows [2], and a back-illuminated
               detector configuration [3]. However, a tuning of  fundamental  (Al)GaN
              properties, to boost the performance of  III-Nitride devices, was never
              directly considered. 

The innovation in this proposal is to significantly
              enhance a photovoltaic detector performance by tailoring the minority carrier
              diffusion length in (Al)GaN. The diffusion length is a crucial parameter for
              the detector quantum efficiency and photoresponse. 

The underlying concept
              is defined by the PI.s recent findings [5-8] that electron injection into
              p-(Al)GaN from the application of an external voltage in a solid state
              device--p-n junction or  Schottky  barrier-increases  the  critical  minority 
              carrier  diffusion  length  and  lifetime. Consistent changes were observed in
              other material properties, including luminescence and spectral photoresponse,
              and were attributed to charging of deep metastable Mg-acceptor-related centers
              [6].  

The practical significance of this research is a long-term (days),
              revolutionary (up to an order of magnitude!) performance  enhancement for
              (Al)GaN-based photovoltaic detectors, achieved through short time (at most 1500
              sec) electron injection. This is because the increased diffusion  length 
              improves  minority  carrier  collection  and  eliminates  the  "dead space", 
              where carriers recombine before they are collected.  

The proposed project
              is of high  risk,  since  it  must  be  determined  whether  the  novel
              electron injection-induced effects in p-(Al)GaN  [5-8] are universal in nature
              and represent a fundamental property of the p-type material, or if instead they
              depend on the material's quality, growth, and processing  conditions.  If,
              indeed, the effects  are universal, a high pay off  will  be manifested in a
              development of this novel and  simple approach to revolutionize photovoltaic
              detector  performance  by manipulating  the  material.s  transport  properties,
               which  will  likely  be used in combination with design and technology
              improvements. 

Success  in  this  SGER  application  will  lead  to  the 
              implementation  of  this  approach  in commercial detectors, and will advance
              the frontiers of this technology for use in other bipolar devices  for  which 
              the  diffusion  length  is  critical  (transistors,  thyristors)  [6].  It  is 
              planned  to submit a GOALI proposal (with Corning) based on success of this
              project. 

The broader impact of this research will be a dipper understanding
              of electron transport in GaN  and related compounds, the integration of 
              research with education, and partnership with industry.  

