Title       : Collaborative Research: A Joint NU-UIUC Project for the Development of New
               Integrated Tools for Predicting, Monitoring and Controlling Ground Movements
               due to Excavations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0219123

Award Number: 0219123
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2011     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1954187            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard J. Finno r-finno@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Youssef Hashash  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jamshid Ghaboussi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0219123
PI:		Richard J. Finno
Institution:	Northwestern
              University
Title:	"Collaborative: A joint NU-UIUC Project for Development of
              New Integrated Tools for Predicting, Monitoring and Controlling Ground
              Movements due to Excavations"

Abstract:

The increased urbanization,
              population density and traffic congestion in major urban centers in the US has
              lead to a greater demand for underground space.  Current homeland security
              concerns have prompted consideration of use of underground space for placement
              and protection of critical and sensitive infrastructure along urban corridors.
              With new development, and increasingly more redevelopment within the urban
              areas, there is a clear need to efficiently and safely develop underground
              space.  A major concern when placing deep excavations in urban environments is
              the impact of construction-related ground movements on adjacent buildings and
              utilities.  The ground movements cause structures supported by the affected
              ground to deform and possibly sustain damage.  It is critically important to
              predict and control the magnitude and distribution of the ground movements that
              result from creating the underground space.

This collaborative research
              project aims to develop new, integrated tools for predicting, monitoring, and
              controlling ground movements associated with excavations in urban areas.  The
              project is a joint venture between Northwestern University and the University
              of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. 

The project will explore and develop new
              technologies that offer substantial promise for greatly enhancing the
              construction control process and attendant mitigation of ground deformations
              including: (1) field instrumentation and sensors with wireless communication
              capabilities, (2) data storage and display, including the display of
              construction progress and ground and building movements in a virtual reality
              environment, and, (3) intelligent, self-updating numerical models to simulate
              the excavation and support process and to compute anticipated ground and
              structure movements.  These new technologies and improvements will be field
              tested in real time during excavation projects. 

The project has strong
              educational and industry outreach components in addition to its research
              components.  A group of contractors and engineering firms that have national
              practices will provide access to ongoing excavation projects and participate in
              the project advisory board.  Faculty and their students from primarily
              undergraduate institutions will participate in the project. 

