Title       : ITR: Nonlinear Dynamics-Based Robust Congestion Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0219162

Award Number: 0219162
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $447408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eyad H. Abed abed@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Although the internet's origins lie in computer and communication technology,
              control and stability theory have also had a major influence on its
              development. After the development of the additive increase, multiplicative
              decrease  algorithm by Jacobson in 1988, the first significant Active 
Queue
              Management (AQM) algorithm introduced was Random Early Detection (RED). In RED,
              the basic idea is to let the senders know about a high queue occupancy
              situation by increasing the 
drop probability at the gateways as a linear
              function of the time-averaged queue occupancy. Field observations of  anomalous
              behavior for TCP networks with and without  deployment of RED have been made
              that show irregular load  batching, load oscillations, and high parametric
              sensitivity. 
Given the heterogeneity of the internet, and the associated wide
              variations of parameters, extending the range of stable operation in parameter
              space is clearly very important. In  this research program, tools from
              nonlinear dynamical systems and from bifurcation and chaos control will be
              harnessed for the analysis and control of congestion in networks with one or
              several bottlenecks with TCP-type and/or UDP-type (User Datagram Protocol)
              traffic. The project emphasizes work of a 
fundamental nature to develop an
              understanding of network congestion dynamics and address some of the difficult
              systems issues that are at the heart of the congestion avoidance and 
control
              problem. The project builds on recent work of the PI's group on the analysis of
              nonlinear dynamics in TCP-RED and mixed traffic networks. The project also
              leverages past contributions of the PI on control of nonlinear instabilities
              (bifurcation control) and on closed-loop monitoring of the 
stability of
              nonlinear uncertain systems.

