Title       : ITR: High Fidelity Simulation for Heterogeneous Civil and Mechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0219422

Award Number: 0219422
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495317             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos A. Felippa carlos@titan.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kwang-Chun Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              
Abstract

High Fidelity Simulation for Heterogeneous Civil
and Mechanical
              Systems




This award funds a three-year research program to develop and
              evaluate methods for high fidelity modeling and simulation of strongly
              heterogeneous coupled systems of importance in Civil and Mechanical
              Engineering.  These systems are characterized by interacting components of
              widely different mechanical characteristics.   The approach relies on
              multilevel decomposition, into subsystems, interface localization and
              regularization. The proposed research is based on two innovative
              concepts:

(1) An interface localization method designed to link 
              heterogeneous models of system components while maintaining consistency and
              energy conservation between nonmatching discretizations.  

(2) A
              regularization approach that preserves the full accuracy of the interactions
              transmitted across the interfaces for a wide spectrum of coupled
              problems.

The research will be driven by and evaluated on two application
              examples that exhibit widely different physical scales:

(1)  A dam under
              seismic excitation, accounting for fluid-structure interaction with bulk
              cavitation as well as interaction with highly heterogeneous soil strata.
(2) 
              A wide-band MEMS frequency-sensor device consisting of a resonator mounted on a
              layered silicon substrate.

Techniques for model-based simulation of
              physically homogeneous components have experienced great advances over the past
              three decades.  Difficulties occur when interfacing such models.  These
              difficulties can be traced to physical, modeling or computational method
              mismatches.  For example, a degrading interface or a protective foam layer can
              produce highly inaccurate results in the prediction of inter-component fluxes
              and forces. The approach taken in this research aims to take maximum advantage
              of existing models and methods for the isolated subsystems, while developing
              interaction techniques that address those  difficulties. 

Outcomes of this
              research will have  application to other fields of science and technology that
              deal with the interaction of strongly heterogeneous models.  These include
              aircraft and marine engineering, electronic packaging and the design of
              advanced materials. Computational multiphysics is expected to be a key
              component of ongoing US industry efforts to boost productivity through
              information technology by  faster exploration of designs and concepts, and
              eventually optimization integrated with CADM. However, the complexity inherent
              in multiphysics simulations necessarily requires the collaboration of experts
              in the underlying disciplines.  This can lead to difficulties and costly
              retrofits when  models originally develop to address the individual problems
              are interfaced. The research aims at facilitating, through modularity and
              reuse, the timely incorporation of advances in modeling and interfacing
              techniques in simulation.

