Title       : Growth of Three Dimensional Cracks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0219839

Award Number: 0219839
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482968             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Mear mear@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory J. Rodin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              K. Ravi-Chandar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1630      MECHANICS & STRUCTURE OF MATER
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              
M.E. Mear, K. Ravi-Chandar and G.J. Rodin
Center for Mechanics of Solids,
              Structures and Materials
The University of Texas at Austin


The University
              of Texas at Austin is engaged in a four-year focused research effort aimed at
              providing the physical underpinnings of three-dimensional (3-D) crack evolution
              through an integrated theoretical, computational and experimental
              investigation. Specifically, we are: (i) performing critical experiments that
              will provide insight into general (mixed mode) 3-D fracture evolution, (ii)
              performing numerical analyses of the experimental specimens/observations to
              determine the crack-tip fields corresponding to crack growth, and (iii)
              developing criteria for crack growth initiation and shape evolution which are
              consistent with the experimental observations and numerical simulations. 
The
              technological importance of this work stems from the staggering human and
              economic costs of structural failure resulting from material fracture. This
              cost is compounded by the fact that much of the infrastructure built in post
              World War II boom is aging yet excessively expensive to replace. While
              significant progress in failure analysis over the past four decades has aided
              in the design and analysis of fracture critical and flaw/damage tolerant
              structures, limitations in the characterization and modeling of flaws in their
              early stages of development have restricted much of the success of fracture
              mechanics to situations where the flaws are fully developed and admit treatment
              within a two-dimensional framework. The objective of this investigation is to
              provide a basis for overcoming these limitations. 

