Title       : ITR: Industrial Organization of Internet Industries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0219205

Award Number: 0219205
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $338153             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn Ellison gellison@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sara F. Ellison  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1353,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal 0219205
ITR: Industrial Organization of Internet Industries
Glenn
              Ellison,  Massachusetts Institute of Technology

This project investigates a
              number of new businesses that have been spawned by the growth of the Internet:
              price search engines, online retail stores, and online auction sites. Several
              components of the project involve the construction and examination of a new
              dataset which includes high frequency pricing data from one online retail
              market, sales data from one of the firms operating in the market, wholesale
              cost data, and prices from traditional retailers which compete with the online
              firms. One part of the project will study the demand environment that price
              search engines create and whether demand becomes so price sensitive that firms
              are unable to cover their fixed costs. It explores practices of online
              retailers that may help them to avoid this outcome, including obfuscation in
              search markets and loss-leader pricing. A second part of the project will
              explore the sensitivity of online purchases to sales taxes and to differences
              between online prices and prices in traditional retail stores. This analysis
              exploits data on the location of consumers and differences between pre-tax and
              after-tax ranking of each retailer. A third part is an examination of how
              retailers react to cost shocks and rivals' price changes and how these
              reactions and the entry of new firms have combined to produce the observed
              evolution of price-cost margins. The last component of the project will study
              competition between online auction sites. It will consist primarily of
              theoretical analyses of the factors that may allow one site to remain dominant
              even as the overall market grows. 

The results of these studies should
              improve understanding of the emerging internet industries. They are very
              directly relevant to some current public policy questions, such as whether
              taxes should be imposed on internet transactions and how this might affect both
              the viability of internet businesses and traditional retailers. By improving
              understanding of these industries they may also enlighten future debates that
              arise and help private firms direct investments efficiently. On a more general
              level the studies can be seen as using a unique opportunity that the internet
              provides to improve understanding of issues that have been and will remain
              important in many industries: how search costs affect pricing and market
              efficiency, how attempts to sell add-ons and a desire to keep consumers from
              focusing on price differences affects competition, and how repetition and the
              entry of new firms affects pricing.

