Title       : ITR: Integrating Intrusion Detection with Intelligent Visualization and
               Interaction Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0219315

Award Number: 0219315
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $415099             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peng Ning ning@csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. St. Amant  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher G. Healey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The overall objective of this project is to develop new intrusion detection
              techniques by integrating intrusion detection with visualization and
              intelligent interaction strategies.  The resulting system allows a user to
              easily monitor an underlying intrusion detection system (IDS), intercede if it
              fails to detect potential attacks, identify and address attacks, and update the
              IDS with attack profiles so that future occurrences will be properly reported. 
              The expected contributions of this project include (1) interactive intrusion
              detection algorithms that capitalize on human knowledge and judgment, (2)
              visualization and interaction techniques that support rapid, accurate, and
              effective monitoring of potential attacks, and (3) semi-automated tools for
              constructing and evaluating attack profiles to extend the capabilities of an
              intrusion detection system.

Research in this project offers the potential
              for significant advances in our understanding of how to detect and prevent
              network intrusions. We expect to make important breakthroughs on a number of
              fronts, including (1) new methods to automatically identify sophisticated
              intrusion attempts, (2) new techniques that harness a human observer's unique
              analysis talents to augment and extend an automated IDS's ability to respond to
              new or unexpected attacks, and (3) new approaches that allow automated
              detection algorithms to continually improve by learning from their users. 
              Moreover, the multidisciplinary approach we are using offers the significant
              benefit of making the problem-solving processes of intrusion detection
              accessible and available to non-experts.  Interactive systems that incorporate
              visualization and some degree of intelligent assistance can be very appealing
              to students and even casual computer users, providing a platform for
              exploration and further learning about the topic.  Due to growing interest in
              the area of intrusion and appropriate countermeasures, the impact of this work
              will be broadly felt. The research will lead to improved techniques for
              intrusion detection, and thus to significantly enhanced computer and network
              security.

