Title       : ITR: Spatially Programmable Equipment: A New Design Paradigm for Semiconductor
               Manufacturing Enabled by Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0219200

Award Number: 0219200
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499247             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond A. Adomaitis adomaiti@isr.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary W. Rubloff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1403,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research:

The purpose of this small Information Technology Research (ITR)
              project is to develop a new paradigm for semiconductor manufacturing equipment
              - flexible equipment design enabled by information technology.  The current
              paradigm of fixed equipment design limits performance of equipment in a rapidly
              changing technology environment, where tradeoffs must be made between product
              performance and manufacturing efficiency.  The concept is based on procedures
              where process conditions can be spatially programmed to (1) decouple
              manufacturing constraints (e.g., uniformity across large wafers) from product
              performance (e.g., material quality); (2) reduce experimentation time by
              enabling parallel, combinatorial experiments on each wafer; and (3) provide the
              basis for a flexible, extendible equipment technology.  Work has already begun
              on an experimental test bed (chemical vapor deposition in a manufacturing
              cluster tool) using a physically based simulation of the prototype system. 
              This project is for developing the IT infrastructure required to link
              object-oriented simulation and model reduction methodologies to web-accessible
              experimental data archives and physical property databases to techniques for
              real-time control of parallel and multiplexed sensor/actuator
              arrays.


Impact:

The project has the potential to fundamentally change
              the design paradigm of a major industry - semiconductor-manufacturing equipment
              - to one that directly exploits a broad spectrum of information technology. 
              Integration of research and education are planned on a number of fronts: (1)
              the project provides an opportunity for interdisciplinary teaming (e.g.,
              between engineers and computer scientists and between materials engineers and
              systems engineers) in the classroom, (2) using spatially programmable equipment
              design as the project focus in a materials/systems project course at the
              graduate level, and (3) developing simulation-based learning software for
              technicians and engineers in industry. 

