Title       : ITR: Making 3D Visibility Practical
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0219594

Award Number: 0219594
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499923             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven M. LaValle lavalle@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Hart  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeff G. Erickson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Efficient reasoning about three-dimensional visibility is a challenging problem
              in many research areas and applications, including computer graphics
              (radiosity, virtual reality walkthroughs), robotics (sensor-based navigation,
              visual surveillance), computer vision (recognition, model building),
              architecture, urban planning, and visualization in computational biology.
              Visibility issues have been considered for four decades in these areas however,
              most early work has focused on computing visibility from a single viewpoint,
              while modern techniques require more global visibility information. Global
              visibility describes the visibility relationships etween objects that are more
              complex than points: visibility from a volumetric region of space, limits of
              umbra and penumbra with respect to an extended light source, mutual visibility
              etween pairs of objects, and loci of structural changes of
              visibility.

Although great strides have een made in understanding visibility
              through the introduction of visibility space partitions and the visibility
              complex, they have so far had little impact on applications. This is due to
              several reasons: 1) worst-case theoretical complexity bounds are discouraging
              2) there are many degenerate cases that must be handled, making it difficult to
              make robust implementations 3) equivalences in visibility lead to a
              four-dimensional cell decomposition, which is difficult to visualize 4) cells
              can be extremely complicated (some include holes).

This work will make 3D
              visibility computations practical by approaching the problem in two parallel,
              integrated tracks. One involves the investigation of several key issues that
              will make 3D visibility algorithms more attractive and practical in
              applications: 1) performing practical complexity analysis that captures the
              expected performance for models that are typically used in applications, as
              opposed to theoretical worst-case ounds derived from uncommon pathological
              cases 2) rather than taking a generic "precompute and return everything"
              approach, we would like the amount of precomputation, information stored in
              data structures, and extraction algorithms to be nicely tailored to the number
              of queries and the type of information arises in a particular application 3)
              traversal through the space of visibility rays will be facilitated through the
              development of decomposition algorithms based on critical events and Morse
              theory 4) we will develop techniques for reasoning about the evolving shadow
              space (set of points not visible), which is required for many problems that
              involve moving viewpoints.

The second track involves the development of a 3D
              visibility library ased on robust visibility primitives. We expect to make an
              immediate impact on applications by making this library available for free to
              other researchers. The library will serve both as a helpful visualization and
              evaluation tool during the development of the research, and as a way to
              stimulate other interest and applications of 3D visibility after the work is
              completed. This effort, combined with the understanding gained from
              investigating the key visibility issues, is expected to make a broad impact on
              a wide array of applications that depend on efficient processing of visibility
              information.
