Title       : ITR: PDE Based Nonlinear Algorithms for Processing Multi-Scale AudioSignals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0219004

Award Number: 0219004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $452536             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jack Xin jxin@math.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS Award Abstract
Award #: 		0219004
PI: 			Xin, Jack
Institution:
              		University of Texas, Austin
Program: 		ITR Small Awards
Program Manager:
              	Catherine Mavriplis

Title: ITR: Partial Differential Equation Based
              Nonlinear Algorithms for Processing Multi-Scale Audio Signals

The aim of the
              project is to develop nonlinear partial differential equation models and
              algorithms for processing multi-scale audio signals. Nonlinearities are present
              in human auditory pathways, most notably in active basilar membranes (BM) of
              cochleas and peripheral auditory neurons. Our approach is to model the
              nonlinearities by combining first principles (Newton's Laws) in cochlear
              mechanics with experimental measurements of acoustic responses, at either the
              active BM level or the psycho-acoustic level. This is achieved by enlarging the
              class of partial differential equations (PDEs) derived from cochlear mechanical
              principles and neural phenomenology, then optimizing solutions towards the
              given set of target data. The first phase of research is to develop accurate,
              robust and fast numerical methods and algorithms for solving model PDEs. These
              PDEs are nonlinear, nonlocal and dispersive. Mathematical analysis will also be
              performed on the well-posedness of the PDEs, as well as existence and
              approximation of multi-tone solutions. The second phase is to select the
              optimal parameters and functional forms for these PDEs to further approximate
              the given data set.

Carrying out the project will generate accurate first
              principle based algorithms to enhance the evaluation of available experimental
              data on human audition, and strengthen our understanding of the computational
              role of human auditory systems. The results will have broad impact on digital
              hearing aid design, modeling of hearing loss, and audio compression. The
              project shall directly contribute to amplifying human sensory abilities,
              enhancing the performance of human beings, especially the hearing-impaired, in
              using audio information with ease and for more tasks.  

Date: June 26,
              2002

