Title       : ITR: High Performance Imaging Using an Array of Low-Cost Cameras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0219856

Award Number: 0219856
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marc S. Levoy levoy@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will explore the capabilities of an array of 128 cameras, which can
              be combined computationally in many different configurations for a wide range
              of scientific, commercial, and communication applications.  Over the past few
              years, the ability of image-based rendering (IBR) techniques to create
              photorealistic images of real scenes has generated great interest in building
              sensor systems that can capture environments from multiple viewpoints.  At the
              same time, we have witnessed the advent of CMOS image sensors, which are
              inexpensive and easy to use because of their digital interface. Furthermore,
              because they are manufactured in a CMOS process, processing power can be placed
              on the sensors themselves.  Finally, advances in semiconductor technology are
              making increasing computing power available for decreasing cost, power, and
              chip area.  These trends raise the questions: What can we do with many
              inexpensive CMOS image sensors, equally inexpensive optics, and a lot of
              processing power?  Can we use more cameras of lesser quality to enable more
              robust IBR algorithms?  Can we use clusters of inexpensive imagers and
              processors to create virtual cameras that outperform real ones?

Each camera
              in the 128-camera array contains a CMOS image sensor, MPEG encoder, and
              programmable processor, in order to investigate these questions.  The device is
              designed to record 128 synchronized video datasets through three PCs to a disk
              array.  This project will explore applications of the array to scientific
              imaging and computer vision and graphics. Multi-camera systems can function in
              many ways.  If the cameras are packed close together, then the system
              effectively functions as a single-center-of-projection synthetic camera, which
              can be configured to provide high performance along one or more imaging
              dimensions, such as resolution, signal-to-noise ratio, dynamic range, depth of
              field, frame rate, or spectral sensitivity. For example, one configuration
              could produce high-resolution images 10,240 x 3,830 pixels, and another could
              generate 7,680 frames per second.  Such capabilities are unprecedented for a
              video system, and they will have many scientific, engineering, and military
              uses. 

If the cameras are placed farther apart, then the system functions as
              a multiple-center-of-projection camera, and the data it captures is called a
              light field.  Of particular interest are novel methods for estimating 3D scene
              geometry from the dense imagery captured by the array.  This information can be
              used to improve compression of the light field and to interpolate smoothly
              between widely spaced cameras, allowing smooth virtual navigation through the
              scene.  Potential applications include evaluation of design models for
              manufacturing, medical and forensic consultation, online shopping, and virtual
              museum displays.

