Title       : ITR: Tailor-Made: Design of e-Textile Architectures for Wearable Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0219809

Award Number: 0219809
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: D. Helen Gill                           
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $399163             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas L. Martin tlmartin@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark T. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1656,1658,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT 
0219809
Thomas L. Martin
Va Poly Inst. 

Wearable  computing  has
               the  potential  to  allow  access  to  information  anytime  and  anyplace. 
              
Three of the major goals of wearable computing are to allow the user to go
              about a normal daily 
routine  while  constantly  wearing  a  device,  to  be 
              invisible  to  those  around  the  user,  and  to  be aware  of  the  user.s 
              actions  and  location.  The  purpose  of  this  research  is  to  investigate 
              the wearable  computing  uses  of  electronic  textiles  (e-textiles),  a 
              novel  hardware/software  platform  that  has  the  potential  to  solve  many 
              of  the  problems  in  achieving  these  goals,  and  to  create  a  design
              environment for e-textile-based wearable computing. 
E-textiles  are  fabrics 
              that  have  electronics  and  interconnections  woven  into  them.    The
              
electronics  consist  of  general-purpose  microprocessors,  digital  signal 
              processors,  sensors,  and 
actuators at regular intervals throughout the
              fabric.  E-textiles allow the creation of systems with a 
physical 
              flexibility  and  size  that  cannot  be  achieved  with  currently  available 
              electronic 
manufacturing techniques. Components and interconnections are a
              part of the fabric and thus are 
much less visible and, more importantly, not
              susceptible to becoming tangled together or snagged 
by the surroundings.
              Consequently, e-textiles can be worn in everyday situations where currently
              
available  wearable  computers  would  hinder  the  user.  E-textiles  also 
              have  greater  flexibility  in 
adapting  to  changes  in  the  computational 
              and  sensing  requirements  of  an  application  for  the 
purpose  of 
              managing  power  consumption  and  context  awareness. The  number  and 
              location  of 
sensor and processing elements can be dynamically tailored to
              the current needs of the user and 
application, rather than being fixed at
              design time.   
