Title       : ITR: Information-Theoretic Limits in Data Storage Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2002     
File        : a0219582

Award Number: 0219582
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul H. Siegel psiegel@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack K. Wolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Data storage systems represent one of the pillars supporting
the modern
              information age. Advances in computing and communication
technologies, and the
              networks that incorporate them, have increased
the demand for high capacity 
              data storage devices in applications
ranging from biological research (e.g.,
              the visualization and analysis
of massive multimedia data-sets)  to consumer
              electronics (e.g., the
storage of high-resolution image, audio, and video data
              in digital cameras).

The research addresses
analytic and numerical methods
              for determining the information-theoretic
limits on achievable storage
              densities and data transfer rates in
recording channels. It also develops and
              evaluates modulation, coding,
and signal processing techniques that can
              approach or achieve these limits.

The research considers both
              one-dimensional channel models applicable
to "track-oriented" storage devices,
              such as disks and tapes, as well as
higher-dimensional models relevant to
              exploratory page-oriented and
volumetric storage technologies, such as
              holographic recording and
thermomechanical recording based upon atomic force
              microscopy.

More specifically, new information-theoretic and algorithmic
              methods are
being used to study lower and upper bounds on the capacity of
              recording
channels, using analytical and empirically-based models for both
              longitudinal
and perpendicular recording systems. Bounds on the  information
              rates of
channels in two and higher dimensions are also being developed.

In
              order to achieve performance approaching the theoretical limits, new
signal
              processing and coding methods are required. In the area
of constrained
              modulation coding, the project is exploring the analysis
and design of
              one-dimensional constrained codes that more efficiently
combine the functions
              of modulation and error-correction. The nascent
theory of constrained coding
              in two and higher dimensions is also being
investigated, with a focus on
              fundamental problems, such as representation
of multi-dimensional constrained
              systems, determination of constraint
capacity, and efficient encoding and
              decoding algorithms.

Channel coding techniques based upon concatenation
              architectures,
graphical code models, and iterative decoding have been shown
              to effectively
achieve capacity on certain memoryless channels. The channel
              coding
component of this project addresses theoretical and algorithmic
              problems
associated with the application of these new  and powerful coding
              concepts
to data storage channels. In particular, the research considers the
              design
and performance analysis of turbo-like and low-density parity-check
              codes
for channels with intersymbol-interference, the trade-offs between
              latency
and complexity in message-passing decoder architectures, and new
              approaches
to combining coding, equalization, and detection that can more
              closely
approach the recording channel capacity. The project also
              addresses
fundamental problems of channel coding and detection in
              two-dimensional
recording systems.

