Title       : ITR: Foundations of Distributed Algorithmic Mechanism Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 7,  2003   
File        : a0219018

Award Number: 0219018
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ding-Zhu Du                             
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $484999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan Feigenbaum joan.feigenbaum@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In traditional theoretical computer science (TCS), computational agents are
              typically assumed either to be obedient, i.e., to follow the prescribed
              algorithm, or to be adversaries who ``play against'' each other.  On the other
              hand, the strategic agents in game theory are neither obedient nor adversarial.
              Although one cannot assume that they will follow the prescribed algorithm, one
              can assume that they will respond to incentives.  Thus, the economics
              literature traditionally stressed incentives and downplayed computational
              complexity, and the TCS literature traditionally did the opposite.  The
              emergence of the Internet as a standard platform for distributed computation
              has radically changed this state of affairs: Ownership, operation, and use by
              many self-interested, independent parties give the Internet
              the
characteristics of an economy as well as those of a computer.
The
              emerging discipline of Distributed Algorithmic Mechanism Design (DAMD)lies in
              the intersection of TCS, economics, and networking.  This project addresses the
              economic and computational foundations of DAMD.  Fundamental problems addressed
              include but are not limited to notions of inherent tractability or
              intractability of DAMD problems, methods of approximation for DAMD problems
              found to be inherently intractable, and the extent to which agent privacy can
              be maintained in distributed algorithmic mechanisms.

