Title       : Collaborative Research: Low Power CMOS Circuits and Systems for Next Generation
               Wireless Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0219126

Award Number: 0219126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124398             (Estimated)
Investigator: Heinrich D. Foltz hfoltz@panam.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Pan American
	      1201 West University Dr
	      Edinburg, TX  785412999    956/381-2011

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Foltz

There is a rapidly growing trend toward embedding wireless capability
              into a
wide variety of information technology products; recently in the form
              of
single chip transceivers, and in the future perhaps integrated on-chip
              with
the main product function.  These devices must have low power consumption
              to
satisfy battery conservation and thermal considerations.   Good
              receiver
sensitivity and signal handling are also essential in a crowded
              radio
frequency (RF) spectrum; however, this requirement conflicts with low
              power
circuit design.  The PI proposes to develop low power CMOS circuits that
              improve
the trade-off between power consumption and RF performance. 
              

Current CMOS low noise amplifiers (LNA) have noise figures as low as 0.8
              dB,
input intercept points up to +18dBm, and power as low as 1.5 mW;
              however,
these specifications cannot be obtained simultaneously.  Likewise,
              CMOS
mixers can meet demanding CDMA communications standards for linearity
              and
noise figure, but only at high power cost.

To address these problems
              the PI proposes a number of strategies for (a) reducing
power consumption for
              a given level of performance, and (b) allowing a
dynamic trade-off of power
              versus RF performance.  These strategies include:
(1) reuse of amplifier
              stages at two different frequencies through reflex
arrangements, thus reducing
              the number of high performance, high current
stages required in receivers, 
              (2) dynamically controlled positive feedback
and bias in LNA stages, to allow
              power, signal handling, and noise figure to
be traded off based on signal
              strength and interference, and (3) integration
of charge pumps into individual
              drain supplies, to optimize the voltage for
RF-critical stages while allowing
              the non-critical portions of a CMOS chip
to operate at low
              voltage.

Successful implementation will lead to improved range and life for
              wireless
sensors, more reliable communications under adverse interference
              conditions,
and ultimately to wider application of information technology in
              industry
and science.


