Title       : ITR: Parallel and Grid Computing for Ecological Multimodeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2002    
File        : a0219269

Award Number: 0219269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eugene N. Bruce                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $497729             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis J. Gross gross@tiem.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael W. Berry  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1141,1148,1652,9139,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Environmental problems that span regional geographic extent require multiple
              approaches to the modelling of natural system responses at various spatial,
              temporal and organismal scales. Analyzing responses of natural systems to
              alternative human actions requires mathematical and computer models for 
              several physical and trophic scales. Computer modeling efforts  require large
              spatio-temporal data sets, often derived from remote sensing, linked to complex
              models for abiotic factors such as rainfall  and hydrology. Due to the large
              spatial data sets and heavy computational demands associated with such models,
              serial computing methods on workstation platforms are barely appropriate for
              analysis.  The investigators will develop algorithms and software for linked
              ecological and physical models appropriate for both multiple-processor
              computers and clusters of machines across a computational grid. Included  will
              be a comparison of the performance of alternative methods and algorithms for
              parallelization of ecological multimodels on a variety of platforms.

The
              proposed research has potentially very broad impacts on the ability   of
              managers of natural systems to effectively utilize the extensive remote sensing
              data currently being collected and archived, link these data with realistic
              ecological and physical models of natural systems, and provide assessments of
              the effectiveness of management scenarios.   Given the costs and potential
              long-term impacts of alternative harvesting, water scheduling, and land-use
              designs, it is important to optimize decision making and monitor the
              effectiveness of the actions taken. Achieving effective use, however, also
              requires the development of a cadre of managers able to make use of new
              technologies. The investigators   will initiate the development of educational
              materials through which environmental scientists can learn about the use of
              multimodels to address regional environmental problems. An objective is to
              formulate an explicit educational program that will lead to computational grid
              methods being accepted as part of the toolkit applied in regional planning for
              management of natural systems.

