Title       : Develop An Evacuation Management Decision Support System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0219155

Award Number: 0219155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $409210             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael K. Lindell mlindell@archone.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Carla S. Prater  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Since the Galveston hurricane of 1900, improved systems for detection, warning,
              and evacuation have decreased the loss of life from natural hazards in the
              United States. Population growth in hazard prone areas is likely to reverse
              this trend unless prompt and effective measures are taken. Hazard-resistant
              land use and building construction practices could help to contain loss of life
              despite population growth, but there are economic and political barriers to
              implementing them. Improvements in the ability to evacuate threatened
              populations will thus be needed.

This research project addresses this need
              by developing an Evacuation Management Decision Support System (EMDSS) to
              assist public officials in monitoring a hazard's onset and determining when and
              where to initiate evacuations. A large data base on warning/preparation times,
              compliance/spontaneous evacuation rates, evacuation route utilization, and
              evacuation costs for both risk area residents and transients (especially
              business and tourist travelers), and economic impacts to business due to
              evacuations will be constructed using multiple surveys. Data on warning and
              preparation times, compliance and spontaneous evacuation rates, and evacuation
              route utilization are sparse; data on evacuation costs (as opposed to losses
              from disaster impact) are lacking in the literature. This database will feed
              the EMDSS to provide public officials support in facing hazards, such as
              hurricanes and help them balance the threat to public safety against evacuation
              costs under time constraints and uncertainty. 

Valuable disciplinary goals
              will be reached through the collection and analysis of data that advance
              theoretical disaster research. In addition, the project will perform a major
              interdisciplinary function by integrating social psychological theories with
              those from transportation planning to develop an improved evacuation time
              estimation model, and with theories from household and business economics to
              develop an evacuation cost model. These perspectives will be integrated with
              concepts from decision analysis and decision support systems to produce the
              EMDSS. 

Broader social utility will result through significant advances in
              technology to support evacuation decisions. This work will add value to and
              leverage the hazard vulnerability analysis and evacuation planning work
              performed by the Hazard Reduction & Recovery Center for the Texas Governor's
              Division of Emergency Management (DEM) for over twenty years. This close
              relationship with an operational agency is unique among university-based
              hazard/disaster research centers. The relationship between HRRC and DEM
              provides an unparalleled opportunity for user input into software design and
              accelerated technology transfer to state and local emergency managers. The
              research will be coordinated with personnel from the Taiwanese National Science
              and Technology Program for Hazard Mitigation (NAPHM), who are interested in
              collaborating in the extending the EMDSS to evacuations from landslides and
              inland flooding. The Hazard Reduction & Recovery Center has a Memorandum of
              Agreement with NAPHM that has promoted cooperative exchanges between the two
              centers.

Finally, graduate students will benefit by their involvement in
              survey development, data collection, and EMDSS development and evaluation. A
              broader group of graduate students will benefit from inclusion of this material
              in the investigators' environmental hazard management courses (especially the
              one on disaster response planning) and in a future edition of the textbook,
              Behavioral Foundations of Community Emergency Planning. The project will employ
              members of under-represented groups, especially women and students from
              developing countries 

