Title       : Collaborative Research: Static and Dynamic Properties of Municipal Solid Waste
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0219834

Award Number: 0219834
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2007     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196328             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen M. Rathje e.rathje@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth H. Stokoe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              0219834, Ellen M. Rathje, Kenneth H. Stokoe U. of Texas-Austin
"Collaborative
              Research:  Static and Dynamic Properties of Municipal Solid Waste"

Over the
              past 15 years, municipal solid-waste landfills (MSW) have evolved from local
              "dumps" into sophisticated engineered systems.  Yet, despite the sophistication
              and complexity of the engineered environmental protection systems required at
              modern solid-waste landfills, and the dependence of the performance of many of
              these systems on the behavior of the waste mass, our understanding of the
              mechanical behavior of MSW is, at best, rudimentary.  Uncertainty regarding MSW
              mechanical properties is a major limitation on performance of reliable landfill
              stability analyses, the design of waste containment systems for new landfills,
              and the closure and redevelopment of old landfills.

This action is to
              support a three-year collaborative research program whose objective is to
              evaluate systematically the significant factors that influence the static and
              dynamic geotechnical properties of municipal solid-waste landfills.  The
              Environmental Protection Agency requires that all landfills in the United
              States be designed to withstand earthquakes.  For landfills in areas having
              significant seismic shaking potential, the dynamic properties are needed for
              design.  Currently, dynamic strength properties are assumed to be the same as
              the static properties, and dynamic stiffness is based on limited small strain
              data.  MSW is a highly heterogeneous material composed of various degradable
              (e.g. paper, food waste) and non-degradable (e.g. soil, plastic) materials. 
              While the behavior of MSW is likely to be influenced by waste composition and
              the state of material degradation, a fundamental understanding of the influence
              of these factors on the static and dynamic behavior of MSW is lacking.  As a
              result, MSW properties for static and dynamic analysis are typically based upon
              rules of thumb, engineering judgment, and a handful of laboratory and field
              measurements.  Factors being investigated in this study include waste
              composition (particularly with respect to the relative proportions of refuse
              and soil-like materials), waste degradation, and particle size.  Shear
              strength, compressibility, and dynamic material properties of MSW are evaluated
              using laboratory and field investigations.  Research on the influence of the
              refuse-to-soil ratio and on the state of waste degradation will further our
              understanding of the fundamental behavior of MSW as a composite material
              composed of refuse and soil.  Research on the influence of test specimen size
              is intended to facilitate both further research and site-specific studies for
              engineering design by possibly reducing or eliminating the need for large-sized
              test specimens and testing devices in future studies.

This collaborative
              project capitalizes on the insights and experienced gained by the principal
              investigators on previous studies of MSW characterization and landfill
              performance.  It will advance the profession's understanding of MSW landfills
              as engineered systems, leading to safer and more economical landfill designs. 
              It is an important step in moving beyond the over-reliance in current landfill
              design practice on rules of thumb and conjecture.  This project involves
              collaboration between researchers at the University of California - Berkeley,
              the University of Texas - Austin, and GeoSyntec Consultants in Huntington
              Beach, California.
