Title       : State-Time Approach for Analysis and Simulation of Complex Multicomponent
               Systems Using Future Massively Parallel Computing Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 28,  2002   
File        : a0219734

Award Number: 0219734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  2003    
Expires     : December 31,  2006   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt S. Anderson anderk5@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : ,1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Kurt S. Anderson
Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and Nuclear
              Engineering
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
NSF Proposal No.
              0219734
State-Time Approach for Analysis and Simulation of Complex
              Multicomponent Systems Using Future Massively Parallel Computing
              Resources

The principal objectives of this work are to research state-time
              methods for performing analysis, simulation, and optimization of complex
              dynamic systems. The goal is to produce dynamic systems analysis formulations
              which will be able to more effectively and fully exploit anticipated massively
              parallel computing resources (i.e. > 106 processors). The proposed space-time
              formulation permits the treatment of time within the equations of motion as a
              generalized coordinate. This permits the problem of performing the computer
              simulation, and associated analysis to be parallelized over both space and
              time, resulting in a far greater level of coarse grain parallelization with an
              associated decrease in simulation turnaround time. This significant increase
              arises from the fact that the most advanced of today's parallel dynamics
              analysis algorithms are sequential in time. Thus parallelization over the
              domain of the system using currently promoted methods is only beneficial when
              using a surprisingly limited number of processors, even if many are available.
              Parallelizing over both space and time results in a drastic increase in the
              number of coarse grain calculations that may be distributed over the available
              processors. By forming the equations and solving them in the proposed
              state-time manner, the level of required sequential calculation relative that
              which may be performed in parallel is reduced by a factor approximately equal
              to the number of temporal integration steps (often > 105) which would have been
              performed using current approaches. The proposed method, if successful, will
              allow the use of more detailed models, for more complex systems, with results
              obtained at a small fraction of the time required using current formulations.

