Title       : ITR: Network and Traffic Engineering for DiffServ MPLS-Based Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2002 
File        : a0219829

Award Number: 0219829
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299991             (Estimated)
Investigator: Caterina Scoglio caterina@ece.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The combined use of the Differentiated Services (DiffServ) and Multiprotocol
              Label Switching (MPLS) Technologies is a promising way to provide
              Quality-of-Service (QoS) in IP networks, while effectively using network
              resources.  However, to efficiently carry DiffServ traffic over an MPLS
              network, a mapping between DiffServ classes and LSPs is needed.   Moreover, the
              design and management of such a network is a fundamental key to the success of
              the QoS provisioning and it includes several open research issues.  Many
              problems need to be solved such as LSP dimensioning, set up tear down
              procedures, routing, adaptation to actual carried traffic, preemption, initial
              definition of the network topology, etc.  Furthermore, in designing network
              planning and management methods, we have to take into account the high
              unpredictability of the Internet traffic.

Our proposal is a comprehensive
              study that describes practical solutions for MPLS network planning along with
              bandwidth and route management, which interwork in a synergetic fashion.  The
              presented ideas are novel paradigms that allow MPLS networks to adapt their
              state to provide the best possible performance and resource utilization.  We
              propose to design, evaluate and fine-tune these new ideas. 

In the bandwidth
              management portion of the project, new methods for LSP setup, dimensioning,
              preemption, and capacity allocation will be designed.  The route management
              research includes novel algorithms for LSP routing and bandwidth request
              routing. Finally, in the network planning research we will investigate methods
              to design the optimal MPLS network topology and its dimensioning based on
              predicted traffic loads and long term Service Level Specification (SLS)
              contracts.

To illustrate the inter-relations of the above mentioned research
              topics, consider a scenario where network planning methods have provided an
              initial topology of the MPLS network.  Possible events include the arrival of a
              request for LSP setup or arrival of a bandwidth request.  The first event can
              be handled by the combined use of three of our proposed methods, in the order:
              LSP routing, LSP preemption, and LSP capacity allocation.  The LSP routing aims
              to find the route on the physical network over which the LSP will be routed. 
              LSP preemption decides if any existing LSPs can be preempted on the route to
              make way for the new LSP in the case in which there is not enough available
              bandwidth.  The LSP capacity allocation method tries to fine tune the LSP
              capacity to avoid unused reserved bandwidth.  The event of arrival of a
              bandwidth request triggers the LSP setup and dimensioning, which may in turn
              trigger the LSP creation steps of routing, preemption and capacity
              allocation.

The potential impact of this proposal is the development of
              novel and practical methods which currently are open issues in the design and
              management of DiffServ-based MPLS networks. Significant progress and
              contributions to the study of MPLS network management have already been made in
              our publications.  This previous work will be useful towards achieving the
              proposed objectives.

