Title       : ITR (EAR): Electronic Library of Lithospheric Imagery from deeP Seismic
               Exploration (ELLIPSE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0219069

Award Number: 0219069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150843             (Estimated)
Investigator: Larry D. Brown brown@geology.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1655,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0219069
Larry D. Brown

The seismic reflection method, developed
              primarily by the oil exploration industry, is arguably geophysics' most
              versatile and powerful tool for mapping the earth's lithosphere. It has been
              increasingly applied over the past 25 years to a wide variety of scientific
              problems associated with the earth's crust and upper mantle by a diverse
              mixture of individual, institutional, national and international programs.  The
              results from these efforts have revolutionized, and continue to advance, our
              understanding of the Earth's interior. Yet until now there has been no central
              guide to the results of those efforts. A comprehensive, global, electronic
              library of deep seismic reflection surveys past and present is being developed
              in this project as a major new resource for both research and teaching. This
              catalog, in the form of a GIS database with user-friendly cartographic
              interface, will serve as an internet portal to a metalibrary of deep reflection
              data that is derived from the physical libraries that are now globally
              dispersed and heterogeneously maintained. A core component of this metalibrary,
              and a proposed template for organizing comparable physical collections
              worldwide, are the COCORP (US), INDEPTH (Tibet) and URSEIS (Russia) datasets
              currently archived at Cornell. These datasets are not only of considerable
              continuing scientific value in their own right; they typify the range of data
              characteristics of the larger global collection. The catalog includes expanded
              digital access to both raw and processed data in the Cornell holdings, as well
              as supporting documentation, field photos, corollary datasets and published
              interpretations. The facility greatly facilitates quantitative syntheses,
              evaluation of seismic techniques, and planning of future seismic geophysical
              experiments. Of special interest with respect to the latter is the EARTHSCOPE
              initiative in the U.S., for which the COCORP dataset in particular is a
              fundamental resource. Organized electronic publication will aid not only the
              serious researcher but also the non-specialist who finds the final product
              useful for synthesis with other data, the classroom instructor who needs an
              easily comprehensive form of the results for the general student, or the earth
              science student who simply wants to browse the earth's interior for
              inspiration. This global catalog, along with the revamped Cornell holdings, is
              being integrated with related programs in the U.S. and around the world.
