Title       : ITR: Dynamically Tunable Clustered Multithreaded Architectures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0219848

Award Number: 0219848
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Peter J. Varman                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $249929             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandhya Dwarkadas sandhya@cs.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chen Ding  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David H. Albonesi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1659,1686,9215,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The goal of the proposed research is to efficiently exploit on-chip parallelism
              via the design and evaluation of a dynamically tunable clustered multithreaded
              (DT-CMT) architecture.  
The proposed architecture will combine the
              utilization advantages of simultaneous multithreaded architectures (SMTs) with
              the speed advantages of chip multiprocessors (CMPs).  
The PIs will design an
              architecture that can be rapidly configured into a restricted number of
              organizations (so as to minimize speed and density impact) in order to balance
              instruction-level parallelism and thread-level parallelism to maximize
              utilization and minimize energy. 
Key to this approach will be the development
              of software systems (compilers, runtime systems, multiprogramming and
              multithreaded support) that analyze application requirements and combine
              this
knowledge with feedback mechanisms from the hardware.   The performance
              and power saving potential of this approach will be characterized via
              simulation.

This project has the potential to significantly impact the
              microarchitecture and software of future server and network processors, and
              will help train the graduate students in the design of future increasingly
              process technology-aware architectures.  The proposed work will allow dynamic
              tailoring of the processor
architecture in order to meet the needs of
              increasingly diverse applications, thereby allowing future processors to scale
              as process technology improves.






