Title       : ITR: Evaluating Phylogeny Reconstruction Algorithms with Digital Organisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0219229

Award Number: 0219229
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric K. Torng torng@cse.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles A. Ofria  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Schmidt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0219229
Torng, Eric K
Michigan State University

ITR: Evaluating
              Phylogeny Reconstruction Algorithms with Digital Organisms

The investigators
              study methods of determining the historic relationship
between species using
              only knowledge of currently existing organisms, a technique called
              "phylogenetic tree reconstruction".  Many tree reconstruction algorithms are
              known, but it is difficult to properly test them for the very
reason that the
              algorithms are useful -- the original trees are lost to
history.

The
              studies proposed make use of a new evaluation methodology based on
              an
artificial evolving system called Avida.  In Avida, populations of
              digital
organisms (self-replicating computer programs) experience natural
              selection
as they compete for limited resources, and will evolve into new
              species
often with entirely new genes.  The history of such a system can
              be
monitored, and hence a reconstruction from the final state can have
              its
accuracy measured.

The proposed activity has several broader impacts on
              society.  It is a core
activity in the Center for Biological Modeling, a new
              interdisciplinary
research and education center at Michigan State University. 
              Undergraduate
students including underrepresented minorities will be involved
              by studying
small, self-contained questions.  Finally, enhanced understanding
              of
phylogeny reconstruction algorithms will improve our ability to
              interpret
the
sequences of genes, aiding in drug design and helping efforts
              to reconstruct
an evolutionary "tree of life".

