Title       : Modification of Carbon Nanotubes with Boron Carbide Nanolumps for Nanocomposite
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0219836

Award Number: 0219836
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jorn Larsen-Basse                       
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $286212             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. G. Wen jgwen@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Z. F. Ren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1633      SURFACE ENG & MATERIALS DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0219836 Wen 
Abstract

A new approach to enhance load transfer from polymer
              matrix to carbon nanotubes by modifying multiwalled carbon nanotubes will be
              developed under an SGER award.  The approach is based on the modification of
              multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNT) by growing boron carbide nanolumps on
              nanotubes. Boron carbide is a covalent bonding compound, so the bonding between
              boron carbide and carbon nanotube is expected to be covalent too. In addition
              to this strong bonding, boron carbide nanolumps can be also bonded to inner
              layers of MWNTs through covalent bonding. Thus, the load transfer from a matrix
              to carbon nanotubes can be dramatically increased since usually only the
              outermost layer of MWNTs contributes to carrying load.  This is because the
              interaction between cylindrical graphene sheets is through relatively weak van
              der Waals bonding. Therefore, MWNTs with boron carbide nanolumps are expected
              to be the ideal reinforcing fillers. 

This project will start from the
              synthesis of MWNTs with boron carbide nanolumps on a large scale. Secondly, the
              mechanical properties of the dispersed and aligned nanotube/polymer composite
              will be measured in order to understand the influence of boron carbide
              nanolumps. Finally, a direct observation of load transfer using transmission
              electron microscopy by applying in-situ tensile stress on a microtomed slice of
              the nanotube/polymer composite will be carried out. This test will utilize a
              specially fabricated in-situ tensile loading holder. This project will present
              a unique opportunity for carbon nanotube applications in light-weight
              super-strength materials. 

