Title       : Computer and Mathematics Scholar Support Alliance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0219800

Award Number: 0219800
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $393750             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. Jane Fritz   (Principal Investigator current)
              William McAllister  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Seppala-Holtzman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : St Joseph's College
	      245 Clinton Avenue
	      Brooklyn, NY  112053688    718/636-6800

NSF Program : 1536      CSEMS--CS, ENG & MATH SCHOLAR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1536,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Project Summary

St. Joseph's College provides a strong academic education
              rooted in a liberal arts tradition. The CSEMS program will supplement existing
              scholarships to encourage and support thirty eligible students, with
              demonstrated financial need, enabling them to complete degrees and enter the
              high technology workforce as qualified professionals.

Consistent with the
              CSEMS goals, we are:
1. Increasing the number of well-educated and skilled
              employees in technical areas of national need by:
Actively recruiting
              students, especially women and other under-represented groups for programs in
              Mathematics and Computer Sciences;
Providing breadth and depth in a quality
              degree program;
Maintaining and upgrading computer facilities and library
              resources;
Creating a database of alumni, for a Speakers Bureau at recruitment
              events;
Attracting younger competent students through high school Programming
              Competitions and class visitations.
2. Improving educational opportunities for
              students in these disciplines by:
Promoting opportunities for students to
              engage in activities and research which enhance their understanding;
Expanding
              courses with an "Honors" component;
Involving our majors as volunteer tutors
              and mentors in the Math Clinic to assist disadvantaged high school
              students.
3. Increasing retention of students to degree achievement
              by:
Providing additional scholarships of one-third tuition for qualified
              students, particularly underrepresented minorities and women;
Formalizing our
              assessment and mentoring programs.
4. Improving student support at
              institutions of higher learning by:
Providing role models and individual
              mentors for students, particularly underrepresented minorities and
              women;
Assessing the needs of the supported student, the effectiveness of the
              curriculum, and the requirements of the high tech workplace;
Expanding peer
              tutoring in our Math Lab;
Extending career and placement services to provide a
              database of industrial contacts;
Increasing assistance to students applying to
              graduate programs;
Strengthening "networking" opportunities to enhance
              interaction between current students and successful graduates.
5.
              Strengthening partnerships between institutions of higher learning and the
              local high technology industry by:
Extending internship programs and seeking
              additional partnerships with local business and industries;
Promoting our
              BA/BS + MS program with Polytechnic University;
Involving more faculty in
              education-industry collaboration programs.

Recruitment from incoming and
              existing student populations are through personal invitations and current
              strategies (publications, TV, school visitations). Transfer students are
              recruited through cooperation with the local community college, business and
              industries.

The CSEMS Selection and CSEMS Retention Committees select
              students, encourage them to achieve and assure that they are qualified to enter
              the workforce. Both committees are by the PI and include the Co-PI's and
              appropriate representatives. One Co-PI is responsible for assessment and
              outcomes evaluation of CSEMS students.

CSEMS scholars receive approximately
              one-third of their tuition at St. Joseph's College, where they receive personal
              attention in small classes, in a supportive learning environment. Internships
              and opportunities to contribute to their community reinforce classroom theory
              with practical experience, and to motivate them to complete their degrees.
