Title       : GOALI: Reflective Crack Control Treatment and Design Procedures: A New
               Integrated Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2002      
File        : a0219566

Award Number: 0219566
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glaucio H. Paulino paulino@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William G. Buttlar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Phillip B. Blankenship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,1504,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              GOALI: Reflective Crack Control Treatment and  Design Procedures:
A New
              Integrated Approach
                      
Proposal Number: 0219566
PIs:
              Glaucio H. Paulino, Philip Blankenship and William Buttlar

Abstract

	The
              University of Illinois will collaborate with researchers and staff from Koch
              Materials Company to vigorously expand fundamental knowledge of damage
              mechanisms in reflective crack control systems. The industry-academia partners
              will address the aforementioned problem through an advanced laboratory testing
              and instrumentation program, development of new models to field performance
              data.  As the industry partner to this venture, Koch Materials Company will
              provide: (1) annual matching funds; (2) technical expertise, including access
              to field installation and performance data; (3) laboratory and field materials
              for laboratory testing at UIUC, and; (4) mentoring of UIUC students through
              extended site visits at the national laboratory in Wichita, Kansas, and by
              serving on doctoral thesis committees. Combined with the University of Illinois
              "Kent Memorial Scholarship Fund," matching funds are proposed at a level of
              168% of the requested NSF GOALI funds. The computational and laboratory
              facilities available at UIUC to bear upon the proposed research problem are
              truly world-class, and include the National Center for Supercomputing
              Applications (NCSA) and the Advance Transportation Research and Engineering
              Laboratory (ATREL). As a result of the proposed three-way leveraging, the
              research team will consist of two cross-discipline faculty members, three
              doctoral students, one undergraduate research assistant per year, several
              industry researchers from Koch Materials Company, and at least one student per
              year from the Summer Graduate Minority Program hosted at ATREL, each
              summer.


