Title       : Bacterial Thermodynamics for Modeling Biodegradation of Anthropogenic Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2003     
File        : a0219330

Award Number: 0219330
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Nicholas Clesceri                       
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeanne M. VanBriesen jeanne@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1440      ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
              0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9187,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0219330   VanBriesen   The goal of the proposed research is to improve
              biological models for prediction of microbiological growth yield and
              stoichiometry in systems involving in situ bioremediation or ex situ
              biotreatment of anthropogenic compounds. A series of hypothesis-driven tasks
              are designed to evaluate current available yield, thermodynamic, and
              quantitative pathway information for anthropogenic compounds and to develop
              improved microbiological models for these compounds.
The crux of the work
              depends upon the hypothesis that maximum theoretical bacterial yield is a
              fundamental parameter of cell growth that controls the removal
of
              anthropogenic compounds by biodegradation pathways in natural and engineered
              systems. Further, bacterial yield, coupled with the principle of mass balance,
              specifies the stoichiometry of biodegradation, thus allowing prediction of the
              formation of intermediates, the requirement of co-substrates and nutrients, and
              the utilization or generation of inorganic species (e.g., O2, NH4 + ) that can
              affect the system biogeochemistry.
Specific research objectives are to:
1.
              Evaluate the available yield data for microbiological systems growing under a
              wide range of environmental conditions and using a wide variety of natural and
              anthropogenic compounds. Compile these data into a searchable, web-enabled
              database for microbiological stoichiometric and kinetic data.
2. Modify an
              existing thermodynamic efficiency-based yield and stoichiometry prediction
              methodology to account for biodegradation mechanisms observed for anthropogenic
              compounds.
3. Evaluate the predictive ability of the newly developed model for
              multiple microbial systems using the database generated in objective 1.
The
              improved model structures developed on this project will have widespread
              utility in biological ecosystem modeling, bioremediation and microbial ecology
              modeling, and biotechnology and engineered bioprocess modeling. Modeling in all
              these fields will improve our understanding of the complexity of living systems
              and will enhance our ability to control this complexity to our benefit.

