Title       : ITR: Fine-Grain Data Management in Computational Grids and Applications in
               Network-Enabled Medical Imaging for Early Cancer Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2002 
File        : a0219925

Award Number: 0219925
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $349967             (Estimated)
Investigator: Vadim Backman v-backman@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Renato J. Figueiredo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In the past few decades, high-performance computing has driven the development
              of practical medical applications that are now widely available, such as
              magnetic resonance imaging and computerized tomography. In recent years,
              information processing is undergoing rapid advances driven by the use of
              distributed computing systems connected by world-wide networks. Analogous to
              power grids, "computational grids" have the potential to provide seamless
              access to high-performance computers from ubiquitous, network-enabled devices.
              The unprecedent levels of computation enabled by this model may foster the
              development of new medical applications that can substantially improve
              healthcare. An example is found in a class of emerging medical applications
              that use Light-Scattering Spectroscopy (LSS) imaging to allow in-vivo detection
              of pre-cancerous changes in human epithelium. Effective deployments of LSS
              imaging will depend on the availability of high levels of performance and
              require access to remote resources. This project aims to improve the
              state-of-the-art in data management techniques for grids to allow seamless and
              high-performance integration of data generated by medical instrumentation
              devices with distributed computers. The long-term objective is to enable
              deployments of network-computing based medical applications for early cancer
              detection that require processing capabilities beyond those available in
              healthcare facilities. In particular, this project will develop computing
              techniques to enable accurate and fast analyses of LSS images.

To this end,
              this project will focus on three specific aims. The first aim is the
              development of
high-performance, parallel implementations of LSS analysis
              algorithms. The second aim is the development of data management techniques
              that allow on-demand access to data generated by a network-enabled
              instrumentation device from off-site computing resources; these techniques are
              based on the notion of per-user virtual file system proxies that are controlled
              by grid middleware and allow latencyhiding performance enhancements to be
              decoupled from operating system and application implementations. The third aim
              consists of the integration of the proposed solutions with computational grid
              infrastructures to enable dissemination to the research community. The results
              of this project will be used and lead to the development and implementation of
              such LSS imaging system for clinical use in collaboration with the Northwestern
              University Medical School and Northwestern Memorial Hospital.



