Title       : GLOBEC-01: Zooplankton Population Dynamics on Georges Bank: Model and Data
               Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  2003      
File        : a0219709

Award Number: 0219709
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 15,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $337391             (Estimated)
Investigator: James M. Pringle jpringle@cisunix.unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Runge  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1308,4444,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this project is to gain a mechanistic understanding of the
              influences of
climate variation on the population dynamics and production of
              target zooplankton species on Georges Bank (Calanus finmarchicus, Pseudocalanus
              moultoni, P. newmani, and Oithona similis) through its effects on advective
              transport, temperature, food availability, and predator fields.  Using data
              analysis and models as tools, results acquired during the first three phases of
              GLOBEC are being incorporated into a new synthesis of the physical and
              biological processes regulating zooplankton abundance on the Bank. Physical
              models will be forced with measured daily, interannually variable data, and
              coupled to biological models synthesizing the detailed observations collected
              during the GLOBEC program.
To understand the role of advection, and to
              disentangle the effects of physical and biological processes, a hierarchy of
              physical and biological models are being developed. These include 1-, 2-, and
              3- D physical models, ecosystem models, and individual-based models (IBMs) for
              the target species. The IBMs are being coupled to 1D physical models designed
              to represent the characteristic environments of the different Gulf of Maine and
              Georges Bank subregions.  Ultimately, the IBMs will be coupled to the full 3D
              physical/ecosystem model through particle tracking. This will provide a
              physical and biological milieu in which to develop and probe hypotheses
              regarding the combined influences of physical and biological factors on the
              copepod population dynamics.
Although the population dynamics in all
              broadscale survey years will be studied, initial
investigations are
              concentrating on 1995, 1998 and 1999. The data sets are the most complete for
              these years, and SeaWiFS data are available for 1998 and 1999. These years also
              represent a wide range of environmental conditions: an extensive winter bloom
              in the Gulf of Maine in 1999 related to Scotian Shelf inflow and increased
              stratification; a slightly warmer year in 1995; and stronger storm activity in
              1998 than 1999. In addition 1998, and to a lesser extent 1999, gave the
              indication of being strong years for haddock recruitment but apparently not for
              cod.
Specific issues that are being investigated include: wind control of the
              advective supply of the target zooplankton species to Georges Bank during
              January-April; interannual and/or event-level variations in the advective flux
              of Calanus finmarchicus to Gulf of Maine basin diapausing populations during
              June-April; interannual and/or event-level variations in advective losses of
              copepods from Georges Bank and bank subregions; the influence of stratification
              on the planktonic ecosystem, and how this affects the population dynamics of
              the target zooplankton species through food and predation.  As a link to Phase
              IV synthesis studies on target ichthyoplankton, this investigation provides
              mechanistic insight into the factors determining production of copepod prey for
              larval cod and haddock on the Bank.
A number of students will be trained over
              the course of the Phase IV research. These students are being trained as
              broadly educated researchers adept at combining techniques from a variety of
              disciplines in their work.  In addition, this is the first major independent
              funding source since graduation for two young investigators (Pringle,
              Gentleman).

