Title       : ITR: Statistical Physics and Computational Complexity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0219292

Award Number: 0219292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $474000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Bowick bowick@physics.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              A. Alan Middleton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Cristina Marchetti  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1765,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award under the Information Technology Research initiative explores and
              strengthens connections between computer science and the physics of complex
              systems, addressing the important examples of membranes and disordered
              materials from condensed matter physics. The proposed research brings these
              disciplines closer together by recognizing that not only are novel algorithmic
              tools crucial for modeling complex physical systems, but that there are
              fundamental links between the physical properties of the system and the
              computational complexity of the simulation. This project will also train
              students and researchers in this area at the interface between condensed matter
              theory and information technology and provide simulation software components
              for the research community. 

Many of the challenges in sciences such as
              physics and biology are problems in understanding the behavior of a very large
              number of strongly interacting degrees of freedom, where the macroscopic
              behavior is determined by the competition between local ordering and
              disordering effects, including temperature, heterogeneities, and geometry.
              Examples abound in the both the classical and quantum world, including vortex
              lines in superconductors, strongly correlated electrons in disordered solids,
              and fluctuating membranes, as seen in cells and artificial colloidal
              structures. Describing the phases and transitions in these systems relies upon
              being able to build up the large-scale behavior from microscopic models. This
              is quite challenging for conventional simulations. The intent here is to draw
              on ideas from computer science to develop new algorithms and to identify
              universal features using extensive simulations. In turn these features will be
              used to develop new simulation methods and analytical understanding. This
              project will focus on specific areas in condensed matter physics that are of
              direct experimental relevance and raise general algorithmic questions:

The
              PIs will study the phase diagram of realistic models of physical membranes,
              with important applications to biological membranes.
The PIs will explore the
              defect structure of crystals on topographies of fixed curvature, such as a
              crystal on the surface of a sphere, and more complex geometries. This work has
              direct relevance to the rich physics of colloidosomes, spherical viruses and
              other systems currently studied in many laboratories. This work will rely on
              combining knowledge about small-scale defects and long wavelength elasticity
              and exploring optimization algorithms.
The PIs will investigate the phases of
              a class of disordered classical (e.g., vortex lines in superconductors) and
              quantum (interacting electrons in disordered solids) disordered systems that
              can be studied simultaneously by the same numerical algorithm.
The PIs will
              explore the connection between polynomial time optimization algorithm and
              physical theories of disordered materials. This includes the development of new
              approaches to explain the timing of algorithms by adapting physical concepts of
              phases and correlation lengths to their nonphysical dynamics.

The
              achievement of the scientific goals for specific physical systems and
              algorithmic studies will be closely linked with more general benefits:
The
              training of undergraduate and graduate students and postdoctoral researchers
              who will have the expertise and inclination to work at the bridge between
              statistical physics and computer science.
Building a common expertise and
              suggesting potential collaborations in the computer science and physics
              communities.
Software development, in three parts (problem generators,
              solvers, and data analyzers), that can be adopted by researchers to solve
              related problems and for testing alternate computational approaches.
%%%
This
              award under the Information Technology Research initiative explores and
              strengthens connections between computer science and the physics of complex
              systems. The research enhances and builds connections between these disciplines
              by recognizing that not only are novel algorithmic tools crucial for modeling
              complex physical systems, but that there are fundamental links between the
              physical properties of the system and the computational complexity of the
              simulation. This project will also train students and researchers in this area
              at the interface between condensed matter theory and information technology and
              provide simulation software components for the research community. 

Many of
              the challenges in sciences such as physics and biology are problems in
              understanding the behavior of a very large number of strongly interacting
              degrees of freedom, where the macroscopic behavior is determined by the
              competition between local ordering and disordering effects, including
              temperature, heterogeneities, and geometry. Examples abound in the both the
              classical and quantum world, including vortex lines in superconductors,
              strongly correlated electrons in disordered solids, and fluctuating membranes,
              as seen in cells and artificial colloidal structures. Describing the phases and
              transitions in these systems relies upon being able to build up the large-scale
              behavior from microscopic models. This is quite challenging for conventional
              simulations. The intent here is to draw on ideas from computer science to
              develop new algorithms and to identify universal features using extensive
              simulations. In turn these features will be used to develop new simulation
              methods and analytical understanding. This project will focus on specific areas
              in condensed matter physics that are of direct experimental relevance and raise
              general algorithmic questions:

The PIs will study the phase diagram of
              realistic models of physical membranes, with important applications to
              biological membranes.
The PIs will explore the defect structure of crystals on
              topographies of fixed curvature, such as a crystal on the surface of a sphere,
              and more complex geometries. This work has direct relevance to the rich physics
              of colloidosomes, spherical viruses and other systems currently studied in many
              laboratories. This work will rely on combining knowledge about small-scale
              defects and long wavelength elasticity and exploring optimization
              algorithms.
The PIs will investigate the phases of a class of disordered
              classical (e.g., vortex lines in superconductors) and quantum (interacting
              electrons in disordered solids) disordered systems that can be studied
              simultaneously by the same numerical algorithm.
The PIs will explore the
              connection between polynomial time optimization algorithm and physical theories
              of disordered materials. This includes the development of new approaches to
              explain the timing of algorithms by adapting physical concepts of phases and
              correlation lengths to their nonphysical dynamics.

The achievement of the
              scientific goals for specific physical systems and algorithmic studies will be
              closely linked with more general benefits:
The training of undergraduate and
              graduate students and postdoctoral researchers who will have the expertise and
              inclination to work at the bridge between statistical physics and computer
              science.
Building a common expertise and suggesting potential collaborations
              in the computer science and physics communities.
Software development, in
              three parts (problem generators, solvers, and data analyzers), that can be
              adopted by researchers to solve related problems and for testing alternate
              computational
              approaches.
***



























