Title       : Magnetic Actuators for Non-Destructive Evaluation (NDE) of Rotating Machinery
               for Health Diagnostics and Prognostics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2003   
File        : a0219701

Award Number: 0219701
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $324999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary E. Kasarda maryk@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel J. Inman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald D. Quinn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. Gordon Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

A jet engine failure at 30,000 feet or a power plant shutdown during
              peak operational hours can be costly from a human as well as financial
              standpoint. Well-established procedures exist to monitor and diagnosis fairly
              severe problems with rotating machinery but little progress has been made in
              developing techniques to detect subtle changes in machine condition for both
              improved diagnostics, and to develop prognostic procedures for determining
              remaining service life.  The proposed project uses a novel application of
              Active Magnetic Bearings (AMBs) as actuators for applying a variety of known
              force inputs to a spinning rotor in order to monitor and evaluate response
              signals resulting from these inputs on-line.  The proposed procedure allows for
              multiple forms of force input signals to be applied to a rotating structure. 
              An important aspect of this approach is that the AMB(s) will be used in
              mid-shaft locations in conjunction with conventional support bearings.  In this
              manner, the diagnostic/prognostic procedures are developed here for use on any
              general rotating machine that can be designed or retrofitted with a single AMB
              actuator and still be supported in the original mechanical bearings.  The
              ability to examine a variety of known inputs and resulting outputs for
              condition monitoring in rotating machinery is unprecedented and the proposed
              technique has broad implications for improving operational safety and reducing
              maintenance costs in rotor-bearing systems in the aerospace, power generation,
              and petrochemical industries.  In addition, the very nature of the proposed
              procedure will ultimately facilitate machinery self-diagnostics and prognostics
              by allowing a method for self-testing.

