Title       : Synergistic Effects of Multiple Enviroments on Composite Degradation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0219250

Award Number: 0219250
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312428             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raman P. Singh raman.singh@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary P. Halada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clive R. Clayton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Toshio Nakamura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
Synergistic Effects of Multiple Environments on Composite
              Degradation

This project employs an integrated approach to assess the
              long-term durability of polymer matrix composites exposed to complex multiple
              environments. Degradation conditions are simulated using several simultaneously
              operating environments to closely parallel real-world conditions, and the
              kinetics of main degradation mechanisms and their interrelations are identified
              through an extensive multi-disciplinary analysis. Finally, comprehensive
              experimental characterizations (mechanical, chemical and physical) of the
              degradation mechanisms across multiple length scales (nano to macro) are
              coupled with sophisticated analytical/numerical techniques to develop
              predictive models of long-term reliability. By integrating life-prediction
              methodologies and the appropriate kinetic descriptions of physicochemical
              degradation, this project provides predictive capabilities for the service life
              of composite materials in real-world, multiple environmental conditions, e.g.
              composite material retrofit and replacement of structurally deficient bridges,
              all-composite automobiles with enhanced fuel-efficiencies and deep-water
              offshore oil drilling platforms.
	This project involves active collaboration
              with industrial partners (Cytec Engineered Materials, Inc. and Resolution
              Performance Products, Inc.) and support from research/federal agencies
              (Brookhaven National Labs and Army Research Labs at Aberdeen Proving Grounds).
              An educational component provides for the significant enhancement of learning
              for both undergraduate and graduate students by integration of research and
              teaching. Specific activities also provide mentoring and outreach for
              underrepresented minority students in collaboration with other programs at
              Stony Brook.

