Title       : ITR: Development of a Novel Short-Data-Record Adaptive Filtering Framework for
               Rapidly Changing Communications Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0219903

Award Number: 0219903
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stella N. Batalama batalama@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dimitris A. Pados  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1686,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              PIs: S. N. Batalama and D. A. Pados

PROJECT ABSTRACT

The effectiveness of
              a receiver designed for a rapidly changing multiple access communications
              environment depends on the following design attributes: (i) low computational
              complexity, (ii) multiple-access-interference resistance, and (iii) system
              adaptivity with superior performance under limited (short) data support.
              Adaptive short-data-record designs appear as the natural next step 
for a
              matured discipline that has extensively addressed  the first two, (i) and (ii),
              design objectives in ideal setups (perfectly known or asymptotically estimated 
              statistical properties). System adaptivity based on short data records is
              necessary for the development of practical adaptive receivers that exhibit
              superior signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) or  bit-error-rate
              (BER) performance when they operate in rapidly changing communications
              environments that limit substantially 
the input data support that is
              available for adaptation and redesign.

A novel line of research is
              identified and pursued in this project that lies in a multidisciplinary
              intersection of Estimation Theory, Communications Theory, and Mean-Square
              optimum linear filtering. Consider an arbitrary input signal vector space and a
              given information bearing signal vector to be recovered in the presence of
              multiuser or other forms of heavy interference. A key for the successful
              solution to the problem of adaptive receiver design under short data records is
              to employ receiver estimators with  varying bias/variance characteristics and
              to control effectively 
these characteristics in a data-centric manner. In
              this project, the investigators develop a short-data-record adaptive filtering
              framework that involves (i) the tools for the generation
of a sequence of
              filter estimators with varying bias/variance tradeoff, as well as (ii) the
              tools for selecting the most appropriate estimator in the sequence for a given
              input data
record. The Auxiliary-Vector (AV) filtering means developed by the
              investigators during the past few years as a state-of-the-art practical
              engineering solution to the problem of short-data-record 
adaptive filtering
              is used as a benchmark case-study.   The theoretical and practical implications
              of such a research  framework are far reaching. Biased estimators and
              algorithms that
offer full control over the bias/variance balance are rarely
              reported in the literature, if any in a communications applicable context.
              While the target applications of this work are all critical
communications
              problems, the pertinent theoretical developments may  touch many aspects of
              multidisciplinary engineering that are hampered by the ``curse of
              dimensionality'' and could benefit from adaptive filtering and/or adaptive
              system optimization through limited input data.

