Title       : ITR: Advanced Computational Environment for Molecular and Mesoscale Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0219266

Award Number: 0219266
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499117             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kofke kofke@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1660,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Information Technology Research (ITR) project aims to apply
              state-of-the-art software tools and methods to develop an advanced
              computational environment for molecular and mesoscale modeling. This work is
              performed to address specific, well-documented needs that block the broader
              adoption of molecular and multiscale modeling tools to solve practical
              problems. The environment is designed to be extensible (accommodates easily new
              methods and models), computationally efficient, and easy to use. It aims to be
              platform independent yet configurable to exploit features of different
              computing environments, including parallel and grid architectures. It is
              developed using the Java programming language, and consists of two distinct
              parts. First is an Application Programming Interface (API) that can be used to
              construct a wide variety of simulations from a common set of building blocks;
              the API can be used, for example, by programming in a text editor. Second is an
              Integrated Development Environment (IDE), which provides an alternative
              graphical environment for the development and application of complex molecular
              simulations. The work performed here consists of designing, developing and
              testing the API and IDE, researching how they can be best implemented on a wide
              variety of single and multiprocessor computing architectures, disseminating
              them, and conducting activities to promote understanding and use of them. A
              range of experts are consulted to assist in the detailed implementation of the
              best simulation methods and models in current use; this practice serves the
              dual purpose of speeding the development as well as broadening the interest in
              it. The focus of the development is to facilitate use in research applications,
              but there are significant educational components to the activity: (1) the tools
              are used to produce aids for teaching molecular phenomena and its role in
              producing macroscopic behaviors; (2) the development environment is used as a
              basis to teach ideas about molecular simulation to students from Buffalo-area
              high schools and freshman- through senior-level undergraduates at the
              University; (3) undergraduates contribute through tightly-focused development
              activities. Further, the object-oriented structure of the API provides a sound
              pedagogical basis for teaching molecular simulation in a way that promotes
              broader use. Accordingly the codes and concepts developed in this work are used
              as a central component in a regular series of national workshops in molecular
              simulation offered by the newly created Nanomaterials Theory Institute at Oak
              Ridge National Laboratory.
