Title       : ITR: Representation and Design of Heterogeneous Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0219176

Award Number: 0219176
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $482605             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wei Sun sunwei@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William C. Regli  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ali Shokoufandeh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1464,1660,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of modeling data structures for
              representation and design of three-dimensional heterogeneous objects, with
              special application to tissue engineered structures.  Representation of
              three-dimensional solid models is accomplished with a novel constructive
              heterogeneous solid geometry algebra and a heterogeneous boundary
              representation data structure. Heterogeneous structure design is accomplished
              by an adaptation of discrete optimization techniques that, when given a set of
              unit cellular structure primitives, determines the optimal (or satisfying)
              internal configuration of the three-dimensional solid that achieves engineering
              requirements.  The approach introduces a graph theoretic optimization framework
              that exploits properties of heterogeneous representation elements to create
              structures that satisfy multiple criteria of anatomical fitting, structural
              integrity, biological function, and manufacturability.

If successful, this
              research will deliver new techniques and tools to represent, design and develop
              heterogeneous tissue scaffolds. It will lead to fundamental and integrative
              computer science and engineering advances that span engineering design, solid
              modeling, computational geometry and algorithms, computer-aided design and
              manufacturing, and tissue engineering. This project actively engages industry
              and government, including collaborations with the developers of international
              standards and the data transfer protocols for heterogeneous structures, a major
              computer-aided design software vendor, a leading biopharmaceutical
              manufacturer, and a major medical center with expertise in tissue scaffold and
              replacement application. This research links the state-of-the-art in geometric
              computing and commercial computer-aided design and manufacturing software with
              the needs of the non-traditional materials found in biomedical tissue
              engineering. Therefore, it will enable new applications. This research also
              produces joint curricula, spanning mathematics, computer science and
              engineering to educate future generations of students who will design,
              manufacture and develop software for heterogeneous material applications.
