Title       : Application of Portfolio Theory and Sustainability Metrics to Civil
               Infrastrastructure Management
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0219607

Award Number: 0219607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Miriam Heller                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244010             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adjo Amekudzi adjo.amekudzi@ce.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,9102,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              State and local governments invest approximately $150 billion annually in the
              construction, improvement and rehabilitation of capital assets.  In the past
              four decades, several states have developed decision support systems to
              facilitate the management of their physical infrastructures such as pavements,
              bridges and public transit infrastructure. The primary objective of these
              infrastructure management systems is to assist public works agencies with
              identifying the most cost-effective investments for limited budgets.  The
              infrastructure management systems have been used primarily for a priori
              planning and less for posteriori analyses either to validate existing models or
              assess the cumulative value of investments.  In 1999, the Government Accounting
              Standards Board (GASB) introduced a requirement for state and local government
              financial reporting using full accrual-based accounting practices such as are
              used in private industry.  This approach covers all capital assets and long
              term liabilities including civil infrastructure, and requires the depreciation
              of assets unless two distinct criteria are met: 
1.	The government manages the
              infrastructure assets using an asset management system; and
2.	The government
              demonstrates that the infrastructure assets are being preserved at, or above, a
              condition level originally established.
The GASB requirement reflects the
              growing importance of managing civil infrastructure as assets.

In this
              research project, a focused body of knowledge and analytical tools for
              portfolio asset management for civil infrastructure will be developed using
              Portfolio Theory. Existing infrastructure management  systems will be
              integrated into more comprehensive asset management systems.  Research results
              will be used to design a prototype asset management system from independent
              infrastructure management systems for highways, bridges and public transit
              facilities, to demonstrate how one would comprehensively value these assets as
              a portfolio, analyze tradeoffs for competing alternatives under uncertainty,
              and identify superior alternatives based on the expected value of the
              portfolio.

The education plan will support practitioner needs for asset
              management as well.  Research results will be used to extend the curriculum in
              Civil and Environmental Engineering at Georgia Tech to include quantitative
              theory and tools for integrated asset management of civil infrastructure, and
              to develop a short course on asset management for practitioners. Furthermore,
              it breaks new ground by introducing the paradigm of portfolio asset management
              for managing civil infrastructure and opens the way for subsequent applications
              of Portfolio Theory to civil infrastructure management

