Title       : Preliminary Evaluation of Colloidal Silica Transport Mechanisms for Passive Site
               Remediation of Liquefiable Soils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  2002 
File        : a0219987

Award Number: 0219987
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Clifford J. Astill                      
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72189              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia M. Gallagher pmg@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1636      GEOENVIRO ENG & GEOHAZARD MITI
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
Program Ref : 1057,1576,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0219987, Patricia M. Gallagher, Drexel University
"Preliminary Evaluation
              of Colloidal Silica Transport Mechanisms for Passive Site Stabilization of
              Liquefiable Soils"

This project involves an exploratory evaluation of
              colloidal silica transport mechanisms to stabilize liquefiable soil formations.
               The results will be used to support development of a non-disruptive technique
              for ground improvement.  "Passive site remediation" is a new concept for
              non-disruptive mitigation of liquefaction risk at developed sites susceptible
              to liquefaction.  The concept is to slowly inject a stabilizing material at the
              up-gradient edge of a site, and deliver the stabilizer to the liquefiable area
              using the groundwater flow.

The focus is on the ability to deliver colloidal
              silica solutions uniformly into liquefiable soil deposits, with subsequent
              gelation to mitigate the liquefaction susceptibility.  The main goals of the
              research are: (1) to determine if colloidal silica grout can be transported
              through a column of liquefiable soils in an adequate concentration to stabilize
              the sand; (2) to determine if the grout will gel along the entire length of the
              column after delivery; and (3) to understand the mechanisms of colloidal silica
              transport through liquefiable sands.  The research involves laboratory
              experiments consisting of short and long column tests to identify the variables
              that influence colloidal silica grout transport in liquefiable soils.  The
              parameters to be considered include the geochemical and physical factors
              thought to affect grout transport most strongly, such as pH, ionic strength of
              the grout solution, flow velocity, and pore size of the sand formation.  The
              effects on the transport of gelling fluids with variable density and variable
              viscosity will also be considered.  This research will set the stage for future
              development of implementation technologies and field testing of passive site
              remediation.  The research results will be widely disseminated among
              researchers and practitioners in the areas of geotechnical earthquake
              engineering, ground improvement, grouting, and environmental
              remediation.

Passive site remediation techniques could have broad
              application for developed sites susceptible to liquefaction, where traditional
              ground improvement methods are difficult or impossible to implement.  These
              techniques could also have application to urban areas where subsurface
              contamination is difficult to remediate.

