Title       : ITR: E-neighbors: Social Networks and Neighborhood Social Capital in the
               Internet Age
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0219538

Award Number: 0219538
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith R. Benson                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299960             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith N. Hampton knh@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1331,1353,1657,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Abstract
Proposal 0219538
ITR: E-neighbors: Social Networks and
              Neighborhood Social Capital in the Internet Age
Keith Hampton, MIT

This
              research addresses concerns about the impact of Internet and computer use on
              community and family life. Through an empirical analysis of four case studies,
              this research project  examines the current relationship between Internet use
              and the size and composition of people's social networks, and ii) explores the
              potential for new information and communication technologies to expand social
              networks, social capital and community involvement at the local level.  This
              project is motivated by recent concerns that Americans have became more
              cynical; are spending less time with friends, relatives and neighbors; and have
              become less involved in clubs and organizations. Past research has concluded
              with mixed results as to whether the Internet further dissociates people from
              those around them, or if it holds the potential to reconnect the disaffiliated.
              The adult residents of four Boston area neighborhoods have been asked to
              complete detailed surveys on the composition, structure, and supportive content
              of their personal and neighborhood social networks. This project will analyze
              the results of those surveys and compare residents based on their level of
              technology use and the structure of their social networks. Following the first
              wave of surveying three of the four neighborhoods will be given access to a
              series of Internet services designed to facilitate communication and the
              sharing of information at the neighborhood level. A second and third waves of
              surveying will compare the three experimental neighborhoods with a control
              group, examining the impact of the provided Internet services on residents'
              social networks and their involvement in neighborhood and community
              activities.

It is vital to address concerns about declining of social
              capital in America, and any role that the Internet and home computing might
              have in continuing or reversing this decline. While the existing trend of
              reduced community participation originates to early to be associated with new
              information and communication technologies, the fear is that home computing
              will further accelerate this trend. The project investigators expect that this
              is not the case. Previous research in this area often privileges the Internet
              as a social system removed from the other ways people communicate. Peering into
              cyberspace and ignoring the network of social relations that extended to other
              social settings, fails to consider the crosscutting nature of community,
              including the many ways and the many places people interact. By embracing a
              social network perspective this project will demonstrate that Internet users
              have larger, more diverse social networks, and that they are more active
              communicators both on and off line. This research will also demonstrate that
              the growth of home computing and Internet use has the potential to reverse the
              existing trend of community noninvolvement. This study will show that the
              introduction of Internet services designed for use at the neighborhood level
              can increase the size and diversity of local social networks. Previous research
              points to the role of this type of social capital in facilitating a number of
              positive community outcomes, including; increased housing values and the
              prevention of neighborhood decline; helping youth find job contacts and
              avoiding social problems including, drugs, crime and teen pregnancy; increased
              neighborhood safety and reducing crime; and increases overall health.

