Title       : GOALI: High Permeability Ferrite Cores for Micro-Inductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2002    
File        : a0219379

Award Number: 0219379
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Santosh K. Kurinec skkemc@rit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Linda Meichle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jayanti Venkataraman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rochester Inst of Tech
	      One Lomb Memorial Drive
	      Rochester, NY  146235603    716/475-2400

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1049,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Magnetic materials have unique properties that are driving their integration
              with microelectronic and micro-electro-mechanical (MEM) devices. Various
              microfabrication technologies are being pursued aggressively. In this proposal,
              it is proposed to develop a novel technique to deposit oxide magnetic material
              films applicable to micro magnetic devices. The magnetic materials chosen for
              the proposed study are low coercivity soft ferrites (manganese zinc and nickel
              zinc ferrites) with initial permeability ranging from 1,000-10,000.  The films
              will find extensive applications in micro inductors, micro transformers and
              other on chip magnetic devices. These films will be deposited by
              electrophoresis i.e electrodeposition from nano to micron size ferrite
              particles suspended in a solution. The ferrite powders will be prepared by jet
              milling technique in conjunction with a ferrite company Ferronics and the
              Center for Advanced Ceramic Technology (CACT) at Alfred University.

An
              electrochemical process will be developed to get uniform deposition of magnetic
              films on silicon wafers. The films will be characterized for their magnetic
              properties, thickness uniformity and adhesion. Subsequently, a lithographic
              technique will be developed to pattern ferrite films to form the cores of micro
              inductors. Fundamental investigations will be made to understand the effect of
              particle size distribution and electrodeposition in confined regions on the
              film morphology by modeling the deposition process. The magnetic properties
              will be measured on these films and structures. These film structures will be
              integrated with copper micro-inductors on semiconductor substrates. Inductors
              will be designed and modeled analytically and using an electromagnetic
              software. The fabrication will be carried out utilizing the IC fabrication
              facility at Rochester Institute of Technology (RIT). Electrical measurements
              such as inductance and Q-factor will be done using network analyzer and
              impedance meters. The optimized structures will then be fabricated with
              circuitry on silicon wafers.

This will be a multidisciplinary experimental
              and theoretical research program between Microelectronic Engineering,
              Electrical Engineering, Physics and Electrochemistry. In addition, there is
              support from industry and the CACT center. The project will enable fabrication
              of on-chip magnetic components for micro-inductors and micro magnetics. The
              proposed process can also be utilized to integrate other magnetic materials
              such as hard ferrites and microwave ferrites.

