Title       : ITR: Linguist-Machine Collaboration for Comparative Linguistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 31,  2002    
File        : a0219467

Award Number: 0219467
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph E. Grimes jgrimes@concentric.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1657,1658,1686,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Joseph E. Grimes will conduct two
              years of linguistic research to extend the capabilities of comparative
              linguists by matching their expertise in making pattern recognition judgments
              with a computational tool that organizes all their data in response to those
              judgments. This division of labor will allow linguists to stay on top of
              greater quantities of data from more speech varieties than has ever been
              possible, because it provides an information technology infrastructure for
              their discipline. Though notable work in language comparison has been done by
              hand, it consumes years; indeed, for much of the world there are more educated
              guesses about what the linguistic relationships might be than there is
              well-martialed evidence for those relationships. This project's
              linguist-machine partnership will empower investigators to do their analysis
              expeditiously (including adding in data from languages that could become
              extinct in the next generation and be lost to science), to follow out competing
              hypotheses, to work collegially as easily as individually, and to offer precise
              documentation to others through public archives. All these things have been
              difficult to do using traditional methods.

To find out how human groups have
              diverged and migrated scholars must draw not only on written and oral history,
              but also on recoverable prehistory, which is accessible mostly through
              comparative linguistics, archeology, and genetics. If linguists are enabled to
              fill the gaps in their data and to make more precise their reconstructions of
              what our ancestral languages must have been like, it will lead to better
              insight into the processes by which all languages (including English) change
              over time, and to better understanding of connections between ancestral
              languages and ancient culture patterns. Seeing language history in this way
              also adds the time dimension to our understanding of humanity's capacity for
              language, and helps us to value language diversity rather than deplore it.
              Solid research in this area, which the proposed tool will promote, can also
              help traditional societies to become aware of a deeper heritage than what their
              oral history alone gives them. On a more immediate scale, it can identify areas
              where educational materials and literature developed in one of a closely
              related group of languages that share a common culture can be easily morphed
              into preliminary drafts of those materials for other languages in the same
              group.


