Title       : ITR: Intelligent High-Performance Computing on Toys
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0219597

Award Number: 0219597
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel A. Reed reed@cs.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Game  consoles,  with  price  points  below  $300,  performance  rivaling  or 
              exceeding  that  of  PCs,  and  graphics  capabilities  recently  found  only 
              on  high-end  visualization  supercomputers,  are  the  vanguard  of  yet 
              another computing  generation  .  computing  on  toys. Moreover,  market 
              forces  and  fierce  vendor  competition  (e.g.,  among  Microsoft, Nintendo,
              and Sony) continue to fuel technical innovation and performance improvements on
              these game  platforms, creating research and development incentives and
              deployment opportunities in new domains. 
 
This  proposal  outlines  a 
              research  plan  to  assess  the  utility  and  performance  of  game  systems 
              for  both  scientific  computing and high-resolution visualization.  This
              assessment of game systems will be based on development of a  suite of adaptive
              performance analysis tools that support both offline and online performance
              optimization and their  application  to  a  suite  of  scientific  and 
              visualization  codes.    This  effort  leverages  proposed  Red  Hat  and  NCSA
               software  enhancements  to  PlayStation2  Linux  software.    In  addition  we
               currently  are  negotiating  with  Sony  to  acquire and deploy a large
              PlayStation2 cluster at NCSA for experimental assessment and scientific
              visualization.   
 
Our  computing  on  toys  software  research  plan 
              focuses  on  three  areas:  (a)  offline,  multilevel  performance
              instrumentation of applications and system software, (b) online, adaptive
              selection of multi-version code execution,  and (c) experimental assessment
              using large-scale scientific applications and visualization software. New
              hardware performance  measurements, instrumented scientific and graphics
              libraries, and performance derivatives, all  integrated with  our  SvPablo 
              performance  analysis  infrastructure, will  provide  the  requisite  data  to
              move  iterative performance tuning from an ad hoc style to one based on
              intelligent feedback and suggestions.  The offline version  of this SvPablo
              extension will accept performance metrics from hardware, software, and library
              instrumentation and  generates  suggestions  for  tuning  locations  and 
              options  using  a  fuzzy  logic  rule  base  that  embodies  performance
              
tuning suggestions for the Sony PlayStation2.   
 


