Title       : ITR: A Novel Framework with Fast Inverse Scattering Algorithms for Future
               Environmental Sensing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 16,  2002    
File        : a0219528

Award Number: 0219528
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Qing Huo Liu qhliu@ee.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1686,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Qing Huo Liu
Duke University

This research aims to develop a novel framework
              for rapid and accurate processing of
geophysical subsurface measurements in
              multilayer media. At present, only 2-D mappings
(i.e., the low-resolution
              images on the ground surface) are available, greatly limiting the target
depth
              information. Due to the excessive computational demand, previous inverse
              scattering
algorithms for these sensors have been developed, but only for
              objects in a homogeneous
background medium. This new computational framework
              is expected to dramatically improve
the way environmental site
              characterization is being performed.
The investigator will develop rapid and
              accurate computational algorithms for the process-
ing of some of the arguably
              most important measurements in environmental site characteriza-
tion and oil
              exploration, namely electromagnetic induction (EMI), ground penetrating
              radar
(GPR), surface seismic, and borehole sonic imaging measurements in 3-D
              heterogeneous,
multilayer media. These algorithms, coupled with large-scale
              computing and visualization
platforms, form a novel framework for current and
              future environmental site characterization
where 3-D subsurface structures can
              be directly investigated, and sensor arrays can be adap-
tively optimized. The
              main contributions of this research are: (1) Rapid inversion methods
based on
              accelerated extended Born/Rytov approximations in layered media; (2)
              High-fidelity
imaging algorithms based on preconditioned contrast source
              inversion methods in a multi-
layer background; (3) A 3-D imaging and adaptive
              optimization framework using these fast
inverse scattering algorithms for
              multi-sensors. These approaches are expected to yield a
high resolution
              because they account for the important multiple scattering effects that
              cause
the resolution degradation in previous linear inversion methods. The
              development of the al-
gorithms for objects embedded in multilayer media
              represents significant advances in inverse
scattering and its applications in
              environmental site characterization and oil exploration.
