Title       : ITR: Large Scale Continuum and Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Ultra-Fast
               Laser Machining
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0219098

Award Number: 0219098
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard N. Smith                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $411885             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jayathi Y. Murthy jmurthy@ecn.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xianfan Xu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal was submitted to the Chemical and Transport Systems Division in
              response to the FY2002 Information Technology Research solicitation, described
              in NSF Announcement. NSF 01-149, in the "Small" category.  The proposal is for
              development of a comprehensive set of numerical models and techniques for the
              simulation of ultra-fast laser machining and to employ these techniques to
              obtain a detailed understanding of the fundamental physics of ultra-fast laser
              processing.  In particular, the PIs propose to develop numerical multiscale
              finite volume and molecular dynamics models of these processes and to implement
              them on shared-memory parallel computers.  Phenomenological issues to be
              addressed include melting and ejection of molten droplets due to recoil
              pressure and droplet redeposition.  Large-scale simulation offers the
              possibility of resolving a number of fundamental questions concerning
              mechanisms of the ablation process in ultra-fast laser machining.  The
              large-scale parallel computing aspects of the research will broaden the
              capabilities of thermal science researchers in this important information
              technology area.  Other technologies that may be impacted by the development of
              these computational techniques include high speed microelectronics device
              simulation, microscale energy generation, and in a variety of emerging bio- and
              non-technologies.   Educational impacts include expanded computational science
              expertise in graduate students involved with advanced manufacturing sciences
              and the expansion of content in upper level courses taught by the collaborating
              PIs.  Funding is from funds reserved for ITR-Small grants in the CTS Division
              as well as from the Thermal Transport and Thermal Processing program.



