Title       : ITR: Free-Boundary Problems in Precipitative Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  2002      
File        : a0219411

Award Number: 0219411
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Earle L. Lomon                          
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $498000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond E. Goldstein gold@physics.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James C. Baygents  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1287,1652,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0219411
Goldstein
This project addresses mathematical and computational
              challenges posed by growth phenomena involving novel and difficult
              free-boundary problems in fluid flow, precipitation/crystallization and
              evaporation.  These appear in contexts as diverse as hydrothermal vents in the
              ocean floor, terrestrial caves, and electrochemical pattern formation, where
              one finds growth of complex structures by precipitation.  These range from
              hollow soda-straw stalactites to fantastic curved helictites and undulating
              sheet-like draperies in limestone caves, to iron-sulfide chimneys tens of
              meters high on the ocean floor.  Despite years of empirical study, these
              fascinating growth morphologies are largely unexplained in any quantitative
              manner.  We will develop computational methods to study precipitative growth
              phenomena, based primarily on boundary-integral and differential geometric
              methods in the study of surface evolution.  The enormous geological time scales
              on which many of these structures form has created a paucity of experimental
              results, and few if any laboratory analogs have been created.  We will also
              develop and explore experimentally model systems that can display such pattern
              formation on accessible time scales. One such system, discovered in our
              laboratory, involves tubular growth by electrodeposition, in which macroscopic
              tubular deposits grow in tens of minutes around bubbles of hydrogen gas
              evolving off a cathode. Theoretical approaches will include the study of the
              underlying electrokinetics at large Peclet number and depletion layer
              modifications due to Lorentz forces, all as a means of understanding the
              geometrical laws of surface growth that can produce the rich and fascinating
              morphologies seen in nature, and the computational techniques to study such
              laws.


