Title       : ITR: Development of an enhanced computer-assisted analysis system for earth
               science investigation of laminated sediments and tree rings
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2002    
File        : a0219075

Award Number: 0219075
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $436480             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jonathan T. Overpeck jto@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Malcolm K. Hughes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Schowengerdt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1652,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0219075
Overpeck

Natural archives with year-by-year resolution (isannual
              resolution proxieslo), such as tree-rings, varved sediments, corals, mollusks,
              and speleothems, are becoming increasingly critical for understanding the
              nature of past environmental variability, and how it may change in the future.
              The most obvious use of these archives is in understanding the patterns and
              causes of natural interannual to century-scale climate variability, and how
              humans may be altering this variability. They are also central, however, to an
              increasingly broad range of Earth Science applications, including documenting
              paleoseismicity, calibrating the radiocarbon time scale, investigating
              hydrologic variability, and understanding paleoecosystem dynamics. Their
              capability to provide the absolute time scale needed to understand these
              dynamics on many societally-relevant time scales is particularly important.  At
              present, extracting information from these sources is extraordinarily
              labor-intensive, resulting in undesirable limitations on temporal resolution
              and replication that result in excessive uncertainties concerning the
              environmental signals of interest. This applies even when sophisticated
              detectors are used to make basic measurements, since great care must be taken
              in stringing series of measurements together into very long time series whilst
              retaining all information that might turn out to be useful later in the
              analysis. Existing image-analysis software alone cannot solve this problem. The
              labor-intensive analysis that these records require has created a strong
              incentive to develop instrumentation that can be used to process samples more
              efficiently, and with more interpretive power than is available from off-the-
              shelf image processing software.

This Information Technology Research Small
              Grants Program (ITR) award will support the development of software for
              automated counting of annually laminated climate change proxies (tree rings and
              varves).  The developments are based on a prototype computer-assisted
              dendrochronology workstation and associated control and image analysis software
              (TREES v. 1) that was previously funded to co-PI Schowengerdt by NSF's
              Anthropology program (BCS-9601867).  This award will support the creation of
              TREES v.2, a Linux-based PC version of TREES v.1, which was written exclusively
              for the SUN platform, and VARVES v.1, also Linux-based software designed to
              automate counting of laminated lake and marine sediments.  
***

