Title       : ITR: Intrusion Detection and Intrusion Prevention Through Dynamic Binary
               Translation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0219587

Award Number: 0219587
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Darko Stefanovic darko@cs.unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Malicious code poses a significant threat to our society, which is becoming
              increasingly reliant on networked computer systems for commerce and
              communication.  Malicious software, including    viruses, worms, and Trojan
              Horses, has the potential to disrupt communications and threaten the stability
              of the Internet as a whole.  Therefore the objective of this research is
              analysis, detection, and mitigation of malicious code.  The many types of
              malicious code are being investigated and grouped by exploited   vulnerability
              and effect. This makes it possible selectively to target each exploit class
              separately.    Previous approaches to the analysis of malicious code relied on
              static reverse engineering, confined execution (via program language
              sandboxing), or network traces.  These approaches are often inadequate for
              increasingly complex malicious code that may be self-modifying, using run-time
              encryption or dynamic polymorphism.  Dynamic malicious code requires dynamic
              tools for analysis, detection, and mitigation.  Therefore new dynamic tools to
              permit such analysis are being developed, together with    security
              enhancements to allow detection and mitigation of known malicious code types. 
              The research approach is to use run-time binary translation to achieve
              transparent code monitoring and rewriting. A prototype implementation of a
              system for software assurance and security based on binary translation is being
              developed, and the effectiveness of the solution and its potential deployment
              cost are being investigated.
