Title       : Collaborative Research: International Development of Non-Destructive Tools to
               Quantify Sample Disturbance and Its Correlation to Measured Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0219480

Award Number: 0219480
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191763             (Estimated)
Investigator: Don J. DeGroot degroot@ecs.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              CMS-0219463
PI:		Jean-Pierre Bardet
Institution:	University of Southern
              California
Title:	 "ITR SOLUTIONS FOR EXCHANGE AND UTILIZATION 
OF
              GEOTECHNICAL INFORMATION"
Geotechnical information describes the
              characteristics of upper soil deposits (typically down to a 50 m depth) on
              which rest most of our civil infrastructure (e.g., buildings, roads, bridges,
              airports, harbors, and factories).  Each year, a large amount of geotechnical
              information is generated with great efforts and expense during the conduct of
              projects, including those sponsored by the National Science Foundation (NSF),
              and many other local, state, and federal agencies.  The data and results of
              these projects are usually published as hardcopy reports, without digital data.
               In addition, the steps in data collection and processing are documented with
              conventional methods, making it often difficult even impossible to scrutinize,
              revise and apply data.  An NSF workshop, held at the University of Southern
              California (USC) in 1998, clearly established a unanimous consensus among
              researchers and practitioners for a better exchange of geotechnical
              information.  Nowadays Information Technologies (IT) unleashes new powerful
              opportunities for collecting, exchanging, and utilizing geotechnical
              information, which should be explored for the sake of our civil
              infrastructures.

Capitalizing on the benefits from recent experiences gained
              during several IT projects carried out at USC since 1998, our research creates
              ITR methods for resolving major issues associated with the collection, exchange
              and utilization of geotechnical information.  The research integrates different
              IT methods to produce a comprehensive and complete description and utilization
              of geotechnical information starting from the data generation in the laboratory
              and field to its end usage by engineers and planners involved in civil
              infrastructure systems.  The specific objectives of the research
              are:
1.	Define versatile data structures based on the knowledge of domain
              experts on selected geotechnical information.
2.	Define metadata by
              geotechnical domain experts describing the processes generating geotechnical
              information, including development of automated metadata collection for
              facilitating user input.
3.	Develop data mining tools for geotechnical
              information, and creating QA/QC algorithms integrating data and metadata. 
 
              
The research is concerned with the development of IT methods for rendering
              geotechnical information usable to those involved with planning, designing,
              building, and maintaining our civil infrastructure systems.  The tools and
              methods developed during the research will be tested in the realistic work
              environments of five research collaborators, namely the California Department
              of Transportation (Caltrans), the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power
              (LADWP), the California Geological Survey (CGS), the Bureau of Research in
              Geology and Mines (BRGM) in France, and Kobe University in Japan.  It is
              anticipated that the IT concepts developed in this research will contribute to
              pave the way to the creation of a virtual repository of geotechnical
              information to be operated in the future by a consortium of local, state and
              federal agencies.

The research will benefit the public in many ways.  It
              will disseminate geotechnical information to the students, researchers and
              practitioners.  It will organize geotechnical information, and improve its
              archival and retrieval for local, state and federal agencies, universities, and
              companies.  It will generate an information platform for the development of
              large-scale geographic information systems of natural hazards such as
              liquefaction-induced lateral spreads during earthquakes.  It will promote
              education and research in engineering, and stimulate data exchange and
              collaboration among researchers and practitioners.  

