Title       : ITR: Private Prediction Using Selective Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  2002    
File        : a0219560

Award Number: 0219560
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenliang Du wedu@ecs.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mikhail J. Atallah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research will study the SPMP (Selective Private Model-based
Prediction)
              problem demonstrated with the following scenario: A client
with a private
              input wants to use a server's private model to make
predictions; however,
              neither side wants to disclose its private data to
anybody. More specifically,
              the research will study the problem for
selected models including the Hidden
              Markov Model, the Neural Network
Model, the Bayesian Network Model, and the
              Decision Trees Model. The goal
is to develop efficient and practical solutions
              that enable such type of
privacy preserving prediction.

The project will
              investigate two approaches: commodity-server approach and
multiple-server
              approach. The commodity-server approach uses the
commodities (data) from a
              third party to preserve the confidentiality of
the private data. The
              multiple-server approach uses duplicate servers so
no single server can learn
              all information about the client's data. Based
on these two approaches,
              various data disguising techniques will also be
studied.

Efficient
              solutions to the SPMP problems enable model owners to provide
new forms of
              e-commerce services while protecting customers' private
information.
              Furthermore, the results, methodologies, and the building
blocks gained from
              the proposed activity can provide invaluable
understanding and insights into
              the Secure Multiparty Computation (SMC)
research, and help to advance and
              expand the areas of SMC research.
---------------------------------------


