Title       : Long-term Degradation Mechanisms of Bond in Concrete Reinforced with Fiber
               Reinforced Polymers (FRP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0219484

Award Number: 0219484
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Perumalsamy N. Balaguru                 
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas E. Boothby tebarc@engr.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Charles E. Bakis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1635      INFRASTRUCT MAT & STRUCT MECHA
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Project Abstract

Long-Term Degradation Mechanisms of Bond in Concrete
              Reinforced with Fiber Reinforced Polymers

Thomas E. Boothby, The
              Pennsylvania State University
Charles E. Bakis, The Pennsylvania State
              University

	The repair of the nation's deteriorating infrastructure requires
              the development and qualification of new materials.  A class of composite
              materials known as fiber reinforced polymers (FRP), originally developed
              through basic research for use in the aerospace industry, have been gaining
              acceptance over the last two decades as suitable materials for reinforcement
              and repair of concrete structures, as well as for other construction
              applications.  These materials have the advantage of exceptional
              strength-weight ratios and resistance to corrosion.  However, the widespread
              adoption of these materials to repair and reinforcement of bridges, buildings,
              and other structures requires an understanding of the complex processes of
              environmental degradation, so that the material can be designed and built to be
              sufficiently durable.  

	FRP's applied to reinforcement for concrete may be
              internal, such as reinforcing bars, or external, such as adhered plates or
              sheets.  The external reinforcement may be used to repair or strengthen
              existing structures.  In all cases, the ability of the material to bond to
              concrete over the lifetime of the structure (50-100 years, typically), and
              under continual environmental attack--due to acid rain, freeze-thaw, heat and
              humidity, etc.--is critical to its success as a reinforcing material.  The
              proposed research will examine in detail the characteristics of bond between
              FRP reinforcing, both external and internal, and concrete, and the process of
              degradation of this bond due to age, long-term loading, and environmental
              effects.  The research will investigate small and intermediate scale specimens
              aged in outdoor environments in temperate and tropical climates, and subjected
              to accelerated environmental conditioning.  The research will enable designers
              of these materials to predict their durability with increased confidence.  

