Title       : Structural-Acoustic Analysis and Optimization of Novel Composite Sandwich
               Structures with Anisotropic Materials for Better Noise and Vibration Isolation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2003   
File        : a0219217

Award Number: 0219217
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : July 31,  2007       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $130000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jian-Qiao Sun sun@me.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tsu-Wei Chou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,1057,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              This project aims to develop novel sandwich structures to address the sound
              transmission problem in various land and air vehicles such as automobiles,
              airplanes, and helicopters.  The research concept is motivated by the recent
              findings of sandwich structures made of anisotropic materials with
              normal-to-shear coupling to reduce sound transmission.  The proposed research
              consists of an integrated effort of micro-structural material modeling,
              structural-acoustic analysis, and optimization of sandwich structures for
              minimum sound transmission.  The objectives of the project are as
              follows:
1.	To develop a mathematical theory describing the static and dynamic
              behavior of sandwich cores made of anisotropic materials, and to provide a
              foundation for structural-acoustic analysis and optimization of sandwich
              structures.
2.	To carry out an extensive investigation of the sound isolation
              mechanism of flat and curved sandwich structures with anisotropic cores, and a
              study of the effect of incident angle of the sound wave and curvature of the
              structure on sound transmission.
3.	To conduct an optimization study of sound
              transmission of sandwich structures with respect to various material and
              geometric parameters, and to develop sandwich structures with superior acoustic
              performance and guidelines for material selection and manufacturing of such
              sandwich structures.
Traditionally, one of the research foci in composites has
              been lightweight and high strength laminates often with poor acoustic
              performance.  The sound transmission problem identifies the needs for new
              composite materials.  The project is anticipated to develop a body of new
              knowledge on the physical mechanism of sound transmission through sandwich
              structures made of anisotropic materials, and new methods for modeling,
              analyzing and optimizing anisotropic structures.  The resulting technology of
              this project will have a broad social impact, and will likely enhance the
              ability of American industry to produce quieter aircraft, helicopters and
              automobiles.  Furthermore, this project will involve women and other
              under-represented minorities, and encourage students from these groups to
              pursue a career in engineering research.


