Title       : ITR: Constructive Visualization: Understanding Spatial Relationships Through
               Interaction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0219979

Award Number: 0219979
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Barbara M. Fossum                       
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Schroder ps@cs.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1652,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Complex spatial structures permeate the environment of the future. Nanoscale
              molecular machines allow sophisticated methods of computing and integrating
              data with environments. Human-scale industrial designs provide transportation
              solutions with greater control and efficiency. Architectural forms, growing in
              both complexity and inter-connectivity, define our experience in the
              ever-expanding city. While many advances have been made in visualizing these
              shapes in three dimensions, designers have yet to leverage the power of
              Information Technology in the early stages of creation. Initial ideas are still
              mostly constructed with two-dimensional paper sketches or simple physical
              tools, such as the molecular modeling kits commonly used in organic chemistry.
              Digital representations in contrast are mutable, dynamic, and re-configurable
              at a lowest level of the computer. These are difficult for humans to manipulate
              effectively with contemporary 2D interfaces. Thus designers, engineers, artists
              and architects must choose either a traditional, pre-Information Technology
              environment, where they can freely play with simple building blocks, or a
              digital space where complex elements can be composed only after exhaustive data
              transformations, strict planning and foresight, and the occasional trick. The
              work proposed here bridges this divide by creating tools that facilitate (1)
              the construction of 3D models with the speed of pencil sketches; (2) physical
              intuition of tangible models; (3) fluid representation of digital data
              structures; and (4) active
response of algorithmic simulation.

The results
              of the work will have immediate application in the fields of architecture,
              industrial design, and molecular chemistry. Because the research team treats
              these separate problems within a common framework the results will be broadly
              applicable to many diverse problems, fundamentally altering the human ability
              to create structures in space.



