Title       : Excavating a Mississippian Outpost
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  2002      
File        : a0219308

Award Number: 0219308
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25586              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy R. Pauketat pauketat@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Timothy Pauketat and an
              experienced student crew will undertake in the summer of 2002 the excavation of
              a recently discovered "outpost" of pre-Columbian Cahokia, located in the
              central Mississippi River valley. Several previous seasons of fieldwork at this
              and five other nearby "Mississippian" villages by Pauketat and crew all now
              point to this one site for an answer to a critical research question: Did
              Cahokians, having constructed the premier religious and political center in
              North America 950 years ago (@ AD 1050), physically control the farming economy
              of the region's rural hinterlands? To date, excavations at other sites have
              provided suggestive but not definitive evidence of such control. These other
              sites have, however, shown that farmers with diverse cultural backgrounds moved
              into a rich agricultural zone coincident with Cahokia's emergence as a regional
              center. Discoveries from two previous seasons of work at the Grossmann site
              include densely packed non-domestic buildings, exotic artifacts, and a hoard of
              70 ax-heads, all within a suspected four-sided village. Such finds make it
              unique to the farming villages of the region. These finds also make it
              plausible that (1) this one village was actually a planned outpost established
              in the midst of farmers by a group of Cahokians or closely related kin or
              administrative functionaries, and (2) that the establishment of the other
              farming villages in the vicinity was part of an overall planned transformation
              of the cultural and physical landscape. The physical attributes of stone
              ax-heads from the site suggest that clearing the woodlands may have been a
              significant part of the means whereby Cahokians instituted an agricultural
              system and obtained the cooperation of farmers. The 2002 excavations will
              reveal the spatial plan of the Grossmann site by mechanically removing the
              disturbed plowzone in a 2500-square-meter area, an excavation strategy also
              necessitated by the imminent destruction of the site by urban sprawl. The site
              will be totally excavated recovering data of a sort seldom retrieved by
              archaeologists. Excavation will either verify the planned, high-status
              hypothesis or prove the site to be lacking a central plan. In either case, the
              relationships between Cahokia and the hinterland farmers will be apparent in
              the debris left behind from the day-to-day practices of the residents. In this
              debris, the team will recover the ultimate answers for a central question of
              concern to all that study complex societies: How were such societies and their
              agricultural systems instituted? This question is in turn important to the
              social sciences and to a broadened understanding global politics because it is
              a basis for an improved general understanding of the extent to which cultural
              traditions and actions of ordinary people play a part in larger-scale political
              changes. 
