Title       : ITR: Virtual Environment Technology and Eyewitness Identification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0219399

Award Number: 0219399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499978             (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Blascovich blascovi@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew C. Beall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeremy N. Bailenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1332,1657,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the use of immersive virtual environment technology for
              eyewitness identification of criminal suspects. This technology allows
              individuals to enter and move about three-dimensional digital "worlds" in
              real-time, observing and interacting with the environment and virtual others
              within it. The rapid development of immersive virtual environment technology
              and increased sophistication in three-dimensional digital imaging of people
              promises a new age for determining accuracy of eyewitness identification of
              criminal suspects. This is important societally as the general accuracy of
              eyewitness identification of criminal suspects using older technologies (e.g.,
              police lineups, mug shots) has been questioned in the research literature as
              well as in the judicial system. 

The scientific goals of the project are
              threefold.  First, the investigators will determine the validity of using
              digital representations of humans within immersive virtual environments for
              person recognition. Second, they will determine differences between traditional
              and immersive virtual police lineups in terms of eyewitness identification
              accuracy focusing on the increased contextual realism described above. 
              Finally, the investigators will use immersive virtual environment technology to
              develop quantitative indexes of fairness of such lineups based on the
              similarity of suspects to foils.

Immersive virtual environment technology
              allows easier recreation of the same environmental conditions under which an
              eyewitness viewed criminal activity involving suspects. Replicating such
              conditions is not easily accomplished using older technologies. Hence, using
              immersive virtual environment technology, witnesses can be asked to identify
              suspects and foils at the same distance, viewing angle, lighting, weather
              (e.g., rain, fog) as was the case during their observation of the criminal
              activity. Furthermore, this technology makes it easier to match foils to
              suspects in terms of organismic variables (e.g., height, weight, hair style,
              coloring), clothing, and movements thereby eliminating potential sources of
              bias. This technology also allows the quantitative assessment of how well
              suspects and foils are matched as opposed to pure subjective assessment using
              older technologies.

