Title       : ITR: Scalable Edge Router for Differentiated Services Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0219110

Award Number: 0219110
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $363680             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bharat Bhargava bb@cs.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research studies and designs coordinated trafficconditioning, network
              monitoring, flow control, and provisions the networkproperly to meet the
              demands for data and multimedia traffic
in various applications. An edge
              router component to monitor a large network for service level agreement (SLA)
              violations and bandwidth theft attacks is developed. This network monitoring
              scheme involves only edge routers. The conditioner and flow control components
              alleviate the congestion and unfairness in resource allocation. The edge
              routers share the congestion information with upstream routers to save resource
              wastage in the downstream domains. 

Continuous monitoring of network
              activity is required to maintain confidence in the security of networks with
              quality of service (QoS) support. These solutions have to be scalable in order
              to
deploy them in the heterogeneous Internet. A scalable edge router cannot
              use excessive per-flow information and cannot involve core routers. The
              researchers follow this principle in designing edge routers to
              achievescalability. 

The following is a list of contributions that are
              obtainedthrough experiments, simulation, and collaboration with industry.

1.
              For the edge router, we determine the optimal traffic assignment rate for each
              traffic class and weight assignments at the queue to maximize the profit for
              the service provider of a network
domain. Proper provisioning provides service
              level agreement bounds, such as throughput, delay, and loss for each
              user.

2. To ensure all flows are getting their share of SLA, the flows of a
              network domain is monitored for possible SLA violation and bandwidth theft
              attack. We define and employ throughput,
delay, packet loss, and security as
              QoS parameters for the design of an edge-to-edge SLA monitoring scheme. This
              contributes to detecting service violations and attacks, especially denial of
              service (DoS) attacks.

3. The traffic conditioners at the edge routers
              intelligently mark and shape packets differentially based on the class
              parameters and according to network state.  Through experimental studies,
we
              show that the flow characteristics provide better resource utilization and
              improve the application level quality of service.

4. The edge routers detect
              and regulate unresponsive flows that cause poor performance for adaptive flows,
              such as TCP, which retreats during congestion. The ingress (entry) edge
              routers
propagate the congestion information to the egress (exit) routers of a
              previous upstream network domain. This reduces the resource wastage at the
              downstream network due to undelivered
packets.

