Title       : Theory and Practice of Point Line Kinematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2002     
File        : a0219859

Award Number: 0219859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Delcie R. Durham                        
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $243409             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kwun-Lon Ting kting@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 1464      ENGINEERING DESIGN
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This grant provides funding for the development of a theory on point-line
              kinematics and its applications on the analysis, characterization, synthesis,
              and control of point-line motion.  A point-line operator based on geometry and
              Clifford algebra will be developed to express a point-line transformation. 
              Subsequently, this transformation will allow a point-line to be considered as
              an independent rigid element having a completely specified motion without
              invoking rigid body transformation.  Based on a principle similar to the
              point-line operator, the theory will be extended to include line displacement
              and rigid body motion, in which parameters responsible for causing incompletely
              specified motion can be removed or added as needed.  Issues on the synthesis
              for finite and infinitesimal point-line motions will be investigated. The
              results will be applied to enhance the design capability of spatial mechanisms
              and manipulators.   The project will also explore for the first time the full
              configuration space concerning the tool path generation in five-axis numerical
              control machining for interference avoidance.

If successful, the results
              will lead to the first point-line kinematics theory comparable to the
              well-developed rigid body kinematics theory.  In addition, it will lead to a
              unified kinematics theory for lines, point-lines, and rigid bodies.  It allows
              one to understand and treat a point-line motion by viewing the point-line as an
              integrated rigid element in a way similar to that of points or rigid bodies. 
              It will lead to a mathematical language such that the characteristics of
              point-line motions can be rigorously articulated.  It will serve as a catalyst
              and foundation for advancements in kinematics, robotics, computer-aided
              geometric design, and manufacturing technology.  Because many tool operations
              such as numerical control machining, drilling, screwing, riveting, cutting,
              probing, insertion, and electric wire discharge machining are basically
              point-line operations, the project's results will enhance the capability of
              making improvements on the motion synthesis, control, and quality of these
              operations.  It is also recognized that because of the fundamental nature of
              the subject, the impact may extend to other aspects of science and
              engineering.


