Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Solving PDEs Using Low Separation-Rank
               Representations and Optimal Quadratures for Expontials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0219326

Award Number: 0219326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Beylkin gregory.beylkin@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lucas A. Monzon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martin J. Mohlenkamp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project develops time-domain solvers for wave propagation problems
in two
              and three dimensions, with fundamentally improved properties,
namely,
              significantly  reduced sampling requirements and, at the same
              time,
significantly higher accuracy. Such solvers would allow modeling of
              linear and, eventually, nonlinear
wave propagation in domains that are
              thousands of characteristic wavelengths
in size, with interfaces and variable
              coefficients.
This approach would also provide improved bases for
              solving
nonlinear advection-diffusion problems.  The solvers are built upon
              two
new techniques, namely, optimal quadratures to represent bandlimited
              functions, and a numerical generalization of separation of variables to
              accelerate applying higher-dimensional operators.  Each
technique contains the
              potential to significantly advance computational
science across a wide range
              of applications.  Together they provide a
new paradigm that efficiently
              organizes the information contained in
operators governing physical phenomena.
               This project develops these techniques
further, and develops multiresolution
              representations for operators and
functions, based on the optimal
              quadratures.

Any computational modeling of natural phenomena requires
              discretization
of the underlying mathematical equations. This project
              addresses questions of
optimality and efficiency of such discretizations, and
              of organization
o information for two important modeling areas, wave
              propagation and
geophysical fluid dynamics.  This research aims to generate a
              much wider use of
efficient techniques for representing information in
              scientific modeling, and to
increase the speed and accuracy of simulations by
              up to two orders of magnitude,
with foreseeable benefits to such areas as
              seismology, remote sensing,
acoustics, optics, geophysical fluid dynamics, and
              quantum chemistry. It would
reduce the computational cost of obtaining high
              accuracy, which is necessary to
describe phenomena that are highly sensitive
              to changes in physical
parameters, and that often cause technological
              bottlenecks.
This Collaborative Research is led by the Department of
              Applied
Mathematics at the University of Colorado at Boulder, and includes the
              Department of
Meteorology at the University of Maryland at College Park.  It
              will fund
one research associate, two visiting scientists from UMD and
              Ohio
University, and one graduate student in a diverse research group that
              includes a
research associate, two postdoctoral researchers, a graduate
              student, and four
undergraduate students.


