Title       : ITR: Ontologies in Action: An Information Architecture to Support Investigation
               of Linked Health-Environment Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0219025

Award Number: 0219025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299994             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Barron eric@essc.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eric S. Post  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark N. Gahegan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frederico Fonseca  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1352,1657,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Communities of scientists develop a specialized understanding of their specific
              domain of expertise, which manifests as differences in mental
              conceptualization.  Within such information communities there may be quite high
              levels of agreement regarding conceptualization, in that members can
              communicate and share ideas, but insurmountable problems arise when data and
              knowledge must be shared between communities.  But many emerging problems in
              science require that such disparate perspectives indeed be merged.  For
              example, relationships between climate, land use, and ecology can have
              far-reaching impacts on human health via ailments such as West Nile Virus and
              Lyme Disease.  Building predictive models that span communities and lead to
              proactive mitigation is only possible when the conceptual differences imbued in
              the data can be resolved, enabling a free exchange.  Through this research
              project, the investigators propose an ontological approach to mediate the
              sharing of data resources among different information communities across the
              environmental sciences, ranging from human health exposures and outcomes to
              climate forecasts and climate-change predictions.  Aside from the benefits
              arising from a deeper understanding of the conceptual similarities and
              differences among these information communities, several major outcomes are
              envisaged in terms of computational infrastructure.  Specifically, the
              investigators will conduct research and development leading to (1)
              computational tools to mediate the interoperation (sharing) of data among
              disparate communities of scientists, focusing broadly on geospatial
              disciplines; (2) computational tools with which to construct, represent, store,
              and exchange ontologies generated from disparate information communities; (3)
              computational tools to visualize and explore ontologies and to support the
              human-centered sharing of understanding between information communities; and
              (4) measures to quantify ontological differences between specific entities and
              categories, and between entire ontologies, as a measure of the complexity and
              likely success of interoperation.

This research project tackles a common
              problem that pervades the geospatial sciences - how to share information and
              results of analyses among communities of scientists in a way that takes account
              of the different ways in which those communities conceptualize the world (or
              parts thereof).  The specific focus of this project is on better sharing of
              information and computational models among environmental scientists, ecologists
              and epidemiologists, with a specific focus on human health outcomes.  Certain
              infectious diseases have a complex relationship with the environment.  Changes
              in climate and land cover offer new habitats for disease-carrying organisms and
              their hosts that can cause harm to humans (exemplified by West Nile Virus and
              Lyme Disease).  By improving the sharing of models and data relating to climate
              and climate change, host and vector life cycles, land use and land-use change,
              human demographics, and human health, scientists and policy makers will be
              better able to understand the problem in greater detail, plan for future
              outbreaks based on changes to the status quo, develop mitigation strategies
              more effectively, and inform and educate health practitioners and the general
              public to increase awareness.

