Title       : ITR: Routing of Dynamic Service Level Agreements between Inter-domain Bandwidth
               Brokers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 16,  2002 
File        : a0219747

Award Number: 0219747
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $446920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raj Acharya acharya@cse.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              George Kesidis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Natarajan Gautam  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1656,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This proposed research project aims to explore several unanswered questions in
              the area of differentiated services for next generation  Internet. In
              particular, the issue of routing SLAs in the presence of multiple alternative
              physical paths is a topic that has been seldom researched
upon. It is an
              important issue since the objective is to maximize the probability of success
              for an SLA without opting for over-provisioning. Also, in the presence of
              multiple physical paths, which is typical in large networks, there is a need to
              choose the optimal path based on appropriate criteria. The proposed research
              directly addresses this critical issue. Currently, there are no standard
              schemes for hierarchical QoS routing. One of the most crucial problems in
              hierarchical QoS routing is to make intelligent decisions in the presence of
              out-of-date or stale network stateinformation. The proposed research will
              address this issue by making use of local statistics collected at each router
              and obtaining a time history of the network state information. Furthermore,
              every domain will have a finite traffic handling capacity. This capacity is
              bound above by the domain topology and the maximum link bandwidth. For
              computing feasible paths, current QoS routing schemes take only the individual
              link bandwidth into account as a constraint but not the domain capacity as a
              whole. The research will address this shortcoming by incorporating the domain
              capacity as a constraint in the path computation algorithms. Additionally, this
              research project will also study the problem of splitting aggregated flows in a
              transit domain with the goal of maximizing the domain resource utilization. The
              motivation comes from the fact that splitting of aggregated flows will lead to
              better utilization of the network bandwidth.


