Title       : ITR: Physics-Based Modeling of Plastic Flow that Couples Atomistics of Unit
               Processes with Macroscopic Simulations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a0219243

Award Number: 0219243
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  2002      
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $417000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Bassani bassani@lrsm.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vaclav Vitek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1765,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This is a grant funded in response to a (small) proposal submitted to the
              Information Technology Research (ITR) Initiative.  The research will be done in
              collaboration with groups at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and
              Oxford University (England).  

Three-dimensional simulations are
              increasingly providing a powerful information-based approach to both material
              processing and the design and manufacturing of components that support a wide
              range of technologies.  The objective of this research, which focuses on
              phenomena that involve large plastic deformations of metallic materials, is to
              develop a physics-based methodology for accurate modeling.  At the overall
              system level, i.e., microstructural in the case of materials processing or
              components under complex loading, both Lagrangian and Arbitrary
              Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) finite element implementations are the computational
              basis of most software.  However, unique unit processes that arise at atomic
              and molecular scales often control critical phenomena, and this is where many
              models are significantly deficient.  In particular, nearly all inelastic
              simulation codes are limited to a narrow class of crystalline materials, namely
              those that are close-packed which primarily includes face-centered-cubic (fcc)
              materials.  There is a challenge to develop accurate models for a broader range
              of engineering materials and to adapt these models into current large-scale
              finite element, hydrodynamic, and dislocation dynamics codes.  The focus of
              this research is on the development of multiscale models and algorithms for the
              accurate and verifiable simulation of the deformation behavior of metallic
              materials possessing complex - non-planar - dislocation core structures.
              

The research focuses on the relationship between the three-dimensional
              atomic configurations of defects, their mobility, and macroscopic plastic flow.
               The multiscale methodologies to be developed will be applicable to many areas,
              including problems in nanotechnology.  The principal goals are: (1) to develop
              a rigorous methodology to link theories at scales ranging from electronic and
              atomic through mesoscale and macroscopic; (2) to develop physically-based
              continuum constitutive relations that account for complex phenmonea arising
              from non-planar dislocation cores; and, (3) to explore the effects of such
              defects on critical phenomena such as strain localization and fracture.  We
              will consider a range of technologically important materials from different
              crystal classes and under conditions that arise in both material processing and
              in components subjected to mechanical loading.

The algorithms to be
              developed will be ready for installation into large-scale finite element codes,
              e.g., Abaqus, both for polycrystals in nanoscale regimes and macroscopic
              components.  Although the structure of the constitutive relations will be
              significantly different from those currently in use, implementation in
              massively parallel codes will be straightforward.  
%%%
This is a grant
              funded in response to a (small) proposal submitted to the Information
              Technology Research (ITR) Initiative.  The research will be done in
              collaboration with groups at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (LLNL) and
              Oxford University (England).  

The research focuses on the relationship
              between the three-dimensional atomic configurations of defects, their mobility,
              and macroscopic plastic flow in metallic materials.  The multiscale
              methodologies to be developed will be applicable to many areas, including
              problems in nanotechnology.  The principal goals are: (1) to develop a rigorous
              methodology to link theories at scales ranging from electronic and atomic
              through mesoscale and macroscopic; (2) to develop physically-based continuum
              constitutive relations that account for complex phenmonea arising from
              non-planar dislocation cores; and, (3) to explore the effects of such defects
              on critical phenomena such as strain localization and fracture.  We will
              consider a range of technologically important materials from different crystal
              classes and under conditions that arise in both material processing and in
              components subjected to mechanical loading.
***



