Title       : ITR: A Community-based Partnership for Integrated Research and Education
               (COPIRE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2002  
File        : a0219547

Award Number: 0219547
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Caroline E. Wardle                      
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $382979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick O. Bobbie pbobbie@spsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Davis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jennifer L. Uboh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Polytechnic State
	      1100 S. Marietta Parkway
	      Marietta, GA  30060    /   -

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : ,1653,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0219547
Patrick O. Bobbie (Southern Polytechnic State University), Brian
              Davis (Kennesaw Mountain High School), and Jennifer L. Uboh (South Cobb High
              School)
Institution:  Southern Polytechnic State U.,

TITLE: ITR: A
              Community Based Partnership for Community-Based Education (COPIRE)

This ITR-
              and ITWF-funded project is a partnership between Southern Polytechnic State
              University (SPSU) (a suburban technology-focused institution), Kennesaw
              Mountain High (KMH) School (a new school with a magnet program) and South Cobb
              High (SCH) School (an established school, also with a magnet program). The
              project is driven by an overarching goal of establishing a community-based
              partnership, which focuses on an integration of education, research, and
              training in the design and development of embedded system simulations. The
              motivation for the project stems from 1) the plausibility of extending embedded
              system research/knowledge to high school students and 2) enhancing their
              opportunities and chances in the field.

SPSU is involved in a Georgia
              statewide research initiative, Yamacraw, which is focussed on embedded software
              development and the design of broadband (high-speed) communications systems,
              devices, and chips.  SPSU's partnership project is designed to dovetail with
              Yamacraw to take advantage of the research resources of Yamacraw and to train
              students early in the academic pipeline.  SPSU is:

1.  Partnering with KMH
              and SCH to select a cohort of both non-minority and minority students - females
              and males - at the 11th and 12th grade levels and SPSU undergraduates to be
              involved in various hands-on research projects. The students are participating
              in the program for 7 weeks during the summer and once a week when school is in
              session for 3 years;
2.  Cstablishing a training, mentoring, role modeling,
              and a management group, which involves Yamacraw graduate students and the PIs,
              to support the program; and
3.  Continually assessing and measuring
              achievements along the 'pipeline' to ensure successful transfer of students
              across its stages.



