Title       : ITR: Printer Characterization and Signature-Embedding for Security and Forensic
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2002    
File        : a0219893

Award Number: 0219893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Carl E. Landwehr                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan P. Allebach   (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Delp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George T.-C. Chiu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Proposal Number CCR-0219893

Title:  ITR: Printer Characterization and
              Signature-Embedding for Security and Forensic Applications

Co-Principal
              Investigators: Jan P. Allebach, Edward J. Delp, and George T. Chiu

We
              propose to develop two strategies for printer identification. The first
              strategy is passive. It involves characterizing the printer and finding
              intrinsic features in the printed output that are characteristic of that
              particular printer, model, or manufacturer's products. We call this the
              intrinsic signature. Developing the intrinsic signature requires an
              understanding and modeling of the printer mechanism, and the development of
              image analysis tools that are used for printer characterization during the
              signature development phase, and then later, for the actual detection of the
              signature in printed pages with arbitrary content.

The intrinsic signature
              is detected by scanning the printed pages with a high resolution drum scanner,
              and applying low-level image analysis routines to extract features. These
              features are processed with a soft classifier to yield likelihoods at each
              level of a decision tree that the document was printed with a device belonging
              to each particular class. At the highest level of the decision tree,
              likelihoods are provided for which of the two possible dominant printing
              technologies: electrophotography (commonly referred to as a laser printer) and
              inkjet was used. At the next level,likelihoods are generated for the candidate
              printer manufacturers, and so on. As we proceed down through the tree, we
              generate liklihoods regarding information that is more and more specific to the
              particular printer in question.

The second strategy is active. Here we embed
              an extrinsic signature in every printed page. This signature is generated by
              modulating the process parameters in the printer mechanism to encode
              identifying information, such as the printer serial number and date of
              printing, in every printed page. To detect the extrinsic signature, we again
              scan the printed pages, and process them using image analysis techniques; but
              in this case, our goal is to decode the signature to extract the information
              embedded in it. Development of the methodology for extrinsic signature
              embedding will build directly on our work with intrinsic signatures. We will
              use our knowledge of the printer mechanism models and the results of the
              printer characterization to determine the printer process parameters that can
              be modulated to encode the desired identifying information. The modulation of
              these parameters will require modification to the actual printer
              mechanism.

A distinguishing feature of the proposed effort will be the
              development of an undergraduate project course that will be associated with the
              research. In this course, students will learn about printing technologies and
              the application of electrical and mechanical engineering theory from their core
              courses to analysis and modeling of printing systems. They will also learn
              about image processing and decision theory; and they will see how all these
              tools can be applied to the solution of practical real-world problems.

