Title       : ITR: Collaborative Research: Accurate Representations of Signals in a
               Coarse-Grained Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2002     
File        : a0219072

Award Number: 0219072
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas W. Fogwell                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69449              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cemalettin S. Gunturk gunturk@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The aim is to provide a better mathematical framework and
alternative design
              methodologies for coarse quantization of signals in
a highly oversampled
              setting.  The central themes is "sigma-delta
quantization" in
              analog-to-digital conversion of audio signals and its
counterpart
              "error-diffusion" in digital halftoning of images.  In both
cases, a given
              target analog signal is represented by a judiciously
chosen one-bit (or
              few-bit) sequence which approximates the signal in a
suitable low-pass
              subspace.  A wide range of different schemes exist for
this purpose, each
              corresponding to a different implementation and
approximation order.  As our
              primary mathematical objective, we expect
to better understand the law of
              error decay of the existing schemes as
well as to improve on these by new
              designs.  On the algorithmic side, we
aim to extend this analysis to settings
              with computational and other
implementational constraints.

The fact that
              digital signals and data sets can be processed, stored
and retrieved with
              great precision and speed places high demands of
accuracy on the conversion
              process from and to the analog world.
However, the devices used in the
              translation process (such as in the
case of analog-to-digital and
              digital-to-analog conversion circuits in
audio applications, and printers in
              image reproduction) are of
necessity analog devices, which have physical
              limitations that, at
first sight, conflict with those accuracy demands.  To
              cope with this
problem, engineers have empirically developed special signal
              processing
techniques leading to alternative signal and number
              representations
that are quite different from standard decimal or
              binary
representations.  Typical techniques take advantage of the
              highly
accurate performance of the analog devices in sampling very densely
              in
time or space to compensate for the lack of amplitude precision of
those
              devices.  Interestingly, while these empirical schemes have proved
efficient
              and have been used in consumer products for a long time, the
corresponding
              framework of signal processing has little mathematical
support.  We aim to
              study these schemes in more detail, with the
goals of improving the
              mathematical theory as well as proposing
variants that outperform those used
              presently, and to identify a wider
range of applications.
