Title       : ITR: Mesoscopic Modeling and Simulation: A Novel Approach to Monte Carlo Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 17,  2003     
File        : a0219211

Award Number: 0219211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hans G. Kaper                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Markos A. Katsoulakis markos@math.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Horntrop  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dionisios G. Vlachos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1686,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal # 0219211
PI: Markos A. Katsoulakis
Institution: University of
              Massachusetts Amherst
Title: ITR: Mesoscopic Modeling and Simulation: A Novel
              Approach to Monte Carlo

ABSTRACT

This project is concerned with a novel
              framework for Monte Carlo simulations based on recently developed
              coarse-grained stochastic mesoscopic models.  Mesoscopic models are stochastic
              partial differential equations which are rigorously derived as asymptotic
              limits from microscopic Monte Carlo (MC) algorithms by means of techniques from
              non-equilibrium statistical mechanics.  Although such models describe the
              mesoscopic scales, which are much larger than the underlying molecular scales,
              they still include detailed microscopic information on particle interactions
              and dynamics and can systematically model anisotropies and multiple
              micromechanisms.  Another attractive feature of mesoscopic models is the
              inclusion of random fluctuations derived directly from the underlying master
              equation and yielding important nucleation and pattern formation and selection
              mechanisms.  Finally, formal and rigorous asymptotics using Large Deviation and
              WKB expansions as well as preliminary numerical simulations indicate that the
              MC algorithms and the corresponding stochastic mesoscopic models produce
              essentially identical results for such delicate quantities as nucleation rates
              and phase transitions.  The main research objectives of this proposal are: (a)
              to develop non-equilibrium coarse-grained MC algorithms by numerically solving
              the stochastic mesoscopic equations using highly efficient spectral-based
              methods and carry out detailed benchmarkings against conventional MC, and (b)
              to apply the proposed computational tools to applications arising in pattern
              formation in advanced materials and molecular separation in nanoporous
              films.

Because of their fundamental nature and their versatility in
              describing complex out-of-equilibrium interactions between atoms and molecules,
              molecular dynamics simulations and Monte Carlo (MC) algorithms have become
              preeminent computational tools for science and engineering research.  With the
              advent of enhanced computing capabilities, these methods can provide
              unprecedented insights into numerous problems ranging from physicochemical and
              biological processes to biomaterials, drug design, pattern recognition, and
              image processing.  Despite their widespread use and the substantial progress in
              related computational methods, molecular algorithms are limited to short length
              and time scales.  Hence, they are capable of simulating only a relatively small
              number of atoms or molecules for quite short time periods.  On the other hand,
              device sizes and morphological features observed in experiments often involve
              much larger spatial and/or temporal scales.  A major obstacle in meeting this
              multiscale modeling challenge is the lack of a rigorous mathematical and
              computational framework providing a direct link from the atomistic scale to the
              complex mesoscopic and macroscopic phenomena that are the result of the
              microscopic interactions.  In this direction, our work focuses on developing
              novel stochastic models and algorithms capable of describing much larger length
              and time scales than conventional MC simulations while still incorporating
              microscopic details.  We intend to apply the computational methods to provide
              new insights into two engineering problems, which are currently intractable
              with conventional MC techniques:  (1) the study of self-organizing
              micromechanisms and their role in pattern formation in advanced materials, and
              (2) the transport and separation of molecules in nanoporous films and
              membranes.


