Title       : ITR: Blind Identification of Multivariate Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2002      
File        : a0219377

Award Number: 0219377
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yingbo Hua yhua@ee.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Blind identification of multivariate systems concerns with modelling,
              estimation and detection of multivariate systems driven by unknown sources. It
              is an emerging area of fundamental importance to applications such as wireless
              communications, human-computer interface, and video surveillance. It provides a
              foundation for, as well as a unification of many application-specific views
              arid techniques. In particular, it brings a bridge between the field of
              space-time coding for wireless communications and the field of speech
              recognition for human-computer interface.

This project continues a
              systematic study previously conducted by the P1 in the past a few years. A
              primary focus is to understand the limits of blind identification of
              convolutive multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) systems driven by nonwhite
              sources. This is known to be a challenging problem. Prior work in this area
              mainly concerns with single-input-multiple-output (SIMO) systems. instantaneous
              MIMO systems, MIMO systems driven by white sources, or MIMO systems driven by
              modulated sources. Preliminary discoveries on convolutive MIMO systems driven
              by nonwhite sources have been made recently by the P1. and more are yet to be
              discovered. Great efforts will be made to draw connections between the generic
              identifiability conditions associated with unknown sources and those associated
              with encoded and/or modulated sources. The results of this work will be a
              complete understanding of the identifiabilty of MIMO systems. a complete
              taxonomy of identification algorithms for various conditions of MIMO systems
              with various coding schemes, and a complete evaluation of performance bounds of
              MIMO systems driven by unknown sources.

This project will also explore a key
              application in speech enhancement. The acoustic channel in a common environment
              (such as offices) is known to have a convolutive distortion that severely
              hampers the performance of today's best speech recognition systems. Blind
              deconvolution is of great importance at the very front end of a speech
              recognition system. The flexibility or friendliness of future human-computer
              interface depends on how well blind deconvolution can be carried out and
              consequently how well speech recognition can be performed. To some degree,
              research has either neglected the structural model of acoustic channels or
              ignored the hidden models in speech signals. This project will cross-fertilize
              between the field of sensor arrays and the field of speech recognition. By
              exploiting multiple microphones, the structural details of acoustic channels as
              well as the hidden Markov model of speech signals, we are expecting a
              significantly improved speech recognition system by the end of this project.

