Title       : Terrorism and Corporate Crisis Management: The Strategic Effect of the September
               11 Attacks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2002    
File        : a0219953

Award Number: 0219953
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dennis Wenger                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339997             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Harrald harrald@seas.gwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie Ryan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Louise K. Comfort  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Washington Univ
	      2121 Eye Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200372353    202/994-6255

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The September 11, 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center were an
              attack on corporate America.  Of the almost 3,000 persons killed, most were
              employees of private corporations and most of the direct economic losses were
              sustained by the private sector.  Corporate America is in the midst of a
              strategic change as the issues of crisis preparedness, physical sand
              information security and continuity of operations have become central and
              immediate in the days and months following the terrorist attacks.  Private
              sector businesses have come to realize that their very survival may depend on
              their preparedness to mitigate the consequences of and respond to extreme
              events. The lack of a firm conceptual and experiential basis for business
              crisis management decision-making and planning raises the potential for
              relatively unproductive and wasteful decisions and resource allocations.

The
              objective of this project is to conduct the necessary research to better
              understand the impacts of extreme events and to communicate the results in a
              manner that contributes to the ability of businesses to prepare for and recover
              from extreme events.  The following research based products are proposed to
              meet this objective:

1. A methodology for quantifying the organizational and
              economic impacts of extreme events on businesses.
2. A framework for
              evaluating corporate preparedness for these extreme events.
3. A definition of
              the common body of knowledge for executive level crisis managers.

The
              proposed research is unique in its focus on individual businesses and the
              consequences resulting form terrorist acts.  Previous research efforts have
              addressed larger levels of aggregation such as impacts on regional economies
              resulting from natural hazard events and have typically address the impacts of
              individual disasters.  The methodology for quantifying organizational and
              economic impacts will utilize the limited empirical results obtained in prior
              studies. The complex inter-organizational coordination among private sector
              businesses and between businesses and the government and non-government
              organization resulting from the September 11th attacks will be investigated and
              incorporated into the research products.  The evolution of these relationships
              that include a level of uniqueness for terrorists attacks will be valuable to
              business crisis managers as they prepare for potential future extreme
              events.

The research team comprised of faculty and students from The George
              Washington University and the University of Pittsburgh has the experience and
              credibility to complete the research and report its result with the proposed
              two year research schedule and proposed budget.  This experience and
              credibility will enable the research team to know where to go for the required
              data and information and will provide the initial personal contacts necessary
              for access.  The research will build on the results of a prior NSF supported
              evaluation of the inter-organizational response to the September 11 attacks and
              a current Sloan Foundation grant that is developing the requirements for the
              response to a mass casualty event in a metropolitan area. 

