Title       : ITR: A User-centric Content-based Approach to Indexing, Query and Retrieval of
               Music through Signal Processing and Knowledge-based Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  2003      
File        : a0219912

Award Number: 0219912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : June 30,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shrikanth Narayanan shri@sipi.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elaine Chew  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Chung-Chieh J. Kuo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This research project will develop methods for content-based indexing of music
              databases, using a combination of signal processing and knowledge-based
              methods, design of statistical algorithms for enabling queries using sung or
              hummed melodies, and design of robust search techniques for retrieving the
              queried information, especially in the presence of uncertainty.  The research
              approach, which is based on statistical modeling, is user-centric and comprises
              three major components: (1) Representation and Indexing - musical information
              utilizing theories and knowledge about human musical intuition, and music
              perception and cognition.  (2) Query Formulation and Interaction Modality -
              algorithm design for enabling interaction with music data through humming, a
              natural activity.  (3) Search and Retrieval - algorithm design to match user
              query against the database that will be robust to uncertainties and errors in
              the query generation.

The architecture will include a front-end recognizer,
              that converts the humming signal to notes using a statistical pattern
              recognition approach, which interfaces with a back-end music database that is
              indexed using perceptually viable features.  The search process matching a
              query against indices is formulated as a statistical information retrieval
              problem.  The project will employ progressively rich indexing representation
              including repeating patterns for recurring themes, chord, beat, and key
              information.  Derivation of such music-theoretic knowledge will benefit from a
              principled approach of mathematically modeling tonality in music.  The
              statistical framework allows for handling variability and uncertainty in query
              formulation and retrieval.  It also enables providing for quality of solution
              in the query results.

This work will contribute not only to the specific
              economically significant application area of music, but also to general
              information science knowledge on how to index and search humanly-meaningful
              patterns in complex sensory data.  The project will also serve as a vehicle to
              foster cross-disciplinary graduate and undergraduate research and education.
