Title       : ITR: Protocol Synthesis and Verification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2002    
File        : a0219805

Award Number: 0219805
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Staudhammer                        
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $259982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ganesh C. Gopalakrishnan ganesh@cs.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Konrad Slind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1652,1686,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Projects of national importance critically depend on supercomputers, such as the
              ASCI White supercomputer deployed at Lawrence Livermore Laboratories.
              Supercomputers such as these are comprised of thousands of microprocessors that
              share terabytes of main memory. In order to bring down the cost of these
              `shared memory' supercomputers and to ensure their error-free operation during
              long-running simulations, their design and verification complexity must be
              significantly reduced. A significant amount of this complexity exists in the
              concurrent protocols that allow the microprocessors to reliably share memory.
              The investigators study how to automatically synthesize these protocols from
              higher level descriptions that are easier (and hence quicker) to verify
              correct. This research involves a formal understanding of high performance
              protocols in use this area, the creation of a guided synthesis procedure that
              allows designers to quickly explore the space of protocols and select one that
              meets the performance goals, and then mathematically prove the correctness of
              the high level protocol as well as its translation to a detailed hardware-level
              protocol description. Design and verification tools that the industry can adopt
              are being developed.

The distributed shared memory (DSM) is a dominant
              organizational paradigm for multiprocessor machines.  DSM machines are used as
              desktop computers, supercomputers such as the 512-node ASCI White of Lawrence
              Livermore, and in future sold as single-chip multiprocessor components.  The
              high verification complexity of DSM machines is known to delay the shipping
              dates of microprocessors and parallel processing software. This complexity
              stems from a host of DSM protocol design issues, such as: (i) aggressive
              latency hiding through out-of-order processing, implying the use of complex
              weak memory consistency models; (ii) complex protocol actions that require
              buffer reservation and deadlock avoidance.  This research involves a formal
              understanding of weak memory models (captured as a theorem-prover library), and
              high performance protocols in use this area. It develops guided synthesis
              procedures that allow designers to quickly explore a wide spectrum of
              protocols. Once a high-level protocol meeting estimated performance goals is
              selected, model checking is employed to verify conformance against the chosen
              weak memory model.  A mathematically proven (using theorem proving) translation
              procedure is then applied to obtain a detailed protocol description. This
              description is analyzed for performance and iterated till convergence. Examples
              drawn from industrial multiprocessors are used to illustrate our new methods. 
              Design and verification tools that the industry can adopt are being
              developed.


