Title       : ITR: Display of High-Dimensional Metabolic Networks in the C6 Immersive Virtual
               Reality System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2002 
File        : a0219366

Award Number: 0219366
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eugene N. Bruce                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325132             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie A. Dickerson julied@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eve S. Wurtele  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolina Cruz-Neira  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,1652,9139,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Multidimensional genome-wide gene expression profiling datasets are being
              generated for bacterial, plant and animal systems. This complex data reveals
              the interacting metabolic pathways that control cell metabolism. Ultimately,
              understanding these pathways will increase our ability to predict the effects
              of a given drug on human metabolism, the consequences of changes in a single
              gene on the composition of a seed, or the effect of a given mutation in a
              pre-cancer cell. The goal of this project is to develop a unique integrated
              information workspace that displays heterogeneous biological information using
              three-dimensional graphs, physical cell models, and wireless handheld devices
              for detailed textual information. This project will use a variety of levels of
              immersion, from desktop settings to the C6 immersive virtual environment. 
Two
              experimental applications will be developed.  First, a prototype interactive
              visualization of a metabolic network, the Calvin cycle of photosynthesis, will
              be used to create a living dynamic example of a biochemical pathway for K-12
              students to explore. The pathway will be brought alive by a computer game that
              students explore at their own pace, with rewards for particular achievements
              such as combining the proper molecules. Complex concepts such as the conversion
              of chemical, light and heat energy, metabolic flux, use and synthesis of
              chemical constituents of living organisms can all be illustrated through this
              pathway.  Secondly, three-dimensional visualization will be applied to the
              analysis of the acetyl-CoA metabolic network in the genetic model-plant
              Arabidopsis.  This visualization will be integrated with complex datasets taken
              from a group of genetic mutants in specific steps in this pathway. 
The
              research objectives of this project are to explore methods for interaction with
              three-dimensional graphs and the integration of different models for data
              exploration. The project will be performed by an interdisciplinary group of
              investigators with expertise in biology, bioinformatics, and computer
              engineering, who will apply elements of graph theory, immersive software
              visualization, and fuzzy logic to the problem of metabolic network
              visualization. 


