Title       : ITR: Atomic-Scale Models in Two Year Colleges: Bridging Science and Technology
               with Atomic-Scale Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2002 
File        : a0219345

Award Number: 0219345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $448243             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Tinker bob@concord.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia C. Linn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Boris Berenfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Concord Consortium
	      10 Concord Crossing, Suite 300
	      Concord, MA  01742    978/369-4367

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1657,1666,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses using technology to teach science in an effective and
              agile manner at the Community College level. As jobs requiring science and math
              increase in numbers, the burgeoning bio-technologies being only one example,
              future workers will be asked to learn new skills rapidly.   The NSF-funded
              Molecular Workbench Project (REC 9980620), now in its final year of research
              and testing, has developed several powerful atomic-level models. These models,
              together called the Molecular Workbench, when combined with a scripting
              language that 'talks with" our model, and with Berkeley's WISE program that
              delivers on-line projects in inquiry science, can illuminate some of the
              hardest-to-teach concepts in chemistry, biology and physics.

Community
              Colleges are a critical gateway not only to career training but also, for many,
              to college itself.  Infusing science courses with the powerful interactivity of
              models will allow students not only to master science, but facilitate their
              transfer to specialty courses. The overall goal of this project is to develop
              and evaluate the use of complex, interactive computational models in the
              real-world situations encountered in two-year college technical programs. The
              project will develop and evaluate flexible atomic-scale modeling software as
              well as the software architecture that supports the rapid development and
              deployment of educational materials that utilize this model. The Molecular
              Workbench software is capable of underpinning key physics and some chemistry
              concepts. It is situated between the rigor of professional science and the
              simplifications required by good teaching. This project proposes to develop the
              modeling software's capacity to model chemical bonds, and photon interactions
              as well as new computational and visualization algorithms needed to model
              different features of larger biomolecules (e.g. steric ligand-receptor
              interactions at active sites).  Working together with science advisors and a
              set of community college educators, this project will not only enhance the
              Molecular Workbench software, but will also develop classroom activities using
              the models, and carefully evaluate their use and efficacy. This technology will
              be pilot tested in two-year college courses by providing a range of
              hypermodels, or scaffolded models, that use atomic-scale models to illustrate
              key science topics in the context of typical technical specialties. The
              principle investigators will identify a set of key science topics typically
              taught in biology, chemistry, and physics courses at this level and generate
              hypermodels for each that are based on technologies and processes used in
              specialty programs. They will capitalize on an existing platform for inquiry
              science projects that has been developed at the University of California,
              Berkeley. The Web-based Inquiry Science Environment (WISE) supports students as
              they work collaboratively on inquiry projects. Using WISE, the hypermodels will
              be integrated into complete online instructional units that faculty can adapt
              to their needs without significant changes in the organization or learning
              objectives of current instruction. They will all, however, have a consistent,
              atomic-scale approach that could be the basis of a new, interdisciplinary
              approach to the core sciences. The materials will be developed in collaboration
              with faculty at two-year colleges and curriculum experts, including Springfield
              (MA) Technical Community College (STCC) and others throughout the US recruited
              through the Center for Occupational Research and Development (CORD) and their
              Community College Presidents Council.  The PIs will make all grant-supported
              code available as open source as part of their Open Source Library of
              Educational Technology (OSLET) initiative.  

