Title       : ITR: High Speed Internet Access in Buildings using Heating and Ventilation Ducts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2002      
File        : a0219278

Award Number: 0219278
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kawthar A. Zaki                         
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $295322             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel D. Stancil stancil@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ozan K. Tonguz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0219278
Stancil

High-speed internet access in buildings (residential,
              office, and commercial) is one of the most important challenges that next
              generation wireless networks face today. Further, modern buildings have complex
              communications infrastructures that may include provisions for building
              controls, alarms, wired and wireless telephones, high-speed data services, and
              wireless LANs. At present, these services are provided with separate
              wired/wireless systems for each service.

An alternative approach to
              providing the communications infrastructure in buildings is to recognize that
              every building is already equipped with a microwave distribution system: the
              heating and ventilation (HVAC) ducts. These ducts are designed to carry air  to
              and from all parts of the building, but can also function as hollow metal
              waveguides for microwave signals. Combining the HVAC with communications to
              form a single integrated system could lead to a new paradigm in smart building
              infrastructure. If widely adopted, the impact of this research could be very
              far-reaching, potentially impacting the design and construction of every major
              new building constructed throughout the developed world.

For the most common
              duct sizes and communication frequencies, the ducts behave as multimode
              waveguides. The possibility of using multimode waveguides for microwave
              communications was first suggested more than 50 years ago, although the
              detailed channel characteristics have not been fully investigated. The goals of
              this proposal are to gain an understanding of mode scattering and conversion at
              common duct components such as bends, tees, and wyes, and to investigate how
              the multimode nature of the channel can be used to increase the capacity of the
              channel.

To investigate the mode conversion and scattering, a
              multiple-antenna structure will be constructed that is capable of exciting
              specific modes or combinations of modes. The mode content upon passing through
              a component under study will be determined by scanning the near-field mode
              profile at the open exit end of the duct. The possibility of increasing the
              capacity of the duct will be investigated by constructing a pair of multiple
              antenna arrays for use as input and output and output couplers.
              Multiple-input/multiple-output multipath channel techniques will be used to
              demonstrate realization of two independent channels in the same frequency
              band.

Two graduate students will be fully supported by this research. The
              topic provides a novel context for mastering concepts in microwave
              measurements, wireless channel models, channel capacity, and network
              architecture. Undergraduates will also be involved in the research for project
              credit.

The results from the research will be presented at major
              international wireless conferences, and detailed papers will be submitted to
              archival journals to further disseminate the results. These presentations and
              papers also offer significant opportunities for the graduate students to hone
              their presentation and writing
skills.

Finally, results from the research
              will be used as examples and case studies in the introductory graduate Wireless
              Communications course offered each year. This course typically enrolls 50-60
              students.

