Title       : ITR: Development of Computational Time-Dependent Density-Functional Theory
               Methods for the Study of Electronic Excitations in Correlated Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0219332

Award Number: 0219332
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $373000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adolfo G. Eguiluz eguiluz@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1652,1765,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award under the Information Technology Research initiative supports
              fundamental computational and theoretical research, including algorithm
              development, on dynamical correlations in materials. Methods to be explored
              include time-dependent density functional theory (TDDFT) and Baym-Kadanoff
              conserving approximations.

An aim of this work is to establish a synergy
              between novel computational methods and insight into the dynamical electronic
              correlations in non-trivial solid-state archetypes involving insulators,
              transition metals, rare-earth metal hydrides, and transition-metal oxides.
              Dynamical charge-density and spin density response functions will be
              calculated; these quantities map directly into experimental loss functions, and
              contain unique signatures of correlation. The time-dependent
              optimized-potential method will be implemented. This method, which relies on a
              representation of the exchange-correlation potential as a functional of
              one-electron orbitals, is self-interaction free. So, it represents a promising
              approach for the study of correlated materials. "Hybrid functionals," which
              have proved successful in the description of the ground state of
              antiferromagnetic insulators will also be explored. TDDFT will also be
              implemented without invoking the linear-response regime, by explicitly solving
              the time-dependent Kohn-Sham equation on a real-space grid, propagating the
              states on a time grid. Baym-Kadanoff conserving approximations will also be
              implemented and explored.
The proposed theoretical and computational will
              contribute to the education of graduate students and postdocs in modern
              computational materials physics. College students from disadvantaged
              backgrounds will be actively recruited for research participation during the
              summers through the Ronald McNair program at UTK. 
%%%
This award under the
              Information Technology Research initiative supports fundamental computational
              and theoretical research, including algorithm development on dynamical
              electronic correlations in insulators, transition metals, rare-earth metal
              hydrides, and transition-metal oxides. The work involves the development of new
              computational methods and the exploration of sophisticated theoretical
              formalism with an aim to forge a quantitative theory of electron dynamics and
              transport in real materials. The work will also contribute theoretical guidance
              to concurrent experimental investigations of materials using inelastic x-ray
              scattering. While this is fundamental research, the computational methods
              developed may support future advances in materials and optoelectronic device
              technologies.
***




