Title       : ITR/(DMS): A Computational Environment for Multi-scale MHD Turbulence Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0219282

Award Number: 0219282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $430000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anil E. Deane deane@ipst.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Modeling MHD (magneto-hydrodynamic) turbulence has become
              increasingly
important both in terrestrial and engineering applications, such
              as
fusion devices and plasma propulsion, as well as in space
              and
astrophysical environments such as the solar wind and astrophysical
jets.
               The magneto-hydrodynamic nature of the plasma fluid imposes
constraints on
              the numerical procedures involved.  Likewise, modeling in
the turbulent regime
              -- for turbulence is ubiquitous -- also imposes
constraints and challenges on
              the numerical procedures employed.  The
numerical approach and demands of
              computation time and accuracy
translate into algorithmic (or software)
              advances which can avail the
hardware --  itself advancing rapidly.  In this
              project these advances
entail: Adaptively refined grids, where fine resolution
              only in regions
of interest reduces overall CPU requirements; MHD shock
              capturing
methods, which improve accuracy of the calculation; parallel
              computing
techniques, which take advantage of the availability of
              multiple
processors and memory and cache hierarchy; and sub-grid models,
              which
allow coarser grids than otherwise for turbulent regimes.  The
              analysis
of the resulting large multi-block multi-processor data
              requires
advanced data visualization tools to examine the physics, the
              raison
d'etre for the calculations.  The project will develop a
              computational
environment, consisting of a 3D MHD simulation code with
              adaptive grid
refinement capabilities, complex  time-dependent boundary
              conditions and
optimized to run under MPI on various parallel computers, and
              a
visualization system that can handle multi-block multi-processor MHD
              AMR
data.

In this end-to-end modeling and discovery process,
              information
technology (IT) plays a critical role.  From software
              engineering
principles that result in robust codes, and smarter data
              structures that
are required for AMR, to single-node optimization and
              better
communication strategies on parallel architectures, to
              visualization
tool development and implementation, IT makes possible
              knowledge
discovery through simulation in a more efficient and orderly
              fashion.
The requirements for MHD turbulence modeling being so considerable,
              this
efficiency of IT translates into enabling the science or
              technology.
I.e. without the application of these IT principles,
              physically
important and interesting regimes would not be analyzed.  The
              results of
this project will significantly enhance the modeling capabilities
              of
diverse flows and will specifically be applied to the problem
              of
heliospheric magnetic field configuration and solar wind turbulence. 
              3D
MHD simulations of the heliospheric fields and flows that
              include
rotation, shear, waves, turbulence, current sheets,
              pressure-balanced
structures, and interaction regions, which thus represent
              most of the
major physical effects of importance, will be performed.  The
              effort will
enable future studies on particle propagation and magnetic
              field
configuration for "space weather" effects on Earth.  The project
              will
directly train a post-doctoral scholar and a graduate student
              in
relevant physics and computational mathematics; project results will
              be
communicated to the community via conference and journal publications
and
              the web, and through classes taught by the PI.

