Title       : ITR: A Portable Laboratory for High-Resolution Three-Dimensional Digital Imaging
               of Craniodental Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 13,  2002 
File        : a0219104

Award Number: 0219104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Theodore M. Cole colet@umkc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Caroline E. Rinaldi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Kansas City
	      5100 Rockhill Road
	      Kansas City, MO  641102446    816/235-1303

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1686,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project aims to establish a portable laboratory for high-resolution,
              three-dimensional digital imaging of craniodental morphology in primates and
              other mammals.  This objective is designed to help meet a long-range goal of
              better understanding organismal diversity and the mechanisms and processes of
              evolution.  The laboratory will use state-of-the-art, automated moire fringe
              projection to acquire three-dimensional "digital specimens" that are accurate
              to microscopic tolerances.  In addition to being very accurate, the laboratory
              will be easily portable, making it ideal for remote use in museums.  The
              laboratory will be used for data acquisition in a multifaceted research program
              that uses morphometrics, phylogenetics, the study of growth and development,
              and biomechanics to understand how mammals evolve and adapt to their
              environments.  The project's major applications include research that is
              specifically focused on the skull and dentition, because of their important
              roles in the adaptations of all mammalian radiations.  Three current,
              large-scale research projects will use the laboratory: 1) an evolutionary study
              of skull form and function in extant and fossil strepsirrhine primates; 2)
              theoretical and functional morphology of the teeth in primates and other small
              mammals; and 3) development, function, and evolution of evergrowing teeth in
              extant and fossil rodents.  In addition, there is a series of smaller research
              projects (with collaborators at other universities) that will use the
              laboratory.  All of these projects are focused on the same goal of better
              understanding mammalian diversity and also involve studies of craniodental (as
              well as soft tissue) form in primates and other groups of mammals.  Each
              project will require the development of new and innovative quantitative
              methods, increasing the breadth of evolutionary questions that can be asked and
              hypotheses that can be tested.

The project has a number of significant
              impacts on research in physical anthropology, mammalogy, and vertebrate
              paleontology: 1) the laboratory significantly advances the development of a
              large-scale research program that is dedicated to better understanding the
              patterns and processes of evolution and adaptation in primates and other
              mammals; 2) the major applications of the project should lead to new
              discoveries of the biological roles of craniodental structures in the
              interactions between mammals and their environments; 3) the archiving of
              digital specimens helps to advance the goal of "museums without walls", where
              morphological specimens can be made freely and easily available to students and
              senior researchers throughout the worldwide scientific community; and 4)
              establishment of the laboratory contributes significantly to the interface
              between research and education, increasing the use of virtual-reality
              technology for undergraduate and professional education, including use of the
              Internet and the World Wide Web.  More importantly, the laboratory should
              provide increased research opportunities for undergraduate and professional
              students in an urban university where there are significant enrollments of
              minorities who are currently underrepresented in the scientific community.

