Title       : ITR: Intelligent Joint Evolution of Data and Information:An Integrated Framework
               for Drought Monitoring and Mitigation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2002    
File        : a0219970

Award Number: 0219970
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 15,  2002    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ashok K. Samal samal@cse.unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leen-Kiat Soh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald A. Wilhite  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kenneth G. Hubbard  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William J. Waltman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1655,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Water is a strategic resource in the U.S. and impacts the sustainability and
              livability of both rural and urban communities. It is therefore critical to
              build monitoring and early warning systems for hydrologic events that inventory
              water resources and accurately model its usage and its impact on communities
              across multiple scales. Droughts have long been associated with Great Plain's
              environments from the "Dust Bowl" years. Many drought indicators such as the
              Palmer Drought Severity Index and Standardized Precipitation Index have been
              developed to model the intensity (severity) of meteorological drought. 
              However, drought is a complex process that also has hydrological, agricultural,
              and socioeconomic components. Hydrological drought indicators are often treated
              as point observations in watersheds, reservoirs, lakes, and streams and these
              indicators have not been extended to spatio-temporal drought regions,
              reflecting the natural landscape.  We propose an integrated framework that
              views droughts through various windows that can provide higher resolution,
              better detect emergence and closure of events, as well as their spatio-temporal
              impacts.  The framework is based on an innovative methodology called the
              Intelligent Joint Evolution of Data and Information (IJEDI) that evolves data
              and information at multiple temporal (windows) and spatial scales to derive
              support decisions.  In this methodology, data and information are considered as
              raw materials and products, respectively, with which the concepts of Quality of
              Data (QoD) and Quality of Information (QoI) are computed.  This research will
              develop an information science-based framework to model droughts as they evolve
              from meteorological episodes to agricultural and hydrologic events. 


