Title       : Valuing Mobile Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2002 
File        : a0219235

Award Number: 0219235
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  2002    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Iain M. Cockburn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernst R. Berndt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1353,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Since the introduction of the IBM PC in 1981, "personal" computers have
              undergone rapid technological innovation in terms of performance, storage,
              communication capability, and portability. While significant effort has been
              directed at quantifying the price-performance relationship in PC's,
              surprisingly little attention has been paid to portability. This attribute is
              evidently highly valued by users: sales of mobile computers (laptops and
              palmtops) account for one third of total PC sales and are increasing rapidly,
              despite very substantial price premiums over desktop models with comparable
              performance.  Using hedonics and other econometric techniques, this project
              evaluates the economic benefits to users arising from improved performance and
              rapid diffusion of mobile computers, through examination of the price, welfare,
              and demand implications of the emergence of portability as a "new good" in the
              PC market. 

This grant supports the data collection phase of the project. An
              existing large database of PC computer prices and characteristics will be
              extended and updated. This effort will include gathering data on sales volumes
              by model, as well as on prices and characteristics of "new" devices such as
              palmtops and PDAs, which have not been tracked in the past.  Data for earlier
              years will be "back-filled" to increase the frequency of observations to
              quarterly or monthly. 

Rapidly falling prices and continuing technological
              innovation will continue to drive the diffusion of mobile devices into many
              areas of economic and social interaction. This work will provide insights into
              the economic consequences of this important trend, particularly those related
              to consumer welfare, tradeoffs between portability and performance, and
              complementarity/substitutability of fixed and mobile computers. As government
              statistical agencies continue to develop procedures for tracking price changes
              and technological progress in computing-intensive sectors, this work will also
              make contributions to the vigorous debate on evaluating the contribution of IT
              to growth and productivity. 

