Title       : ITR: Comparative Genomic Analysis of Signal Transduction in Prokaryotes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a0219079

Award Number: 0219079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $142000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igor B. Jouline igor.zhulin@biology.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1655,1686,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              EIA-0219079
Jouline, Igor B
Georgia Technology Research Corporation -
              GIT

ITR: Comparative Genomic Analysis of Signal Transduction in
              Prokaryotes

Whole genome sequencing projects revolutionize our understanding
              of biology and open up new opportunities for fundamental research and its
              applications to medicine, agriculture and environment. Accumulating genomic
              data generates the need for rapid biological interpretation of genome sequences
              and integration of this knowledge into databases of genomic information for
              immediate use by biomedical and environmental scientists. Proteins comprising
              signal transduction networks control most vital functions in any given
              organism, beneficial or harmful. However, current interpretation of genomic
              data for signal transduction proteins fails to provide sufficient information
              for understanding their biological role. The goal of this research project is
              to significantly improve prediction of biological functions for signal
              transduction proteins and to unravel potentially novel signal transduction
              mechanisms and pathways in various beneficial and pathogenic microorganisms.
              This will be achieved through a systematic computational approach, which
              integrates in-depth analysis of functional elements (domains) of individual
              proteins and evolutionary and genome context information. The results obtained
              will be incorporated into primary databases and will allow automated detection
              of biologically important proteins. The research proposed in this project will
              contribute to a better understanding of the organization and evolution of
              signal transduction systems (fundamental aspect).  This, in turn, will assist
              experimental scientists in identification of targets for antimicrobial drug
              design in pathogens and in improving beneficial capabilities of microorganisms
              used for biofertilization and bioremediation purposes (applied aspect).
