Title       : ITR: Power Efficient Multimedia Wireless Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 15,  2002    
File        : a0219822

Award Number: 0219822
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julia Abrahams                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $400000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Goodman dgoodman@poly.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yao Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elza Erkip  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : ,1652,9215,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The large number and diversity of quality of service (QoS) measures present a
              significant challenge to the design and operation of multimedia wireless
              communications systems. Each information source (data, audio, video) has its
              own metrics of signal quality and the network has an aggregate measure of
              capacity for each source (for example, Erlangs of telephone traffic and data
              throughput). In addition to signal quality and network capacity, the battery
              life of a portable terminal has a major effect on the value of mobile
              information services to consumers. Existing knowledge of quality optimization
              is generally confined to studies of individual sources. In the 1990s, a
              significant body of knowledge was created on radio resource management for
              cellular telephone communications. More recently, the research community has
              turned its attention to wireless data and video. Each study focuses on one or
              two quality measures for one type of information: for example, power and
              distortion for video; power and throughput for data.  

This project takes a
              more comprehensive view by considering the collection of QoS measures to be a
              point in a multidimensional space. Given a system design and a set of operating
              conditions, the achievable points constitute a feasibility volume, with optimum
              points on the surface. Within this formulation, we study simultaneous
              transmission of data and video by analyzing projections of the volume onto
              various combinations of QoS dimensions including: 
video distortion;
data
              throughput for each source;
data utility for each source;
total power
              dissipation (signal processing power and transmission power) in a
              terminal;
number of simultaneous video transmissions at a base
              station;
aggregate base station throughput;
aggregate base station
              utility.

The emphasis is on power efficient communications and the results
              provide guidance on joint adaptation of the following properties of terminals
              that transmit signals to the same base station: transmission power and rate in
              data terminals and transmission power, compression, and channel coding in video
              terminals.
 

