Title       : ITR-The ARCHway Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  2002    
File        : a0219924

Award Number: 0219924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bhavani Thuraisingham                   
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $223717             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin S. Kiernan kiernan@uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerzy W. Jaromczyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alexander Dekhtyar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : ,1655,9150,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The ARCHway Project (Architecture for Research in Computing for the Humanities
              through collaborative research, teaching, and learning) will institute a
              technological infrastructure, an Edition Production Technology (EPT), for
              collaborative work at all levels between computer science and humanities
              disciplines to identify and solve problems of mutual importance in building
              image-based electronic editions of significant cultural materials. We will
              develop the EPT to implement and integrate both new and already available
              software applications, to construct a digital library of previously unedited
              Old English manuscripts as a testbed for our solutions, and to distribute the
              digital library to the public.

We will design formal methodologies for
              collaborative teaching and research, based on our practical goals. We will
              maintain an open-standards architecture with modular, extensible, interoperable
              components to coordinate research and development of novel methods, tools, and
              associated technologies. The EPT will guide the definition and coordination of
              well-encapsulated collaborative student projects using our testbed from
              semester to semester, student to student, year to year. The PIs will lead teams
              of students in both disciplines in focussed research projects related to
              documenting, editing, storing, accessing, searching, and disseminating digital
              libraries of image-based electronic editions.

ARCHway will produce a system
              for building digital libraries of image-based scholarly editions for the
              humanities.  This system will be used to produce electronic editions of a
              number of previously unedited Old English manuscripts. The research results of
              this project will lay the groundwork for sophisticated technical tools to
              interpret, assemble, disseminate, and maintain image-based scholarly editions
              on a continuing basis.



