Title       : The Analysis of Material from Archaic Cerros de Trincheras Sites in Chihuahua,
               Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  2002  
File        : a0219185

Award Number: 0219185
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2002     
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99452              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Hard rhard@utsa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Roney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mexico-North Research Netw
	      318 W. Houston St.
	      San Antonio, TX  78205    210/857-9018

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With NSF funding, Robert Hard at the University of Texas at San Antonio and John
              Roney of the Bureau of Land Management have been exploring why hunters and
              gatherers began to farm in the Southwest. The shift to farming is perhaps one
              of the most important historical developments to humankind as agriculture is
              the economic basis of virtually all civilizations, past and present. In 1997
              Hard and Roney began archaeological excavations at a dramatic hilltop
              settlement in northwest Chihuahua, Mexico about 125 miles southwest of El Paso,
              Texas. On this hill, three thousand years ago, Native Americans constructed
              over 500 terraces overlooking the surrounding desert grasslands and the Rio
              Casas Grandes. This site and a series of associated settlements have proven to
              be the largest, early settled farming communities in Northwest Mexico and the
              American Southwest and pushes the age of settled farming for the region back
              1,500 years. The terraced site of Cerro Juanaquena has revealed numerous
              artifacts including spear points, pipes, food grinding implements, and house
              remains. Hard and Roney are examining these materials to consider the causes
              and consequences of these precocious settlements. They argue that the terraces
              were built, not as agricultural features, but to form flat living space so they
              could live atop this highly defensible hill and repeal potential raiders.  The
              current NSF funding will be used to complete the laboratory analyses of the
              artifacts so a book and other publications may be completed. Hard and Roney's
              work has already resulted in numerous scientific publications including an
              article in Science. National newspapers, including the Washington Post, New
              York Times, and Los Angeles Times, as well as broadcasts and publications in
              Canada, Mexico, and Europe have reported on their work. Hard and Roney have
              given 18 public presentations in Washington D.C., Texas, New Mexico, and
              Arizona and another 20 presentations at international, national, and regional
              scientific meetings. 
