Title       : ITR: Understanding Stress Resistance Mechanisms in Plants: Multimodal Models
               Integrating Experimental Data, Databases, and the Literature
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2002 
File        : a0219322

Award Number: 0219322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eugene N. Bruce                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2002 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $499973             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lenwood S. Heath heath@cs.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Layne T. Watson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth G. Alscher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Boris I. Chevone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Naren Ramakrishnan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1141      PHYSIOLOGY AND BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1145,1652,1686,9139,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Plants have evolved to cope with a variety of environmental stresses, including
              drought, heat, cold, salt, pathogens, and insects. The imposition of stress on
              a plant results in the marshaling of genomic defense mechanisms. Some defense
              mechanisms are common to the response to multiple stresses (e.g., drought and
              salt), while others are more specific.  Defense mechanisms may interact
              collaboratively to combat a stress or may work independently to repair multiple
              kinds of damage inflicted by stress.  This research proceeds on the premise
              that functional genomic and bioinformatics approaches together with data from
              drought stress experiments and information from multiple biological information
              sources can elucidate relationships among and within stress mechanisms.  This
              project will capture these relationships in representations or models called
              multimodal models.  Sources of biological information that will be utilized
              include (1) data from drought-stress experiments, especially gene expression
              data from microarray hybridizations; (2) sequence, protein, and other
              databases; and (3) the biological literature.  Multimodal models will represent
              these multiple aspects of biological knowledge and of biological systems
              themselves: responses over time; response variation by subcellular
              compartments; uncertainty (our lack of complete knowledge of cell state); and
              the dynamic changes in biological information due to the boom in biological
              data and knowledge. These models are readily visualized, explored, analyzed,
              and extended via computational means.  Current models for drought stress
              response will be available via the project web site.
The microarray
              experiments for studying drought stress in loblolly pine and Arabidopsis
              thaliana (a model plant for biological research) will be designed, managed, and
              analyzed by the Expresso system, a microarray experiment management system for
              experimental design, data capture, and data analysis. The experimental and
              computational methods used in this research will have an impact on the ability
              of biologists to address additional complex, interrelated hypotheses using
              microarray technology and other tools of modern genomics. The multimodal
              networks will have predictive power that will enable biologists to explore
              hypotheses computationally in advance of experiments, to obtain estimates of
              probabilities associated with various drought response mechanisms given
              hypothesized drought stress conditions, to decide on future experiments based
              on the estimated likelihood of a large yield of information from the
              experiments, and to serve as the basis for mathematical models that have more
              quantitative predictive power.  Enhanced understanding of responses to drought
              and other stresses in plants will ultimately benefit agriculture and forestry
              in the form of hardier crops and trees.   

