Title       : An Image Thesaurus for Content Based Search Using Texture and Color
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9704785

Award Number: 9704785
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Zemankova                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202466             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bangalore S. Manjunath manj@ece.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of this project is to develop an image thesaurus to facilitate
              content based search of large digital image/video libraries. As computers and
              communications technology advance, limitations of current information
              processing tools are becoming more apparent, and is particularly visible in the
              context of media rich data such as satellite and medical imagery databases. The
              image or visual thesaurus provides a conceptual framework for similarity search
              and indexing of such multimedia data. At the time of data ingest, image
              features of interest, such as color, texture, spatial location and shape, are
              computed and clustered to give a feature code book. Application specific
              information and user requirements are used to make this code book construction
              adaptive. The mapping to code words is hierarchical and groupings of several
              basic features can be used to represent high level structured visual concepts.
              Key components in this thesaurus construction include new spatio-temporal
              segmentation algorithms, and dimensionality reduction and learning algorithms
              for efficient search and indexing in the feature space. Potential applications
              of this thesaurus include geographic information systems, medical imagery,
              searching on the Internet using image content, and in new image/video coding
              standards such as MPEG-7. A prototype retrieval system incorporating an image
              thesaurus will be developed and its effectiveness will be demonstrated on
              searching airphoto databases and stock photo galleries.
