Title       : Algebraic and Geometric Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9704637

Award Number: 9704637
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $518680             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. James Milgram milgram@math.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph L. Cohen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. Kerckhoff  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704637  Milgram       The research in this project is led by three principal
              investigators  from the Mathematics Department at Stanford University: R.L.
              Cohen,  S.P Kerckhoff, and R.J. Milgram.  Cohen and Milgram both have research 
              projects that involve studying the algebraic topology of spaces ("moduli 
              spaces") that arise as the set of solutions to equations coming from  Geometry
              and Theoretical Physics.  These include the Yang-Mills equations  defining
              instantons on four dimensional manifolds, and the Cauchy-Riemann  equations,
              which define holomorphic structures on maps from surfaces to a  variety of
              important target manifolds.  In addition, Cohen plans to use  techniques from
              Algebraic Geometry and Topology to study a holomorphic  version of the K-theory
              of an algebraic variety.  These lead to invariants  of holomorphic bundles in a
              systematic way.  Milgram plans to continue to  study the emerging connections
              between the structure of finite groups and  homotopy theory.  He will also
              study the topology of certain special types  of function spaces with
              applications to both homotopy theory and other  areas of mathematics.  S.P.
              Kerckhoff studies low dimensional topology and  geometry.  In this project he
              plans to continue his work on hyperbolic  geometric structures in dimension 3. 
              This includes studying structures with  singularities along links and along
              graphs.  He will use both combinatorial  and analytic methods.       Recent
              interactions between mathematics and physics have  brought new ideas and
              problems into mathematics related in part to  the physicists' desire better to
              understand quantum field theory.   Among the mathematical results of this
              interaction have been  extensive new information about the geometry of 3- and
              4-dimensional  spaces, including counterexamples to basic conjectures  and new
              structure results.  The major focus of this project is to  apply much more
              advanced results from deep, well-developed areas of  mathematics, such as
              algebraic topology and homotopy theory , to  these new ideas and problems, as
              well as to related questions.  ***
