Title       : Stochastic and Numerical Matrix Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9704847

Award Number: 9704847
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $169000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl D. Meyer meyer@ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                STOCHASTIC AND NUMERICAL MATRIX ANALYSIS  DMS-9704847  Carl D. Meyer      
              TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. This project focuses on issues from three computational 
              areas in applied mathematics.    1.  The first set of problems concerns the
              analysis and computation of      eigensystems of stochastic matrices and
              associated Markov chain models.      Special attention is devoted to nearly
              uncoupled Markov chains. These are      large systems comprised of collections
              of loosely coupled subsystems, and      the purpose is to analyze and compute
              the stability and steady state nature      of such systems with
              aggregation/disaggregation (or A/D) algorithms.      Specific goals are to
              provide a more concrete foundation for analyzing (A/D)      errors through the
              use of ergodicity coefficients instead of tradition norm      based bounds; to
              provide a better understanding of the nature of errors in      multilevel A/D
              processes thereby facilitating improvements in the      development and
              performance of multilevel A/D algorithms; and to develop new      techniques
              for uncoupling the eigensystems for stochastic matrices.  2.  The second set of
              problems focuses on the development and analysis of direct      projection and
              implicit factorization algorithms used to solve large sparse      systems of
              linear algebraic equations encountered in the numerical solution      of
              partial and ordinary differential equations. Specific goals are to gain      an
              advantage when solving positive definite systems by means of      conjugate
              gradient-like methods on high-performance vector and parallel      computers by
              utilizing implicit factorization algorithms to construct      explicit
              approximate inverse preconditioners.  3.  The third set of problems stems from
              manufacturing applications involving      the necessity to describe or measure
              a manufactured item at various points      on its surface in order to build an
              accurate computer model so that the item      can be machined by automatic
              tooling devices. When these description s or      measurements are used in the
              manufacturing process, constraints are      automatically generated by computer
              codes to account for complex geometries,      to insure smoothness, and to
              account for material variability in the      surfaces being tooled. But these
              computer codes usually generate many      redundant constraints, and it is a
              significant problem is to distinguish      the necessary constraints from the
              redundant ones. This facet of the      project is dedicated to developing new
              numerical algorithms for making such      distinctions. The strategy is to
              improve on costly rank-revealing      techniques currently used to identify
              redundancies by developing new      sparsity-preserving, row-action algorithms
              for estimating      the smallest singular value/vector of a matrix.            
                         NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION. This project focuses on issues from three
               computational areas in applied mathematics.    1.  The first set of problems
              concerns computations involving stochastic      matrices and associated Markov
              chains. The theory and application of Markov      chain models is a recurring
              theme in many problems from engineering,      economics, and physical and 
              social science. In particular, analyzing and      computing steady-state
              probabilities associated with large-scale Markov      chains is a fundamental
              concern in areas such as queueing models and      networks, telecommunications,
              computer performance evaluation, economic      modeling and forecasting,
              manufacturing systems modeling, and more      generally, in applications where
              discrete models are used to understand and      analyze the dynamics of large
              evolutionary systems. This project emphasizes      computational as well as
              theoretical issues, and special attention is      devoted to nearly uncoupled
              problems. These are large systems comprised of      collections of loosely
              coupled subsystems (e.g., the economy of the United      States), and the
              purpose is to analyze and compute the stability and      stea dy-state nature
              of such systems with techniques known as      aggregation/disaggregation.
              Specific goals are to sharpen and extend the      theory of errors in
              aggregation/disaggregation processes and to develop new     
              aggregation/disaggregation algorithms for estimating steady-state behavior     
              in nearly uncoupled systems.  2.  The second set of problems focuses on the
              development and analysis of      a new class of algorithms for solving systems
              of linear algebraic equations      arising in the numerical solution of partial
              and ordinary differential      equations of the type typically encountered in
              solving large-scale problems      in engineering and physical science. The
              algorithms under development are      aimed at high-performance multiprocessor
              computers  3.  The third set of problems stems from manufacturing applications
              involving      the necessity to describe or measure a manufactured item at
              various points      on its surface in order to build an accurate computer model
              so that the item      can be machined by automatic tooling devices. When these
              descriptions or      measurements are used in the manufacturing process,
              constraints are      automatically generated by computer codes to account for
              complex geometries,      to insure smoothness, and to account for material
              variability in the      surfaces being tooled. But these computer codes usually
              generate many redundant      constraints, and it is a significant problem is to
              distinguish the necessary      constraints from the redundant ones. This facet
              of the project is dedicated      to developing new numerical algorithms for
              making such distinctions.
