Title       : Localized Electronic States in Amorphous Semiconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1999     
File        : a9704946

Award Number: 9704946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: P. Craig Taylor craig@physics.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704946  Taylor  This is a renewal project for the study of the electronic  and
              structural properties of disordered semiconductors.  This research will answer
              questions concerning the  structure, defects and doping mechanisms in Group IV 
              chalcogenide glasses at low chalcogen concentrations and in  metal chalcogenide
              glasses at high metal concentrations.  A  second important component of the
              research will answer  questions concerning the microscopic origins of
              optically-  induced paramagnetism and of photodarkening in chalcogenide 
              glasses, especially those in the two model systems mentioned  above.  The
              scientific approach involves a broadly based  program that utilizes several
              growth techniques, magnetic  resonance spectroscopy, optical spectroscopies,
              various  combinations of optical and magnetic resonance techniques,  and
              electrical measurements.  The specific objectives are  (1) to understand
              details of the local order, (2) to study  the intrinsic defects, and their
              associated metastabilities,  as a function of average coordination number, and
              (4) to  identify the defects that contribute to photodarkening.  %%%  This is a
              renewal proposal for a continuing study of  amorphous semiconductors. 
              Amorphous semiconductors provide  inexpensive alternatives to crystalline
              semiconductors for  many electronic applications.  One important example is the
               use of amorphous silicon for the switches (thin-film  transistors) in
              flat-panel displays for personal computers  and flat television screens.  The
              use of these materials is  hindered by changes that occur with time in the
              various  electronic or optical devices that are currently  manufactured.  The
              information gained in this research will  greatly increase our understanding of
              the behavior of  electrons which are the carriers of electrical current.  This
              information will confirm or refute specific models that  have been developed to
              apply generally to all amorphous  semiconductors.  For example, the most
              important property of  semiconductors that mak es them useful as switches of 
              electricity is the ability to change the electrical  conductivity dramatically
              via a process known as doping.  This research will result in a more general
              understanding of  doping mechanisms in amorphous semiconductors - an 
              understanding that can eventually be used to manufacture  more reliable
              devices.  ***
