Title       : Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Relativity and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9704760

Award Number: 9704760
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68609              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gilbert A. Weinstein weinstei@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will address a number of problems, mainly in the following two
              related areas: harmonic maps, and the Einstein equations. The investigator will
              study the asymptotic behavior of harmonic maps into negatively curved spaces
              near prescribed singularities. This study is motivated by, and has applications
              to, the problem of stationary black holes in general relativity. The PI also
              proposes to generalize blow-up results for wave maps. Wave maps which develop
              singularities from regular initial data will be constructed from harmonic maps
              defined on hyperbolic space. In the area of general relativity, the
              investigator will continue his work on equilibrium configurations of co-axially
              rotating charged black holes. A uniqueness theorem is sought independent of the
              number of black holes present. Also proposed is the study of the topology of
              the space of initial data for the Einstein equations, and questions related to
              equilibrium configurations of rotating and nonrotating perfect fluid bodies.
              Harmonic maps are mappings between Riemannian manifolds  (geometrical spaces)
              which satisfy nonlinear elliptic partial differential equations.  They were
              first introduced on two dimensional domains by C. B. Morrey Jr. in the 1950's
              in his study of Plateau's Problem in Riemannian manifolds: to find a soap film
              which spans a given contour. Harmonic maps have since found numerous
              applications in physics, geometry, and other fields. Harmonic maps with
              prescribed singularities will be used in this project to model equilibrium
              configurations of co-axially rotating charged black holes. Understanding these
              configurations is an important step in the future study of the evolution
              equations. Wave maps are the dynamical counterparts of harmonic maps. They
              satisfy nonlinear hyperbolic partial differential equations. These equations
              have been studied by many researchers as a first step in a program to
              understand more complex evolution equations of classical field theory such as
              the Einstein field equations of general rel ativity. The Einstein field
              equations model the large scale evolution of spacetime. One of the interesting
              features of this class of nonlinear evolution equations is that solutions
              starting from regular data may sometimes yield blow-up after a finite time
              laps, leading to singularities. The investigator will construct and study wave
              maps with such singularities. Another problem, with applications to
              astrophysics, to be addressed in this project will be to construct a model for
              relativistic dense rotating stars in equilibrium.
