Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Knots, 3-Manifolds and Thin Position
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9704140

Award Number: 9704140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87400              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abigail A. Thompson thompson@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704140  Thompson       A fundamental question in 3-dimensional topology is the 
              classification problem for 3-manifolds, that is, to find a complete  list of
              3-manifolds in which each space appears precisely once.  The  classification of
              2-dimensional manifolds provides a model of the kind  of classification sought
              for 3-manifolds.  A crucial step in the  classification problem was completed
              by J. H. Rubinstein in 1992, when  he described an algorithm to decide if a
              given 3-manifold was  homeomorphic to the 3-sphere, the "simplest" 3-manifold. 
              His  arguments used minimal surface theory in the context of a triangulated 
              3-manifold.  There is a deep connection between this type of minimal  surface
              theory and the notion of thin position for knots in the  3-sphere, an idea
              introduced by D. Gabai.  This interplay between  standard knot theory and
              minimal surface theory provides significant  new techniques to explore
              outstanding problems.  This project explores  two particular applications of
              these techniques.  The first is the  extension of the standard 1-parameter idea
              of thin position for a knot  to multi-parameter families.  These extensions are
              used to approach  some long-standing problems in knot theory.  Connections
              between  multi-parameter thin position and other well-known invariants, such as
               the energy of a knot, another notion of efficient imbedding, are also 
              described.  The second application is to a new type of irreducibility  for
              Heegaard splittings that divides splittings into two groups, one  of which is
              atoroidal.  The techniques will be used to seek injective  immersed surfaces in
              one group and negatively curved metrics in the  other.       People originally
              thought the earth was flat.  This was a reasonable  hypothesis, arrived at by
              considering the local information available  at the time.  Similarly, by
              considering the local information  available to us, we might hypothesize that
              the spatial universe we  live in is 3-dimensional Euclidean space.  Evidence
              from physics makes  th is unlikely.  The question then is, what is the
              3-dimensional shape  of the universe we live in?  Is it the 3-dimensional
              analog of the  sphere?  Perhaps -- but here we encounter a deep mathematical
              problem.  Unlike 2-dimensional spaces, which are well-understood, there is no 
              list of all 3-dimensional spaces.  So we don't even understand what  the
              possibilities are for the shape of the 3-dimensional universe.  Perhaps the
              most important problem in low-dimensional topology today  is to find such a
              list.  This project uses the interplay between new  minimization techniques
              from piecewise linear geometry and knot theory  to explore aspects of this
              problem.  ***
