Title       : Renormalization and Global Bifurcations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9704867

Award Number: 9704867
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54010              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles Tresser   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : IBM T J Watson Res Ctr
	      
	      Yorktown Heights, NY  10598    /   -

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the greatest novelties of recent non-linear dynamics is the new meaning
              of a qualitative theory: it is no more a weak theory but a theory that allows
              one to understand changes in the topology associated to dynamical behavior when
              one varies the parameters controlling an experiment. Mathematically, one has to
              know how to describe complicated bifurcation structures to be able to make
              qualitative predictions about an experiment. In the non-linear regime, one
              cannot hope for many quantitative predictions (or quantitative tests on the
              validity of models). It is then important to remember that, in the non-linear
              aspects of classical statistical mechanics, the theory can only predict numbers
              at transition points.  At some transitions, the main observables are universal
              in that they do not depend on a precise experiment but on a small number of
              (generically) small integer numbers. Not so surprisingly, most of the numbers
              non-linear mathematics can predict about non-linear sciences are also universal
              and associated to transitions. These transitions can be local (and one then
              uses local bifurcation theory; for instance one describes in this way most
              instances of onset of periodic behavior) or global (like the transition from
              order to chaos). In the global case, as in statistical mechanics, the main
              theoretical tool is a renormalization group, indeed, essentially the same sort
              of renormalization group as in statistical mechanics.  The goal of this
              research is twofold.  One aspect of the work will involve locating new examples
              of renormalization groups for dynamics and using them to understand dynamical
              properties.  A second aspect will involve investigating the bifurcation
              structure of parameterized families of maps which exhibit both simple and
              complex dynamical behavior, focussing in particular on the transition between
              order and chaos (more precisely the transition between zero and positive
              topological entropy).  The  basic aim of the project is furthering the
              understanding of complicated dynamic s and the transition from order to chaos
              which appears as essential to understanding climate changes and other major
              ecological events such as earthquakes or population dynamics. More
              specifically, renormalization is essential in explaining a variety of
              phenomena, from the transition to turbulence to the dynamics of some basic
              pieces of electronic circuits such as digital filters. Global bifurcation
              theory is the branch of mathematics which addresses our need to understand
              quantities which vary in time under adjustable or varying constraints.
