Title       : Complexity in the Constructive and Intuitionistic Theory of Reals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 5,  1999    
File        : a9704337

Award Number: 9704337
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $76943              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Shore shore@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Miklos Erdelyi-Szabo  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed project includes research into topics in the constructive and
              intuitionistic theory of the reals. The research will focus on the constructive
              theory of real closed fields and on the various topological models of the
              reals. Particular emphasis will be placed on the complexity of the theories
              under investigation and on the decidable fragments of these theories including
              the questions of definability and axiomatizations. Results about the models
              help to find fragments of the language whose truth in the real number system
              (as defined by  Bishop) can be decided, and this fact is provable
              constructively, or in an  intuitionistic metatheory. Using the decidability
              results, the next step is to look for first order axioms for the decidable
              fragments of the constructive and/or intuitionistic theory of real closed
              ordered fields and to analyze the structure of elements and sets definable in 
              these  fragments. The work then would turn to the direction initiated by
              Scowcroft: towards the model-theoretic study of the relative strength of
              axiomatizations of a constructive first order theory of the reals.  Connections
              to recent developments about the decision procedure of S2S and to related
              game-theoretic approach to concurrent programming are to be  investigated, as
              well as the relationship between the theory of a Heyting algebra and the
              properties of the corresponding model for intuitionistic analysis.     In most
              cases computations involve real numbers. The proposal's aim is to look at the
              structure of reals - for instance, (maybe infinite) decimal fractions with
              addition and multiplication - from a constructive point of view. This means,
              for example, that it is not enough to show that a real number, or a function
              from reals to reals with particular properties exists, a method is required to
              find arbitrary approximations of the number or of the values of the function in
              question. The first step in this practical approach is to find constructive
              proofs that questions like "is there a number/funct ion with such and such
              properties?" can be answered. Then from the proof itself, if the answer is yes,
              one may obtain the method mentioned above. One way to approach this problem is
              by looking at various models of the constructive/intuitionistic theory of the
              reals, and this is the starting point of the present proposal. The results then
              help to find the method when there is such, and also to find the problems where
              in general there is no such method.
