Title       : Discontinuous Data and Media in Physical Phenomena Modeled by Hamiltion-Jacobi
               Equations and Conservation Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9704864

Award Number: 9704864
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67203              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel N. Ostrov   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Clara University
	      500 El Camino Real
	      Santa Clara, CA  950530250    408/554-4764

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9704864    Ostrov     This project is aimed at resolving issues of uniqueness
              and  computability for a class of Hamilton-Jacobi equations and related 
              Conservation laws that contain discontinuous spatial data.  It will  begin with
              the Hamilton-Jacobi equation that relates surface height  to spatial data
              collected by Synthetic Aperture Radar.  The  characteristic curves for this
              radar equation "flow" in one direction  like time dependent phenomena.  Due to
              a monotonicity property of the  Hamiltonian, one can establish -- for some
              cases -- a unique physical  solution for discontinuous data as the limit of
              continuous data  approximation viscosity solutions.  One can also prove that
              this  unique solution can be simulated by monotone numerical schemes.  The 
              first goal of this project is to combine viscosity solution theory  for
              Hamilton Jacobi equations with the theory of generalized  characteristics from
              Conservation Law theory to establish the  uniqueness of the solution for most
              (or all) cases.  The second goal  is to establish a unique limit for the case
              of surface reconstruction  from discontinuous optical data.  The optical data
              equation does not  have "flowing" characteristics and therefore requires
              Dirichlet, as  opposed to Cauchy, boundary conditions.  Generalized
              characteristics  are inappropriate for Dirichlet conditions, but recent Control
              Theory  approaches appear to work well in their place.  The Hamiltonian is no 
              longer monotonic, but it is now convex, which, it is hoped, can be  exploited
              in a similar manner to the monotonicity property.  Finally,  these methods will
              be applied to classes of Conservation Laws with  discontinuous media that
              correspond to the classes of Hamilton-Jacobi  equations previously studied.   
              Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) is used extensively by NASA (who, for  example,
              collected SAR data for most of the surface of Venus in 1990  using the Magellan
              probe) and the military.  Ideally, one would like  to reconstruct a surface
              from the collected radar data.  Thi s  reconstruction (called Shape from
              Shading) can -- from previous   work -- be accomplished very quickly for
              noiseless, continuous  radar data.  For discontinuous data, which occurs in the
              presence of  ridges (e.g., mountains, cliffs, tank edges, building edges,
              etc.),  it is unknown (a) if only one surface corresponds to the SAR data and 
              (b) if the surface is computable.  Previous work has shown  that for a number
              of surfaces there is only one physically likely  surface and it is easy to
              compute.  First, this project hopes to show  that this is the case for all
              surfaces.  The next goal of the project  is to extend this result to optical
              data (i.e., reconstructing a 3-D  surface from a 2-D photograph), which has
              numerous applications both  in industry and in the military (where it is
              typically referred to as  "computer vision").  The final goal of this project
              is to apply these  results to Conservation Laws with discontinuous media (e.g.,
               describing chemical separation with two or more solvents, describing  two
              phase flow, etc.), which is of interest, for example, to Chemical  Engineers,
              who must be able to compute simulations for these  situations to maximize
              chemical conversions effectively in industrial  processes.
