Title       : Mobility and Resource Management for Multimedia Mobile Computing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a9704404

Award Number: 9704404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Admela Jukan                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zygmunt J. Haas haas@ece.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Project URL: http://www.ee.gatech.edu/research/labs/bwn/projects/nsf            
                http://www.ee.cornell.edu/~haas/nsf.html    In this proposal, we deal with
              two central issues in   Multimedia Mobile Computing, namely   Mobility
              Management and Connection Admission.   More specifically, we ask the questions
              of   how to efficiently locate users within massively  accessed internet (we
              refer to a network of networks   as an internet), based on the micro-networking
                communication environment   and how to limit the multimedia connection
              admission   in such an environment, as to   guarantee quality of service to
              already accepted connections.     Our approach is based on the idea of   User
              Mobility Profile (UMP).   As a user roams within an internet,   the system
              continuously collects   information on the users' mobility and connection
              patterns.   This information is used to anticipate the future   location of the
              active users, thus, reduces the  search space and, consequently, the cost of
              locating the user.   This is achieved through the dynamic calculation of
              location   area. In our approach, the location area is defined per   mobile and
              is calculated, using the UMP,  ``on the fly,'' as the user roams between
              different   networks. Calculation of the location area is done   as to minimize
              the user's mobility management  cost. Furthermore, the statistical knowledge of
              users'   future positions embedded within the UMP allows   prediction of
              resource utilization and, thus,   reduces the probability of resource shortage.
                The result is that multimedia connections can be supported with a   much
              stricter Quality-of-Service (QoS) guarantees.     To achieve the goal of
              guaranteed QoS, we employ a   new concept, called the Shadow Clique,   which is
              the representation of the probability   of user's future locations,   given its
              current position in the network.   The Shadow Clique is, in fact,   a digest of
              the UMP and allows easy and fast determination   of the future resource
              requirements in different network s.    In our research we will address the
              following issues using  both analytical and simulation tools:     1. The
              optimal strategy for UMP information reporting and collection    2. The use of
              the UMP for reducing the registration requirements and     the user location
              costs    3. Methods for grouping the networks into paging groups, as to     
              reduce the mobile paging costs, subject to delay constraints     4. The use of
              the UMP to create the Shadow Clique digest     5. The use of the Shadow Clique
              concept to predict the future network      resource utilization      6. The use
              of the Shadow Clique concept in the      Connection Admission algorithm    It
              is obvious that as the six topics  are highly related, a close collaborative  
              interaction and continuous exchange  of information and results is essential  
              for the success of this project.     To estimate the potential impact of our
              work,   one must envisage the future use of the   Internet services and the
              mobile applications.   These are responsible for much of the recent   research
              in the Mobile Multimedia   field. However, before a wide-spread use of the  
              mobile applications can be realized, the fundamental   questions of how to
              manage the mobility of such  large volume of users and how to manage the
              resources   for multimedia communication need to be addressed.   Our proposal
              is a significant step in this direction.
