Title       : Dynamical Systems Approach to Flow and Transport in Heterogeneous Aquifers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 11,  1998       
File        : a9704630

Award Number: 9704630
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121356             (Estimated)
Investigator: Garrison Sposito sposito@ce.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9704630  Sposito    This project entails the application of dynamical systems
              theory to the problem of groundwater flow and transport in an isotropic aquifer
              of arbitrary spatial heterogeneity.  The overall objective of the project is to
              provide new physical concepts that permit greater advantage to be taken of
              recent breakthroughs in experimental methodology and computer simulation of
              field-scale groundwater movement.  The specific objectives of the project are: 
                To calculate and interpret the vorticity field for steady groundwater flow in
              a stratified aquifer, based on field measurements of the hydraulic
              conductivity, and to develop and "extended phase" representation of this flow. 
              To establish general conditions under which tracer-plume spatial concentration
              moments modeled as averages over an ensemble of advective flow trajectories can
              be equated to plume concentration moments determined from a single field
              experiment.  To investigate, using the methods of dynamical systems theory,
              conditions under which chaotic motions of a tracer following advective
              flowpaths can be induced, leading to more efficient tracer spreading in a
              heterogeneous aquifer.    These three objectives, if met successfully, will
              result in the following technical advances: (1) a confirmation of the
              hypothesis that the flow topology of an arbitrary, steady groundwater flow can
              always be transformed mathematically to that of steady flow in a
              perfectly-stratified aquifer; (2) precise criteria as to when stochastic
              transport models can be applied accurately to solute transport data from a
              single field experiment; and (3) a strategy for using chaotic advection to
              improve contaminant solute spreading in groundwater.  One postdoctoral
              researcher, Dr. Scott Weeks (Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics), will be supported
              by project funds.
