Title       : Probability and Statistics and Related Biomolecular Sequence Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 4,  2001    
File        : a9704552

Award Number: 9704552
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188700             (Estimated)
Investigator: Samuel Karlin fd.zgg@forsythe.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Amir Dembo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704552  Karlin   This research centers on developing new probabilistic and
              statistical tools of   relevance to biomolecular sequence analysis with
              particular emphasis on:  (i)  The use of   scan statistical analysis of marker
              arrays in multiple correlated sequences.  Specifically, to   find asymptotic
              distributions of extremal r-scan lengths for several stochastic models,  
              extending earlier work of the investigators by accommodating dependent and/or  
              transformed data. These asymptotics then serve as benchmarks for interpreting
              various   biological correlated multiple sequence data by providing estimates
              of probabilities of   clustering or over-dispersion of markers along one or
              more sequences.  (ii) To provide a   flexible and general framework for
              characterizing residue clusters and statistical   significance of unusual
              compositions in protein 3D structures as well as the means of   assessing
              statistical significance of strong local similarities among two or more such  
              structures. The proposed framework is based on the study of random models for
              weighted   labeled graphs and as such it generalizes previous work on the
              probabilistic foundation of   general score based methods for use in protein
              sequence comparison.   Since 1995, several prokaryotic genomes and one
              eukaryotic genome have been   reported, and many are forthcoming. These genomes
              provide opportunities and pose   challenges for characterizing genomic
              inhomogeneities, for detecting significant sequence   patterns, and for
              evolutionary comparisons. Availability of complete genomes and massive  
              amounts of DNA and protein sequences opens a new era in bioinformatics
              research.   Advances in (i) and (ii) above can provide much needed tools for
              biomolecular data   analysis and for comparison of protein sequences and
              corresponding three-dimensional   structures.  Software approaches are often
              used to find relationships between newly   discovered sequences and the
              existing data banks. Similarities detected can be used to   predict biologi cal
              characteristics of new structures, suggest directions for further  
              experimental study, and point to possible medical applications. However, due to
              the   accelerating growth of the data banks, random correlations might at first
              appear significant   and thus mask the true biological information existing in
              the data. This research aims at   putting biomolecular data analysis procedures
              on a firm mathematical foundation, and   concomitantly reducing the masking
              effect of random correlations.
