Title       : Dynamics of Polynomial Diffeomorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9704523

Award Number: 9704523
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82338              (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Smillie smillie@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:  This project involves developing  analogs of some of the important
              concepts in the theory of one  dimensional complex dynamics in the context of
              diffeomorphisms in two complex  dimensions. One powerful tool in dynamics is
              hyperbolicity.  In one complex dimension this property is easily characterized
              in terms of the behavior of the critical point.  The first part of this project
              involves characterizations of hyperbolicity and related properties for
              diffeomorphisms in two complex variables with the expectation that this work
              will shed light both on the hyperbolic and the non-hyperbolic cases. The
              proposed characterizations involve the regularity of unstable manifolds, the
              geometry of the intersection of unstable manifolds with the set of bounded
              orbits and growth conditions on Green functions in unstable manifolds.  A
              second set of questions involve symbolic dynamics.  There are situations in
              which external rays can be used to parametrize  ``Julia sets''.  This gives a
              new way of symbolically describing Julia sets in many cases. We raise questions
              about which symbolic descriptions can occur. A third set of questions involve
              the property of ``connectivity of the Julia set'' and the properties of the
              connectivity locus. Dynamical systems is an area of pure mathematics which
              deals with theoretical questions that arise in studying long term behavior of
              mathematical models of physical systems.  We restrict ourselves to models whose
              state at any time can be described by a finite number of variables. Even though
              these systems can display complicated chaotic behavior, there are some powerful
              theoretical tools that can be applied to study them in some cases. On the other
              hand there are many cases where these tools do not apply. Recently new
              techniques have been developed which use complex analysis but these techniques
              have so far been limited to one variable whereas typical dynamical systems
              involve many variables. The proposed research aims to establish a link between 
              dynamics of one complex v ariable and the more typical dynamical systems which 
              involve many variables.
