Title       : Subanalytic Sets, Pfaffian Functions, and Complexity of Quantifier
               Simplification
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9704745

Award Number: 9704745
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $77000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrei Gabrielov agabriel@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,9218,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A. Gabrielov proposes to continue research in two closely related areas: the
              theory of subanalytic sets, with applications to quantifier elimination and
              simplification problems, and the theory of Pfaffian functions (analytic
              functions satisfying systems of Pfaffian differential equations with polynomial
              coefficients), with applications to o-minimality and computational complexity. 
              The goal of this research is to find an effective estimate of complexity of the
              ``quantifier simplification'' for expressions with Pfaffian functions, i.e.,
              replacing an expression with existential and universal quantifiers by an
              equivalent expression without universal quantifiers.  This includes estimates
              of the complexity of different operations with semi- and sub-Pfaffian sets,
              such as the frontier, closure, stratification, and resolution of singularities.
                 Modern computer algebra qystems allow one to perform on a computer many
              operations with algebraic equations and inequalities previously considered the
              domain of abstract algebraic geometry.  The results can be applied to such
              practical problems as visualisation, robotics, and coding theory.  The
              complexity of computer codes performing these operations becomes a practically
              important problem. This complexity usually grows quickly with the degree of
              polynomials.  A new approach to reduce computational complexity lies in the
              Pfaffian theory studying a class of non-algebraic functions with global
              finiteness properties similar to the properties of algebraic functions.  The
              complexity of a polynomial considered as a Pfaffian function depends only on
              the number of its non-zero monomials (or, more generally, on the complexity of
              a formula representing this polynomial) independent of its degree.  Exponential
              and trigonometric functions, and many special functions, are Pfaffian, too.
              Thus Pfaffian methods, when applicable, allow one to produce fast computer
              codes for computations with simple algebraic, exponential and trigonometric
              formulas, possibly of a high degree.
