Title       : Dissertation Research: Constructing Palmarino Identity: The Archaeology and
               History of Palmares, a 17th-century Brazilian Quilombo
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1997     
File        : a9704407

Award Number: 9704407
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Shepard Krech III   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Shepard Krech III, Mr. Scott Allen will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at
              Macaco, the seventeenth century 'capital' of the Palmares which is located on
              the Serra da Barriga, a mountain in Alagoas, Brazil. The Palmares were fugitive
              slaves who fled colonial plantations and established their own society which
              developed and survived for approximately 100 years. The Palmares successfully
              repelled repeated attacks by the Dutch, before finally falling to the
              Portuguese. Although the Palmares left no written record, they are described in
              several colonial documents which provide (a likely biased) insight into their
              political and social organization. It appears that over a century of
              independent existence the group melded original African elements with knowledge
              acquired on plantations and contact with indigenous native Americans to forge a
              new culture. Through his excavations at Palmares Mr. Allen will examine the
              material byproducts of this process. He will focus on changes in pottery
              manufacture and use, housing construction and spatial patterning in terms of
              village layout and activity areas.   Archaeologists have come to realize that
              cultural entities are often short-lived phenomena and that humans can redefine
              social boundaries with surprising rapidity. This contrasts to older models
              which recognized that groups, although they change over time, have considerable
              long-term integrity in terms of both boundaries and membership. `Ethnogenesis`
              refers to the process of ethnic group emergence and the Palmares provide an
              excellent case study for this since their history is known in broad outline. It
              is not understood however how the Palmares were able to develop a distinct
              identity over a short period of time, how they melded together elements from
              different cultural traditions and how this identity was expressed in material
              terms. Mr. Allen's research should shed significant light on this process. 
              This research is important for several reasons. It will provide new insight
              into a little understood aspect of New World history and provide information of
              interest to both archaeologists and historians. It will also increase the
              understanding of a basic process which took place many times in different parts
              of the world and, through a study of material culture, provide archaeologists
              with new analytic techniques. The work will also assist in training a promising
              young scientist.                                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
