Title       : Differentiable Optimization Techniques for the Recovery of Sharp Features of
               Solutions to Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2001  
File        : a9704899

Award Number: 9704899
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78633              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia K. Lamm lamm@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9216,9263,AMPP,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9704899  Lamm    The main goal of this project is to develop local
              regularization methods for   the solution of ill-posed inverse problems such as
              those arising in   applications of inverse heat conduction and image
              reconstruction.  The   ideas of local regularization developed by the P.I.
              naturally lead to a   "predictor-corrector" type of solution method.  The idea
              is that a regularized   solution is first obtained on a small part of the
              domain of the solution, after   which subsequent correction is applied in order
              to avoid oversmoothing.    This method has been seen to be as effective as
              standard Tikhonov   regularization for Volterra problems, with improved
              computational   performance.  In addition, the scheme naturally suggests a
              "variable   regularization" approach in which a functional regularization
              parameter is   used to apply more smoothing in some parts of the domain and
              less in   others.  In this project the P.I. plans to continue to develop the
              existing   theory for Volterra problems, and to extend this theory to
              non-Volterra   problems of the type arising in image reconstruction and image
              deblurring.    The design of a theoretically-sound adaptive process of
              selecting the   functional parameter is an essential and difficult part of this
              project.     Inverse problems naturally arise in numerous scientific
              applications,   including biomedical imaging (Magnetic Resonance Imaging and
              CAT   scans), the nondestructive thermal testing and analysis of materials,
              satellite   sensing of remote images, and geophysical applications such as
              seismic and   reservoir engineering.  These problems are of considerable
              challenge to   scientists because they often lead to very large computational
              problems   which are extremely sensitive to errors in data.  The aim of this
              project is to   develop new methods for the stable and efficient solution of
              such inverse   problems.  The successful attainment of this goal would have an
              important   impact on applications such as biotechnology, remote imaging, and  
               materials science.
