Title       : Acquisition of a Small-Angle X-ray Scattering System for Investigation of
               Metallic Glasses and Polymer Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1999      
File        : a9704217

Award Number: 9704217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd Hufnagel hufnagel@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. van Zanten  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704217  Hufnagel    Small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) is one of the foremost 
              techniques for studying the structure of materials on a scale of  1-100 nm. 
              The ability to study materials on this scale is  important both in
              understanding the development of the  microstructure of metallic alloys, as
              well as for investigating  the structure and dynamics of polymer solutions. 
              The SAXS  instrument is critically important to several research projects  on
              metallic glasses, complex fluids, and polymer solutions at  Johns Hopkins.     
               Two of the primary research projects that will benefit from  the SAXS
              instrument concern bulk metallic glasses.  One of these  projects seeks to
              develop new bulk metallic glass materials and  processes through an improved
              understanding of the kinetics of  phase separation and crystallization.  The
              other project probes  structure-property relationships in nanocrystalline
              composite  materials, which consist of a dispersion of nanometer-scale 
              metallic crystals in an amorphous metallic matrix.  The SAXS  equipment will
              contribute to this research by providing a means  to study the nanometer-scale
              structure of metallic glasses, which  is a critical regime in both phase
              transformations and  micromechanical behavior.  %%%       Another class of
              materials to be examined with the SAXS  instrument are soft materials such as
              complex fluids and  polymers.  Complex fluids are solutions containing
              surfactants,  polymers, colloids or a combination of these components.  The 
              focus of this research is on the structure and dynamics of these  systems. 
              SAXS capabilities are crucial to this research program,  especially for highly
              concentrated systems where light scattering  is not applicable,  The SAXS
              equipment will provide a means for  investigating and ultimately understanding
              the coupling between  structure and dynamics.  Another area of active research
              is  supercritical fluid-polymer solutions, where a particular  interest is the
              conformation of polymers in such systems.  Supercrit ical solvents are capable
              of dissolving a whole host of  polymers such as fluoropolymers, random
              copolymers and block  copolymers.  The emphasis of this program will be on the 
              structure of the polymers or supramolecular assemblies in these  supercritical
              solvent systems.       The SAXS instrument will be a powerful tool for 
              investigating the structure of metallic alloys and polymer  solutions.  It will
              also provide a necessary adjunct to current  small-angle neutron scattering
              (SANS) and anomalous small-angle x-  ray scattering (ASAXS) investigations,
              which, while crucial to  these programs, are limited in terms of instrument
              availability.  ***
