Title       : New Approaches to Global Homotopy Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  1997      
File        : a9704761

Award Number: 9704761
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Z. Arone   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704761  Arone       The investigator's general area of specialization is
              algebraic  topology.  His recent work has been concerned with achieving a
              better   understanding of the global structure of homotopy theory.   This work
              combines two hitherto disjoint approaches, the "chromatic  approach," and the
              "calculus of functors" approach.  In joint work with  M. Mahowald, the
              investigator examined the Goodwillie derivatives of  unstable homotopy theory
              and used them to prove a new result about  unstable homotopy of spheres.  In
              other work, the investigator   studied the Taylor polynomials (as opposed to
              derivatives)   of unstable homotopy theory and provided an explicit space-level
               description of these.  One of the key ingredients of the investigator's  
              contribution to his joint work with Mahowald was a combinatorial   analysis of
              the poset of partitions of a finite set, which turned   out to have
              consequences for the chromatic filtration of spheres.  Further   investigation
              of the combinatorics involved has led the investigator  to discover seemingly
              new and mysterious recurrence patterns.  He   believes that some of the deep
              periodic phenomena in homotopy   theory can be studied via this combinatorial
              periodicity.   In very recent work, the investigator utilized this
              combinatorial   periodicity to construct certain "self maps" on the derivatives
                of unstable homotopy theory, which imply, among other things, the   existence
              of finite complexes whose cohomology realizes certain   finite subalgebras of
              the Steenrod algebra.  The investigator believes that   these finite complexes
              will be useful for localization and   periodicity.       In the investigator's
              area of Algebraic Topology, he is interested in  how to analyze the space of
              continuous functions between two topological  spaces.  It turns out that an
              analogue of the theory of Taylor series can  be developed, and one can study
              the space of continuous maps via its  "polynomial approximations" (an idea due
              to T. Goodwillie).  The  investigato r combined this theory with more classical
              methods in topology,  and he used it (in joint work with M. Mahowald) to prove
              a new result on  the global structure of an important algebraic tool of the
              trade, the  so-called unstable homotopy of spheres.  He now intends to use the 
              aformentioned polynomial approximations to construct certain spaces with 
              interesting (cohomological) properties, spaces whose mere existence should 
              lead to further insights in topology.  His work has a strong combinatorial 
              flavor (specifically, one of the main gadgets in his work is the lattice  of
              partitions of a finite set), and he hopes that some of his results will  be of
              interest to combinatorialists.   ***
