Title       : Acquisition of an Electron Energy Imaging Filter for the Electron Microbeam
               Analysis Laboratory (EMAL)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  1997     
File        : a9704175

Award Number: 9704175
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131510             (Estimated)
Investigator: David C. Martin milty@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary S. Was  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xiaoqing Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John F. Mansfield  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johannes W. Schwank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704175  Martin    This award provides support for the acquisition of a Gatan 
              Imaging Filter (GIF) accessory for the JEOL 4000 EX High  Resolution
              Transmission Electron Microscope (HREM) located in the  University of Michigan
              Electron Microbeam Analysis Laboratory  (EMAL).  The GIF consists of a curved
              magnetic sector lens that  acts as a prism to disperse the transmitted electron
              beam as a  function of energy.  The dispersed beam can then be filtered to 
              create images or diffraction patterns from selected portions of  the electron
              energy loss spectra.  This instrument would  significantly enhance the
              microanalytical capabilities of the  electron optics instrumentation at EMAL. 
              Additional  functionality provided by the GIF which is not presently  available
              includes:  (1) high resolution elemental and electronic  state mapping of low
              atomic number elements, (2) improved  contrast of polymer and organic thin
              films on substrates, (3)  improved electron diffraction analysis by removal of 
              inelastically scattered radiation, and (4) improved contrast in  convergent
              beam electron diffraction patterns.  Research underway  in our laboratory which
              wi11 directly benefit from this  acquisition includes the construction and
              characterization of  grain boundary defects in optoelectronically active
              ordered  polymers; the synthesis, and processing and characterization of 
              thermally reactive benzocyclobutene functionalized polymers; the  processing
              and microstructure of genetically engineered  polypeptides for biocompatibility
              of micromachined silicon  sensors for neural prosthetics, and the
              microstructure of  polymers and polymer composites near surfaces.  The
              instrument  will also provide useful capabilities for other research projects 
              in Materials Science and Engineering, Chemical Engineering, and  Nuclear
              Engineering and Radiological Sciences departments, as  detailed in the text of
              the proposal.  %%%  The GIF will provide an enhancement of the electron optics 
              facility at EMAL, directly influencing the re search opportunities  available
              for students, staff, and faculty who use these  instruments.  It will also be
              used in the curriculum as part of  the laboratory sessions for graduate and
              undergraduate courses in  Microstructure of Materials (MSE 460, MSE 560, and
              MSE 662).  The  GIF will also be used in summer short courses on Polymer 
              Microscopy offered through the University of Michigan Continuing  Engineering
              Education program.  ***
