Title       : RUI: Research in O-minimality and Related Topics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9704869

Award Number: 9704869
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles I. Steinhorn steinhorn@vassar.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project involves questions concerning o-minimality and extensions of
              o-minimality. Some of the problems concerning o-minimality relate to expansions
              of archetypal o-minimal structures and structures whose domain has as its order
              type that of the real numbers. Others have as their focus groups definable in
              o-minimal structures or the development of o-minimal analogues of more
              sophisticated topological methods and tools. Problems having to do with
              extensions of o-minimality deal in particular with the notions of weak
              o-minimality and local o-minimality. A range of natural examples of weakly
              o-minimal structures is now known and there already is a significant body of
              results in the subject. It is hoped that local o-minimality may provide a
              suitable framework for developing some model theory for subanalytic sets. The
              research described above falls under the heading of model theory, one of the
              principal subfields of mathematical logic. Model theorists study  properties of
              familiar mathematical structures which can be described by a formal
              mathematical language such as predicate logic. The distinctive point of view of
              model theory can provide insights and understanding into such structures that
              otherwise might not be easily achieved. This project focuses on structures that
              include and behave in important respects like the ordered field of real
              numbers, that is, the real numbers together with the polynomial and algebraic
              functions that are studied in first-year calculus and describe many phenomena.
              This decade has witnessed significant advances in which model theory has played
              a crucial role.  The results obtained have deepened our understanding of
              familiar mathematical systems of interest in such diverse areas of the
              mathematical sciences as the analysis and geometry of real functions, neural
              nets, and relational database theory.
