Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Post-Fordist Manufacturing and its Exploitation by
               Architects
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9704033

Award Number: 9704033
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana L. Buntrock dana@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,5921,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Buntrock  9704033    This award supports a 12-month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Dana Buntrock at
              the Center for Collaborative Research of  the University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
              Japan.  Professor Buntrock  will work with Dr. Terunobu Fujimori, Professor of
              the  Center for Collaborative Research and of the Institute of  Industrial
              Science at the University of Tokyo, on a research  project entitled, "Studying
              Post-Fordist Manufacturing and  its Exploitation by Architects."   
              Post-Fordism - identified by increased flexibility,  adaptability, and
              efficiency in the manufacturing process  that allows for variable control in
              production output - has  evolved by and large outside North America, and as
              such its  implications for architectural practice are not presently  understood
              by North American architectural professionals.  As systems of flexible
              production developed in Japan much  earlier than they did in North America, it
              is possible to  project opportunities for North American architects to  exploit
              Post-Fordist techniques by studying the manner in  which architects,
              contractors, and manufacturers work in  tandem in Japan.  The proposed research
              will explore the  process of innovation in Japan that occurs between 
              architects, contractors, and manufacturers and will compare  the relative
              effectiveness of this interaction with that  which is now occurring in the
              United States.  The goal of  the research is to obtain insights into the
              Post-Fordist  manufacturing process that will provide immediate and useful 
              advantages to the United States.  ***
