Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Model Theory and Rigid Analytic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 9,  1999   
File        : a9704981

Award Number: 9704981
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $159000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leonard M. Lipshitz lipshitz@math.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Lipshitz and Robinson propose to continue their collaborative investigation in
              two distinct but related directions:  analytic geometry over fields with a
              non-Archimedean (ultrametric) absolute value, and the model theory of
              ultrametric fields with analytic structure (i.e., the theory of subanalytic
              sets). Classical affinoid rigid analytic geometry is based on rings of strictly
              convergent power series-power series convergent on products of "closed" discs. 
              The proposers have introduced new rings of power series convergent on products
              of "closed" and "open" discs.  These rings of separated power series share many
              of the desirable algebraic properties of the smaller rings of strictly
              convergent power series.  Lipshitz and Robinson propose to develop local and
              global rigid geometry over these rings, in analogy to the classical case.  This
              will represent an extension of the classical theory to the case of relative
              rigid geometry over "open" polydiscs.  On the model theory side, Lipshitz and
              Robinson propose to complete their development of the theory of rigid
              subanalytic sets based on the rings of separated power series by proving a
              Uniformization and a Singular Locus Theorem.  They also propose to continue
              their development of the theory of rigid subanalytic sets based on the rings of
              strictly convergent power series. The methods employed come from model theory,
              commutative algebra and algebraic geometry.  The sets of points in real space
              defined by systems of equations and inequalities among analytic functions are
              called analytic sets.  The projection (i.e., the shadow) of such a set on a
              lower dimensional subspace is called subanalytic.  Real subanalytic sets arise
              in several branches of mathematics such as differential equations and geometry.
               Similar classes of sets arise naturally, for example in number theory, over
              fields different from the real numbers, where the notion of distance has rather
              different properties.  These sets, however, share many of the nice properties
              of their real cousins.   Lipshitz, Robinson and their students will continue
              their investigation of the properties of these sets, using methods from
              mathematical logic, commutative algebra and algebraic geometry.
