Title       : Problems in Set-Theoretic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9704849

Award Number: 9704849
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63214              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary F. Gruenhage gruengf@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator will continue his research on several open problems
              in set-theoretic topology.  First, he will determine if some modifications of
              his recent solution (with P. Koszmider) of the well-known Arhangel'skii-Tall
              problem can be applied to other long-standing open problems concerning
              normality and paracompactness in locally nice spaces.  These problems include
              M.E. Rudin's question of whether or not every normal manifold must be
              collectionwise-Hausdorff, and S. Watson's question about the existence in ZFC
              of a perfectly normal locally compact non-paracompact space.  Second, two
              problems concerning closed mappings will be investigated, the first being the
              well-known open question about the preservation of the metalindelof property
              under closed or perfect maps, and the other a question about the existence of
              irreducible restrictions of closed mappings.  Finally, a set of other problems
              related to recent work of the principal investigator includes the question of
              the characterization of the Baire property in function spaces with the
              compact-open topology, of the existence of a completely regular
              connectification of metrizable spaces with no compact open sets, and problems
              about the behavior of the Lindelof property in product spaces.     Set-theory
              and general topology are fundamental mathematical disciplines which have common
              turn-of-the-century roots.  Set-theory provides a framework upon which all of
              mathematics can be based.  Objects of study in topology include familiar spaces
              such as the plane and ordinary three-dimensional Euclidean space, and their
              subsets, as well as much more abstract spaces.  The pioneering set-theoretical
              work of  K. Goedel in the late 30's and P. Cohen in the 60's soon led to the
              realization that some long-standing topological questions could not be solved
              assuming only the standard axioms of set-theory.  The principal investigator's
              research lies substantially within the scope of this interesting interaction
              between the two fields, focusing especia lly on problems selected for their
              topological significance, but where knowledge of set-theory is likely to be
              useful in their solution.  The problems involve basic topological properties
              and constructions-normality, covering properties, product spaces, function
              spaces, etc.-which impact a large portion of the field of general topology, and
              have applications in other areas of mathematics as well.  The new techniques
              involved in the solution of these problems are likely to be applicable to a
              wide variety of other problems.
