Title       : The Numerical Solution of Elliptic Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  1997     
File        : a9704852

Award Number: 9704852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17280              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seymour V. Parter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9704852  Parter    These investigations will focus on three specific projects: 
              (1) First Order   Systems Least Square (FOSLS) methods with a special emphasis
              on   problems in elasticity, (2) the general over-lapping grid problem, and (3)
                preconditioning strategies for Spectral Collocation Methods. At this time  
              computational methods for problems in elasticity are primarily based on   mixed
              methods which lead to indefinite problems which have proven   difficult to
              solve.  The FOSLS approach leads to large systems which are   generally much
              easier to solve.  However, despite the efforts of several   independent groups,
              a useful FOSLS  formulation of the elasticity problems   for general boundary
              conditions is still a major problem.  The overlapping   grid method has proven
              itself an effective tool for problems set in regions   with complicated
              geometry.  Further, the analysis of these methods has been   lacking until a
              recent breakthrough for difference equations of positive type.   Since there
              are limitations on the order of accuracy of such difference   methods there is
              a need for further analysis. Spectral Collocation methods   are extremely
              accurate and very badly conditioned.  Hence preconditioning   strategies are
              essential. There are over twenty-five years of experience and   study of
              preconditioning methods. And, still, there is a need for better   approaches. 
              Moreover, the mathematical justification for some of these   methods is
              incomplete.    The basic theme of this research can be stated simply "Find
              effective   numerical methods to solve the important boundary-value problems of
                mechanics and material science, and provide mathematical proofs of their  
              validity."  In the problems of elasticity most of the methods now in use are  
              expensive to implement.  Hence, a new formulation is sought which will  
              provide accurate approximations which can be computed at a reasonable   cost.
              In the other two cases one is dealing with established methods which   are
              either difficult to impleme nt or whose mathematical basis is incomplete.  
              This research is aimed at a more complete mathematical understanding   which
              will both clarify the existing methods and provide a basis for the  
              development of new, more effective methods.
