Title       : Fracture Behavior of Porous Ceramics Substrates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 3,  2000   
File        : a9704281

Award Number: 9704281
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $316805             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Green Green@EMS.PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1374,1774,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704281  Green    Ceramics with moderate amounts of porosity are an important
              class of  materials that can make a significant impact in applications in which
               their permeability plays a key role.  This attribute, in addition to their 
              chemical and thermal stability, makes them suitable as catalytic supports, 
              particulate filters, membranes for micro- and ultrafiltration and as 
              integrated catalytic reactors.  In such situations, however, the poor 
              mechanical performance of these materials is likely to be a limiting  factor in
              the full exploitation and development of these technologies. In  particular,
              there is concern over the strength, fracture toughness and  thermal shock
              resistance.  Unfortunately, little is understood about the  factors that
              control fracture in these porous materials and thus, there is  a need for a
              scientific study that tackles this area in a fundamental and  generic way. 
              This is particularly important for the development of  materials with improved
              mechanical reliability.  In the proposed work, the  objectives are to explore
              some new techniques for processing porous  materials and to identify the
              microstructural factors that control the  strength and fracture toughness of
              these materials.  The technical  approach will involve 1) exploring new
              processing techniques, 2)  quantifying the microstructure of the resulting
              porous materials,  particularly contiguity and pore structure, 3) measuring a
              set of  mechanical properties (elastic constants, fracture toughness and
              strength)  and 4) evaluating or devising appropriate theoretical models that
              link the  pore structure to the mechanical behavior.  %%%%  Ceramics with
              moderate amounts of porosity are an important class of  materials that can make
              a significant impact in applications in which  their permeability plays a key
              role.  This attribute, in addition to their  chemical and thermal stability,
              makes them suitable as catalytic supports,  particulate filters, membranes for
              micro- and ultrafiltration and as  integrated cataly tic reactors. In such
              situations, however, the poor  mechanical performance of these materials is
              likely to be a limiting  factor in the full exploitation and development of
              these technologies. In  particular, there is concern over the strength,
              fracture toughness and  thermal shock resistance.  Unfortunately, little is
              understood about the  factors that control fracture in these porous materials
              and thus, there is  a need for a scientific study that tackles this area in a
              fundamental and  generic way.  This is particularly important for the
              development of  materials with improved mechanical reliability.  In the
              proposed work, the  objectives are to explore some new techniques for
              processing porous  materials and to identify the microstructural factors that
              control the  strength and fracture toughness of these materials.  ***
