Title       : Modeling and Statistical Analysis of Mental Test Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2001       
File        : a9704474

Award Number: 9704474
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Stufken                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306846             (Estimated)
Investigator: William F. Stout stout@stat.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Modeling and Statistical Analysis of Mental Test Data              William
              Stout           University of Illinois              Abstract    This research
              involves the probabilistic modeling and statistical  analysis of multiple
              question(item) mental test data.  The   investigator has in the past used the
              nonparametric item response   theory(IRT) paradigm to study test fairness, the
              statistical   assessment of complex latent IRT structures, and the cognitive  
              process/psychometric modeling and cognitive diagnosis of test  taking examinees
              using the investigator co-developed Unified   Cognitive Model.  Now, it is
              proposed to develop a nonparametric   item level geometric description of the
              item structure analogous   to the classical subtest score level factor analytic
              approach.    It is planned to develop a practical operational cognitive 
              testing procedures based on the Unified model.  It is proposed   to further
              develop the test bias procedure, SIBTEST, in various   much needed ways.  A
              practical need cutting across all three   areas is forour nonparametric
              procedures to be modified to match   on liklihood based latent ability
              estimates as well as on their   currently used number correct scores.    The
              research involves developing mathematical models and statistical  procedures to
              improve standardized and classroom tests and to improve  the measurement of
              examinee performance on such tests.  There is a   special emphasis on providing
              an educationally useful concept mastery  profile for each examinee based upon
              his/her individual test question   responses, on providing fairer tests, and on
              assessing the   substantive complexity of skills required for performing well
              on a   test.  In particular, it is desired to     (i) provide for each item a
              description of what it measures best,   (ii) to produce fairer tests -- in
              particular by informing the         construction specifications of future tests
              about biased         item types that should be excluded, and   (iii) to provide
              for educators detail ed feedback of concept mastery         and nonmastery for
              each individual examinee to be used to         guide further instruction and
              remedial efforts.    Because standardized tests are ever more ubiquitous in
              American   society and noting their gatekeeper role, the above work, if  
              successful, should have a major impact on how effective standardized  tests in
              America are and indeed could improve the educational   process in the
              classroom.
