Title       : A Markov-Chain Model for Intergranular Stress Corrosion Cracking
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 26,  1997    
File        : a9704471

Award Number: 9704471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamara A. Olson trolson@mtu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mich Technological Univ
	      1400 Townsend Drive
	      Houghton, MI  499311295    906/487-1885

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Olson  9704471    The proposed research develops a new model of intergranular 
              stress corrosion cracking of metals, based on measurable features of  the
              polycrystalline microstructure.  In the model, the crack is  viewed as
              proceeding through a network of grain boundaries, causing  failure when the
              crack percolates through the material.  The first phase of this project will be
              to compare various   models for interface energy.  This analysis will largely 
              be a statistical analysis of data obtained from cracked  samples, followed by a
              comparison and modification of the   existing interfacial energy models.  Next,
              the model will   be used to compare the resistance to cracking of various  
              microstructures.  The microstructures to be tested will   include random
              textures, textures simulated through   numerical models of annealing, and
              textures from actual   materials measured by Brent Adams' experimental group at
                Carnegie Mellon University.  The results for textures from   simulated
              processing models will predict the net effect of  material processing on
              material performance.    The lifetime of many engineering materials (for
              example,   metals and metal alloys) is seriously limited by   their
              susceptibility to the phenomenon called stress   corrosion cracking.  This type
              of failure occurs when  the material is subject to a combination of tensile  
              stress and a corrosive element, leading to a crack which   propagates through
              the material and causes it to break.  The main objective of the proposed
              research is to develop  and analyze a new model of intergranular stress
              corrosion  cracking.  This model is used to predict the growth of cracks   in
              metals and metal alloys, and it is unique in that it  incorporates measurable
              microstructural information from   the material.  Because stress corrosion
              cracking is a common   and catastrophic phenomenon in certain materials, it
              would be  invaluable for engineers to be able to estimate a material's 
              susceptibility to cracking by measuring microstructure  and u sing the model. 
              In addition, if one can correlate given   processing techniques with the
              resulting microstructures,    one could then use this model to prescribe
              processes which   would enhance resistance to stress corrosion cracking.
