Title       : Almost Periodic Differential Equations and Lattice Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9704245

Award Number: 9704245
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67411              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wenxian Shen ws@math.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704245  Shen    Research is proposed in two areas:  almost periodic
              differential equations   and lattice dynamical  systems. Recently, the
              principal investigator and a   collaborator systematically investigated the
              dynamics of various types of   almost periodic differential equations.
              Fundamental dynamical issues such   as the existence of almost periodic and
              almost automorphic solutions,   asymptotic behavior of bounded solutions, the
              structure of omega limit sets,   etc. have received a considerable amount of
              attention.  The principal   investigator and her collaborators also studied the
              global dynamics of some    almost periodic differential equations arising from
              biology and physics by   utilizing both the general  approach and theory
              established in the principal   investigator's joint works with Yi.  The
              principal investigator plans to   continue her research in almost periodic
              differential equations.  In   particular, she intends  to explore the global 
              dynamics of various almost   periodic population models such as
              migration-selection models and multiple   species competition models; to study
              almost periodically forced oscillators   such as  van der Pol oscillators and
              Josephson junctions;  to consider   spatially almost periodic parabolic
              equations; to find conditions on the   existence of almost periodic dynamics; 
              and to investigate  almost   automorphic dynamics in general differential
              equations.  In her recent work   and also in joint works with her
              collaborators, she studied the stability of   standing and traveling waves and
              the existence of chaotic dynamics in   lattice dynamical systems.  Among the
              results, an existence criterion for   chaotic dynamics in coupled map lattices
              is found; a moving coordinate   approach, which is different from but analogous
              to the traditional moving   coordinate approach in partial differential
              equations, is introduced to deal   with traveling waves; and various dynamics
              such as spatial chaos,   propagation failure, traveling waves, etc., are shown 
              to exist in  a discrete   Nagumo equation. The above works provide some insight
              into the complex   behavior of lattice dynamical systems.  Continuing her
              commitments in   lattice dynamical systemq, she would like to study the
              following problems    in the near future:  other possible routes such as
              bifurcations to chaotic   dynamics; existence and stability of traveling waves
              and the appearance of   synchronization.  Moreover, she intends to continue the
              analysis of the   dynamics in the discrete Nagumo equation; and to explore the
              dynamics in   lattice  population models.    Both almost periodic differential
              equations and lattice dynamical systems   are widely used as models for many 
              physical and biological problems.  For   example, in the population dynamics of
              a single species, the dynamics of   the species is described by an almost
              periodic reaction diffusion equation if   a continuous environment is
              inhabited, seasonal variation is accounted for   (note that  seasonal variation
              may  not be exactly periodic but rather almost   periodic) and there is another
              inherent periodic variation.  If the species   inhabits a patchy environment,
              then its dynamics are described by a lattice   ordinary differential equation. 
              Furthermore, if each individual of the   species migrates from patch to patch
              in a discrete time manner, then the   dynamics are characterized by a coupled
              map lattice.  Numerous other   examples are found in electric circuits, climate
              dynamics, image processing   and pattern recognition, material sciences, etc. 
              It is therefore of great   importance to study almost periodic differential
              equations and lattice   dynamical systems.  Though much research has been done,
              many scenarios   appearing in both areas are far from being well understood. 
              The principal   investigator proposes to do research in these two areas.  In
              particular, based   on her previous experience, she plans to study various
              models arising from   physics and biology such as competition models, almost
              periodically fo rced   oscillators, etc.  The proposed research is intended to
              be a mathematical   contribution to the qualitative and quantitative theory of
              almost periodic   differential equations and lattice dynamical systems,
              resulting in a better   understanding of complex behavior in these systems.
