Title       : Nonlinear Problems in Geophysical and Reactive Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9704423

Award Number: 9704423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pedro Embid   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      MSC05 3370
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    505/277-2256

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Embid  9704423       The investigator studies mathematical problems with 
              applications in geophysical fluid dynamics and reactive flows.  The two main
              topics of research are: 1.  Averaging over fast  gravity waves for geophysical
              flows. 2.  Front wave propagation in  reactive flows.  The investigator
              combines formal asymptotic  analysis and rigorous mathematical theory of
              physical models,  together with the numerical analysis of simplified problems. 
              In  the first topic he studies the limiting dynamics of several  geophysical
              fluid dynamical systems that include the rotating  shallow water equations and
              the rotating Boussinesq equations for  stably stratified flow.  In the
              physically relevant regimes of low  Froude number or low Rossby number the
              equations evolve with two  separated scales; the slow modes are associated with
               quasi-geostrophic flows, and the fast modes correspond to gravity  waves.  The
              investigator derives simplified equations for the  limiting dynamics of
              geophysical flows at low Froude or low  Rossby number by averaging over the
              fast gravity waves.  These  limiting equations are applicable even when the
              flow is not in  geostrophic balance initially.  The investigator studies the 
              resulting simplified dynamics equations, which include in natural  and
              systematic manner the important effects of three-wave  resonant interactions of
              three fast gravity waves, or two gravity  waves and a vortical mode.  In the
              second topic he studies the  propagation of fronts in the presence of an
              underlying advective  velocity field.  This velocity field involves several
              space-time  scales, describing large variations both at the integral scale,  as
              well as rapid fluctuations at a scale intermediate between the  integral scale
              and the front thickness.  The investigator works on  the derivation and
              analysis of effective large scale equations  for the propagation of fronts in
              the physical limit of fast  reaction, slow diffusion, and fast velocity
              fluctuations at the  intermediate scale.  He applies  these results to study
              the  interaction of either premixed or diffusive flames with the  turbulent
              velocity field, and to study moist convection in  clouds.       The research on
              the limiting dynamics of geophysical flows  and the role of the fast gravity
              waves has potential applications  in atmospheric and oceanic sciences.  As the
              demand for more  accurate numerical weather predictions increases, it is
              necessary  to gain better understanding of the effect of the unavoidable  fast
              gravity waves that pollute all calculations.  Similarly, the  need for long
              range forecasting also requires a better  understanding of the accumulative
              effects of the fast gravity  waves.  Additionally, this work is relevant in the
              area of  stratified turbulence, where the simplified dynamics equations  can
              help to explain some of the universal features observed in  the velocity
              spectrum in the atmosphere and the ocean.  The  research on front wave
              propagation has potential applications in  combustion design, guiding the
              engineer in evaluating the  reliability of the simplified advection algorithms
              currently used  in flame front propagation.  This work is also relevant to
              cloud  physics.  Clouds are a key ingredient in the radiative balance of  the
              earth and also a key variable in the study of weather  forecasting and global
              climate.  Currently, in large-scale  numerical simulations of the atmosphere,
              the important effects of  the small-scale cloud physics cannot be modelled in
              detail.  This  work gives insight into ways of incorporating the small-scale 
              effects of the interaction of moisture and convective currents in  clouds into
              these large-scale calculations.
