Title       : Topics in Dynamical Systems, Ergodic Theory and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 18,  1999   
File        : a9704776

Award Number: 9704776
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282476             (Estimated)
Investigator: Anatole Katok katok_a@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9250,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The project covers a classification of Anosov (normally hyperbolic) and certain
              classes of partially hyperbolic actions of higher-rank commutative groups, both
              discrete and continuous, on compact manifolds, classification of several
              classes of smooth actions of lattices in higher-rank semi-simple Lie groups, a
              systematic study of invariant measures for Anosov and partially hyperbolic
              algebraic actions of discrete and continuous higher-rank abelian groups,
              development of a general theory of hyperbolic measures for actions of
              higher-rank abelian  groups, and developments of a uniform theory of invariant
              distributions for various classes of dynamical systems.  Among the principal
              tools are smooth ergodic theory (Lyapunov characteristic exponents and
              non-uniform hyperbolicity), the theory of non-stationary normal forms,
              geometric super-rigidity and the theory of group representations.  The theory
              of dynamical systems is the mathematical foundation of the rapidly developing
              fields of non-linear dynamics and chaos theory which provides these fields with
              their principal paradigms and tools of rigorous analysis. Those paradigms in
              turn play a key role in the development and analysis of mathematical models for
              numerous problems within natural and social sciences and engineering.  The
              standard setup in dynamics considers time as one-dimensional, either discrete
              or continuous. One of the central conclusions is that in a variety of
              situations, the orbit structure is rich and its robust features can be
              described by well-understood symbolic models.  The research under the present
              grant looks at the situation when the time is multi-dimensional while the phase
              space is still finite-dinemsional, i.e. the state of a system under
              consideration can be described by a finite set of numerical parameters.  The
              leading paradigms in these cases turn out to be strikingly different. On the
              one hand, the symbolic models are no longer valid. On the other, the orbit
              structure turn out to be "rigid", i.e. not only its robust f eatures, but much
              more subtle  structure, including the fine statistics of asymptotic behavior,
              do not change under perturbations. The project intends to identify  and
              systematically study a set of "universal models" which replace the symbolic
              models in the case of one-dimensional time.
