Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology, Arithmetic Groups and Toric Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9704535

Award Number: 9704535
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $78000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Weiping Li wli@math.okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark W. McConnell  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704535  McConnell       The project has three parts.  First, let G = SL(n,R),
              let Gamma  be an arithmetic subgroup of G, and let X be the symmetric space for
              G.  The spaces X/Gamma are one setting where automorphic forms can be  defined;
              they provide a topological approach to parts of the Langlands  conjectures. 
              For each Hecke operator T on the cohomology of X/Gamma,  MacPherson and
              McConnell have defined a cell complex W(T) which allows  one to find the
              operator by cellular techniques, i.e., using only a  finite amount of
              combinatorial data.  They will investigate W(T) and  extend the definition to
              more G.  In the second part, Ash and  McConnell are computing the cohomology of
              X/Gamma in degree five for  certain Gamma for SL(4).  The goal is to determine
              the cuspidal  classes and the Hecke action on them.  The third part concerns 
              Sheafhom, a suite of computer programs McConnell has developed.  Sheafhom
              provides models of chain complexes, spectral sequences,  sheaves, and other
              objects.  The largest application to date is its  algorithm for finding the
              intersection homology (IH) of toric  varieties in any perversity.  One goal is
              to compute the intersection  product on IH of toric varieties, with
              applications to convex  polytopes.  Sheafhom has also been used in the
              Ash-McConnell work.       A computer algebra system is a program for
              calculation with  algebra, as opposed to numbers.  Any program can find 2 + 2,
              but a  computer algebra system combines whole formulas: the input  (2x + 7) +
              (4x - 3) becomes 6x + 4 automatically.  This capacity is  more abstract, hence
              more flexible.  Excellent general-purpose systems,  like Maple or Mathematica,
              are available, but of course they don't have  everything that every
              mathematician needs.  In recent years, several  disciplines have been given
              their own special-purpose systems--  Cayley/Magma for algebraists, Pari for
              number theorists, and a dozen  others.  McConnell has written Sheafhom, a
              computer algebra system for  algebraic topology.  The program,  some 10,000
              lines long, is written  in Lisp, one of the liveliest (and most efficient)
              programming  languages.  The goal is to apply Sheafhom to study convex
              polytopes.  Convex polyhedra are solid bodies with flat faces, like cubes,
              pyramids,  or hundred-faced diamonds.  A convex polytope is the same kind of
              body  in the fourth or higher dimension.  Since 1980, algebraic geometry has 
              become a major tool for studying polytopes.  This is surprising,  because
              algebraic geometry includes some of the most abstract  mathematics known, while
              polytopes, like crystals, are very concrete  objects.  Sheafhom will make
              possible some difficult computations in  algebraic topology and geometry; these
              will advance our understanding  of convex polytopes.  McConnell's project
              actually has two other  parts that are more loosely related to Sheafhom.  These
              are connected  with the Langlands conjectures, a very deep set of ideas that
              relates  number theory to other, more geometric parts of mathematics.  ***
