Title       : Essential Laminations in 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9704811

Award Number: 9704811
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66123              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Brittenham   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vassar College
	      124 Raymond Avenue
	      Poughkeepsie, NY  12604    845/437-5490

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704811  Brittenham       Essential laminations are one of a large array of
              objects that are  used to probe the structure of 3-manifolds.  They were
              developed as a  result of an attempt to generalize simultaneously two such
              classical  objects; the incompressible surface and the taut foliation.  This 
              project involves studying the structure of essential laminations and  how they
              sit inside of a 3-manifold, to extract information about the  `laminar'
              3-manifold.  The main goals that the investigator will  pursue are to show that
              every irreducible 3-manifold  homotopy-equivalent to a laminar manifold is
              homeomorphic to it, and  to show that laminar manifolds are finitely covered by
              Haken  manifolds.  He will also study taut foliations from the laminar point 
              of view, using this new point of view to study these older objects.  The goal
              is to find examples of manifolds that admit essential  laminations but which do
              not contain either of the two `parent'  objects.  An associated goal is to find
              a hyperbolic 3-manifold which  does not admit an essential lamination.       A
              3-dimensional manifold is an object which looks like our  ordinary
              3-dimensional space, if you don't look too far away from  where you are
              standing.  Such objects can behave very differently over  large distances,
              though; walking in a straight line, for example, can  bring you right back to
              where you started from (much like walking on  the surface of the spherical
              Earth).  3-manifold topology attempts to  describe this global structure.  In
              doing so, ideas are drawn from,  and applied to, many other branches of
              science; they have been applied  to chemistry, where they have helped to unlock
              some of the secrets of  DNA recombination, and they have been both drawn from
              and applied to  physics, in work aimed at understanding the basic building
              blocks of  the universe.  One technique that has proved fruitful in studying 
              3-manifolds is to think of the 3-manifold as a collection of surfaces  (called
              a foliation) stacked together (like the  pages of a book); then  one can use
              what is known about surfaces to explore the structure of  the 3-manifold.  The
              investigator plans to continue work aimed at  developing this approach.  ***
