Title       : Models of Biological Transport in Ionic Channels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  1997    
File        : a9704458

Award Number: 9704458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58761              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph W. Jerome jwj@math.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Jerome  9704458       The investigator develops, analyzes, and computes with 
              models of biological transport for ionic channels.  Ionic channels  are now
              known to mediate significant electrical activity through  cellular membranes. 
              The discovery of the patch clamp has made  experimental verification of such
              electrical currents possible.  Theoretical predictions proceed through a
              hierarchy of models.  For the simpler models, categorization of possible
              behavior is  sought, and the dynamics carefully studied.  In particular, gating
               is analyzed in great detail; this includes both regular and  anomalous
              behavior.  An understanding of the relation of the  channel to its ambient
              environment is achieved through the  calculation of the heat exchange of the
              protein.  In addition, a  complex asymptotic procedure yields a high field
              model,  particularly appropriate for channels, yet originally developed  for
              semiconductors.  This proposal benefits from the  investigators' previous
              experience in semiconductor modeling.  The  common thread of electro-diffusion
              leads to mathematical models  of surprising similarity.  This analogy has
              facilitated some  interesting studies, as well as some provocative conjectures.
               One  of these deals with the role of temperature in channels.  Another  deals
              with so-called active transport, and the association with  the molecule ATP.   
                 Ionic channels are protein molecules in cell membranes, and  have been
              linked to such diverse applications as drug receptors  on the one hand, and
              irregular gating in the brain and mental  illness on the other hand.  The
              investigator and colleagues in  mathematics and biology model the electrical
              and energetic  activity of channels.  The project greatly benefits from the 
              similarity in the mathematical models developed for both ionic  channels and
              semiconductor devices.  Whereas electrical currents  are induced by ions in
              channels, a similar role is played by  electrons and holes in semiconductors. 
              Powerful electric fields  coexist with int ense biological activity in the
              channel pore.  The  principal investigator and his colleagues study these
              analogies,  as well as separate issues of biological import, including the 
              possibility of explaining, in mathematical terms, the pulses  associated with
              the opening and closing of channels and the  energetics associated with active
              transport, including the action  of various ion "pumps." The work aims to
              clarify details  surrounding energy exchange, heating, and temperature
              variation.  The project uses both mathematical analysis and extensive  computer
              simulations.
