Title       : Mathematical Problems Related to Materials Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9704383

Award Number: 9704383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $52962              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harumi Hattori hhattori@wvu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : WV Univ Research Corp
	      P.O. Box 6845
	      Morgantown, WV  265066845    304/293-3998

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Hattori  9704383    We discuss the three subjects that are related to materials
              science. They  are the phase transition problem, magnetostriction, and
              hydrodynamic models  of semiconductors. The phase transition problems are a
              fundamental problem  in physics and an important research area in engineering.
              Some of the  materials undergoing the phase transition are called ``smart
              materials.''  Typical examples are shape memory alloys. In the phase transition
              problem we  examine the compatibility of the entropy rate admissibility
              criterion and  the entropy condition. Then, we discuss the existence of global
              weak  solutions and numerical analysis. We need a careful analysis of the 
              interaction between phase boundary and elementary waves (shock waves and 
              rarefaction waves). I believe that this research will bring a better 
              understanding of the phase transitions. The magnetostriction is the 
              combination of wave equations for elasticity and the Landau-Lifshitz  equations
              for the magnetic moment. We can regard them as nonlinear wave  equations with
              rate equations, where the rate equations have a special  structure. This gives
              an interesting dynamics. We consider the traveling  wave solutions, the smooth
              and weak solutions, numerical analysis, and etc.  We also consider the Ericksen
              bar. Some magnetic materials undergo phase  transition. This research may bring
              an insight to it. Also, this research  may be useful to study the hysteretic
              behavior observed in some magnetic  materials. The semiconductors are important
              materials or devices in  industry. Recently, the hydrodynamic models are
              becoming more popular. The  equations we discuss consist of the hydrodynamic
              equations for electrons and  the Poisson equation for the electrostatic
              potential. We consider mainly the  stability of steady state solutions. The
              stability issue is an important  subject especially when there are multiple
              steady state solutions.    I study mathematical aspects of materials science.
              One goal is to have  better understanding of t he phase transitions. In phase
              transition problems  we discuss the change of various properties of materials
              due to change in  factors such as temperature. A typical example is water which
              changes to  vapor or ice depending on temperature. The phase transitions take
              place in  magnetic materials too. The phase transitions in magnetic materials
              are used  for various switching devices or recording devices. A very good
              example of  magnetic material is a videorecording tape. It is important to
              understand  the mechanisms of phase transitions so that we can construct better
              devices.  In some such materials, it is important to consider both elastic and 
              magnetic effects as both influence the ways in which the phase transitions 
              occurs. By elastic effects we mean the effects associated with compressing  or
              pulling the material. There are mathematical models describing the phase 
              transitions. I plan to study how various effects such as above influence  each
              other. I would like to study these mathematical models analytically as  well as
              numerically. I also study hydrodynamic models of semiconductors. In  these
              types of models we regard the electric current as ``fluid'' and study  how this
              ``fluid'' flows in semiconductors. Semiconductors are used in PCs  and other
              electric devices. To study how the electric current runs in the  semiconductors
              is very important and interesting. There are a few  hydrodynamic models
              depending on what kind of effects one wants to consider.  An important effect
              that has not been considered is temperature. I would  like to consider such
              effects.
