Title       : Development of Dynamical Systems Techniques with Applications in Nonlinear
               Optics and Oceanography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 11,  2000 
File        : a9704906

Award Number: 9704906
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher K. Jones ckrtj@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704906  Jones    Dynamical systems offers a body of modern mathematical
              techniques with   the potential for application to a number of problems in
              current science and   technology.  The principal investigator plans to develop
              techniques that are   specifically geared to solving important problems in
              optical pulse   propagation and mixing attendant to mesoscale ocean structures.
              In optical    communications, lasers, and fiber couplers a key issue is the
              support of   multiple pulses. These pulses may be separated in time, by
              polarization,   frequency or live on distinct but coupled fibers. Based on
              needed extensions   of the current mathematical technology,  techniques will be
              developed that   promise a major contribution to these issues through stability
              calculations of   pulses found by homoclinic bifurcation theory and other
              related methods.   For mixing in ocean structures, perturbations of the
              quasigeostrophic   models will be used to assess the efficacy of the added
              mechanisms to   promoting Lagrangian transport. This has already been
              successful in   studying the effects of viscosity and, using this analysis as a
              starting point,   the plan is to incorporate other effects and ascertain their
              role in what is   now known to be a significant phenomenon in ocean  transport,
              namely the   advection of fluid particles due to the splitting of separatrices.
                 The importance of the work in this project lies both in the significance of 
               the applications and the promise of building a body of techniques that can  
              be used in other areas. The capacity of optical communication systems is  
              limited by the ability of the fiber to carry, simultaneously, multiple pieces
              of   information. Many scenarios have been proposed but most require the  
              resolution of difficult mathematical problems concerning the stability of  
              these pulses and assessment of their interactions. Envisioned in the work of  
              this project is  the development of techniques for addressing these difficult  
              questions. The second application  to be considered is quite different. To   
              understand the distribution of fluid properties, such as salinity and  
              temperature, in regions of the ocean governed by well-known currents, such   as
              the Gulf Stream, is central in understanding, for instance, the origin and  
              progress of weather patterns. The key to determining these distributions are  
              the transport mechanisms associated with well-defined structures within   these
              currents. The flows are, however, so complex that the elucidation of   these
              transport scenarios remains a formidable challenge. The work under   this
              project will be to implement analytic approaches aimed at isolating the  
              underlying physical mechanisms responsible for certain observed types of  
              transport and thus lead to more effective predictability of fluid  
              redistribution near such currents and other ocean structures.
