Title       : Resolvable-and Subgrid-Scale Measurements in the Atmospheric Surface Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1999  
File        : a9704740

Award Number: 9704740
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $398488             (Estimated)
Investigator: John C. Wyngaard wyngaard@ems.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis W. Thomson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James G. Brasseur  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract/Wyngaard  ATM-9704740      Large-eddy simulation (LES) has become t he
              modeling method of choice  in micrometeorological research.  Nonetheless its
              performance in the  surface layer suffers because of inadequate numerical
              resolution and  heavy reliance on the precision of the subgrid-scale (SGS)
              model there.   Until recently, little attention has been focused on these
              deficiencies in  the surface layer, probably for two reasons.  First,
              experimental  limitations make it difficult to produce data for thorough
              testing of LES.    No direct measurements of the resolvable-scale fields that
              LES predicts  have been reported, for example.  Second, the weaknesses of the 
              traditional SGS models in the surface layer have not been documented in   much
              detail.    Measurements of resolvable- and subgrid-scale atmospheric turbulence
              in  the atmospheric surface layer for the purpose of testing and improving  SGS
              closures for LES are proposed here.  Recent studies indicate major  weaknesses
              of the widely used Smagorinsky SGS model near the surface.   A new experimental
              technique is proposed whereby a lateral array of  sensors is used to measure
              two-dimensionally filtered turbulence variables  in the atmospheric surface
              layer.  The preliminary studies presented here,  which demonstrate the
              potential of the technique, will be extended  in  the proposed studies. 
              Resolvable and SGS variables will be measured in  the surface layer over a
              range of ABL states, from nearly neutral to highly  convective, and shall be
              analyzed to study resolvable and subgrid-scale  dynamics in detail.  The
              resulting data and new physical insight will be  coupled with parallel program
              using direct numerical simulation and LES  data to provide the necessary
              impetus for the development of improved  SGS models for surface-layer
              turbulence.    The proposed program is part of a coordinated effort in a multi-
               disciplinary research group at the Penn State University directed at  analysis
              and improvement of SGS modeling through combined  numerical  simulation and
              field measurement.  The present studies will provide  benchmark data for the
              development of remote sensing techniques for  the measurement of filtered
              turbulence in the surface layer.
