Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Mapping Class Groups and Teichmueller Spaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9704817

Award Number: 9704817
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolai V. Ivanov ivanov@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704817  Ivanov       This project is concerned with the algebraic structure of
              the  mapping class groups of surfaces and the geometric structure of 
              Teichmueller spaces.  As is well known, they are deeply related, and  also
              related to the combinatorial structure of complexes of curves of  surfaces. 
              The investigator, Nikolai Ivanov, has successfully exploited  these
              interrelations in the past, and intends to continue this line of  research. 
              First, he is planning to explore the possibility that the  mapping class groups
              are quasi-isometrically rigid, guided by the  analogy between mapping class
              groups and arithmetic groups and recent  results about arithmetic groups due to
              R. Schwartz, B. Farb, A. Eskin,  B. Kleiner and B. Leeb.  Another part of the
              project is concerned with  the structure of subgroups of the mapping class
              groups normally  generated by pseudo-Anosov elements.  The hope is that the 
              Teichmueller spaces are "sufficiently hyperbolic" (as evidenced by the  recent
              theorem of H. Masur and Y. Minsky about hyperbolicity of  complexes of curves)
              in order for such subgroups to exist in  abundance.  Finally, the investigator
              is planning to explore two more  recent geometric structures on Teichmueller
              spaces, namely, the  Thurston semi-metric and the Kerckhoff geometry.  In
              particular, he  is planning to find all automorphisms of these structures.     
               The global study of surfaces and of various geometric structures  on them goes
              back to the last century, with the foundations laid down  by Gauss, Moebius,
              and Riemann.  The mapping class groups encode all  possible symmetries of
              surfaces, while Teichmueller spaces collect  together all possible geometric
              structures of a particular sort on a  surface.  It turns out that these two
              aspects of the theory of  surfaces are deeply interrelated, and the project
              focuses on several  aspects of this relationship.  In the last decade, the
              theory of  surfaces acquired an additional significance as a result of a
              promising  physical "theory of everything ," namely the so-called string
              theory.  In this theory, the elementary constituents of matter are not 
              point-like particles, but rather collections of loops ("strings")  sweeping a
              surface during their motion.  It turns out that both  various geometric
              structures on surfaces, as well as their symmetries,  are of fundamental
              importance here.  ***
