Title       : Surface Tension Driven Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1999     
File        : a9704793

Award Number: 9704793
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Demetrios T. Papageorgiou depapa@aphrodite.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Papageorgiou    This project will study several nonlinear problems involving 
              free surfaces separating fluids with different properties and  where surface
              tension is important. We will study flows  modelled by nonlinear evolution
              equations which encounter  finite-time singularities as interfaces touch and a
              change in  topology takes place. An example is the breakup of a liquid  jet
              into droplets. A paradigm problem of physical interest is  the compound jet
              comprised of a core fluid surrounded by a second  immiscible annular fluid.
              Breakup under the capillary instability  usually produces compound spherical
              particles and analysis of  the local singular phenomenon is of value in both
              designing  experiments and incorporation into and testing of hybrid large scale
               simulations. In addition we will study the motion and management  of bubbles
              in surfactant solutions (fluid phases with impurities).  Of particular
              theoretical importance is the prediction of parameter  ranges where the bubble
              is remobilized after its bouyant or  thermocapillary motion is arrested or
              retarded by surfactant build-up  at the back end of the spherical bubble. In
              many cases system parameters  are large and asymptotic solutions of the
              singular perturbation  type will be constructed and analyzed.    We study two
              related classes of fundamental problems  encountered in several key
              technological and  manufacturing situations. A common feature is the presence
              of interfaces  separating fluids. These have important effects on how the
              fluids move  and the mathematical and computational analysis of such models is 
              extremely useful in diverse manufacturing processes as well as on-going 
              experiments in microgravity environments (for instance parabolic flights  as
              well as in the space shuttle). Using tools of mathematical  analysis and modern
              computational methods will enable us to identify  important physical regimes
              which would perhaps be prohibitively  expensive in the laboratory or in space.
              In addition, the use of mathematical  analy sis is imperative in extreme
              situations (which are more the rule  rather than the exception in many
              processes - for instance the  breakup of a liquid jet into droplets). Besides
              their intrinsic usefulness,  such mathematical solutions can be used to make
              large scale computations  more accurate and efficient as well as test the
              accuracy of existing codes.  Liquid jet breakup has many modern applications in
              addition to the more  traditional ones of printing and fuel injection systems.
              Compound jets  are useful in the manufacture of compound particles used for
              slow drug release,  the manufacture of fibres used to reinforce mechanical or
              aerodynamic  components, and color printing with environmentally friendly inks
              and dyes.  Our studies of bubble dynamics should lead to identification of
              efficient  operational regimes in large scale purification systems
              (contaminated liquids  are often purified by passing large numbers of gas
              bubbles through them),  provide theoretical guidelines for the design of safe
              agricultural sprays,  and produce theories that can be compared to experiments
              done in space  aiming at the production of sophisticated materials in 
              containerless microgravity environments.
