Title       : Statistical Modeling of Multidimensional Movements of Free Ranging Animals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  1999     
File        : a9704739

Award Number: 9704739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $241000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Brillinger brill@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                Brillinger, Kie, Preisler and Stewart  9704739    This interdisciplinary
              research is aimed toward developing multidimensional models of motion based on 
              recorded trajectories of marine mammals and terrestrial animals among other
              moving entities. One central  objective is the development of flexible models
              that can  accommodate the movements of a variety of  faunal  taxa,  their
              intra- and inter-specific interactions, and their interactions with the
              environment.   Characterizing the trajectories of animals traveling great
              distances through the oceans for example   requires models for diffusion
              processes on the sphere.  Stochastic differential equations will have to be 
              adapted to this situation and in particular to include covariates, 
              nonparametric coefficients and non- Gaussian processes.  Basic inferential
              aspects of diffusion processes, many of which are as yet unstudied 
              particularly with respect to animal movement, will also be explored in this
              study.    Two primary data sets will be analyzed. One consists of geographic
              locations (determined daily) and dive  depth (determined every 30s to 60s) of
              northern elephant seals during their migrations of 3 to 8 months in  the north
              Pacific. The second data set consists of hourly locations of Rocky Mountain elk
              and mule deer, together with geographic information on habitat types. Since
              animal movements are determined by biological and physical features of the
              environment and this may be anticipated to vary with the climate,  this
              research relates to the Strategic Area of environment and global change within
              the general framework  of the National Science Foundation. The movement models
              to be developed will allow formal assessment  of temporal and spatial aspects
              of change and of wildlife responses to them.
