Title       : Research in Knots and 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 16,  2000  
File        : a9704726

Award Number: 9704726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Xiao-Song Lin xl@math.ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704726  Lin       The landscape of the study of knots and 3-manifolds has
              undergone  a dramatic change in the past decade.  Through the advent of the
              Jones  polynomial, quantum invariants and Vassiliev invariants, it transpired 
              that knots, 3-manifolds and other lower dimensional topological objects  could
              be studied extrinsically as combinatorial objects, with topological 
              equivalence as a kind of symmetry.  The investigator recognized the broader 
              roles these topological objects may play, and this fresh point of view  is
              reflected in the many topics studied in this project: the representation 
              varieties of the fundamental groups of homology 3-spheres over finite  fields
              and their relations with Ohtsuki's invariants of homology  3-spheres; the
              probabilistic interpretation of certain string link  invariants closely related
              to quantum invariants; integral and projective  geometry of Gauss integrals,
              the classification of Legendrian knots, the  study of various energy
              functionals with respect to the geometric  structures on knot spaces, and the
              topology of level sets of Gauss  integrals; and calculation of relations among
              (alternating) multiple zeta  numbers, using string links as devices.      
              Knots are fascinating objects.  When fastening a rope, the  distinction between
              a knot and a "slip-knot" (one that can be undone by  pulling) must have been
              recognized very early in human history.  However,  a mathematical study of
              knots was started only around the end of the  nineteenth century and has
              finally in recent years matured into a useful  scientific tool.  Nowadays,
              basic concepts in knot theory are crucial for  DNA biology and foundational
              physics, and they are related to many other  fields in mathematics.  On the
              other hand, easily pictured but difficult  questions in knot theory still
              remain beyond the reach of mathematical  techniques.  Two basic features of
              knot theory, the diversity of different  kinds of knots and the role played by
              symmetry in their classification,  may well provide hin ts and tools for many
              different kinds of scientific  research.  ***
