Title       : RUI: Granular Friction, Fluid Mixing and Related Nonlinear Phenomena
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1999     
File        : a9704301

Award Number: 9704301
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $297000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerry P. Gollub jgollub@haverford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Haverford College
	      Lancaster Avenue
	      Haverford, PA  19041    215/896-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,9162,9178,9229,AMPP,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9704301  Gollub    This is a renewal project which will extend our 
              understanding of nonlinear physical phenomena, especially  those involving
              granular materials and fluids, using small  scale laboratory experiments and
              involving undergraduate  students.  An extensive study will be made of the
              phenomena  of shear friction in granular layers.  Delicate shear force 
              measurements will be combined with simultaneous microscopic  imaging.  These
              improvements will allow the onset of stick-  slip motion, precursors, and the
              transition to continuous  slipping to be investigated in detail.  One goal is
              to  compare and contrast granular friction with solid-solid  friction.  A
              second focus will be the study of fluid mixing  phenomena, in which a passive
              impurity is mixed by a flow.  These experiments will include investigations of
              chaotic  advection in random cellular flows, and transport in  granular media. 
              Finally, continuing experiments on pattern  formation and dynamics of nonlinear
              waves will explore  phenomena such as hexagonal superlattice patterns with 
              multiple spatial periodicities.  %%%  This a renewal project which will extend
              our understanding  of nonlinear physical phenomena that can give rise to 
              complex or unpredictable behavior.  The project will focus  especially on
              granular or particulate materials and fluids,  using small scale laboratory
              experiments.  The training of  undergraduate students in research will be an
              important  aspect of this work.  An extensive study will be made of the  motion
              of layers of granular material when subjected to  shear forces.  Shear friction
              in granular layers is  potentially important in connection with earthquakes,
              though  these studies are aimed at achieving a basic understanding.  Delicate
              force measurements will be combined with optical  imaging to understand the
              onset of sudden slipping events,  and the localized precursors that occur in
              advance of major  events.  A second area of study will involve fluid mixing 
              phenomena, in which a passive impurity  is transported or  mixed by a fluid
              flow, which may contain a porous medium  such as sand.  Studies of this type
              may be relevant to the  transport of impurities in soils.  ***
