Title       : Nearly Integrable PDES: Open Mathematical Problems and Their Technological
               Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 13,  2000  
File        : a9704549

Award Number: 9704549
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Gregory Forest forest@amath.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704549  Forest    Modulation theory and rigorous analysis of the small
              dispersion limit of   scalar and vector nonlinear Schrodinger (NLS) equations
              are fundamental to   data transmission in nonlinear fiber optics.  For pulses
              in use today, so-  called "non-return-to-zero" or NRZ pulses, fundamental
              issues consist of:    how do the pulses degrade?, and, what combination of
              fiber properties and   pulse features determine how much and where the pulse
              degrades?  The   principal investigator and Ken McLaughlin have studied these
              questions for   two particular transoceanic fibers in use today, with answers
              provided to the   above questions.  Proposed new research involves the
              description of pulse   propagation once degradation has begun; mathematically,
              these results   require generalization of integrable PDE methods in two
              fundamental ways.    First, one must provide detailed behavior of the solution
              after shock   formation, including how fast the ripples spread and evolve with
              the main   pulse; and second, there are no results to date for weak dispersive
              behavior   of the coupled NLS equations which apply when there are birefringent
                effects, and there is no systematic construction of oscillatory solutions for
                coupled NLS pdes.    Current data transmission questions in nonlinear fiber
              optics have to be   answered in order to achieve a robust, faithful
              communication link for the   various planned applications.  These questions
              relate to:  the type of fiber   one uses; for a given fiber, the type of data
              one sends as carriers of   information bits; for given fiber and data, how long
              can the transmission   line be before unacceptable errors occur as bits become
              distorted.    Remarkably for the applied mathematical community, each of these
              issues   can be framed in terms of cutting-edge questions in special nonlinear
              partial   differential equations called nearly integrable.  The pulse
              propagation in   modern nonlinear fibers is well-known to be approximated by
              the solution   of perturbed nonlinear  Schrodinger equations, special equations
              studied in   great detail by the principal investigator for twenty years.  The
              material   properties of the fiber give coefficients in the equations, the
              length of the   fiber dictates how long one must construct the solution, and
              the shape of the   data that is sent  along the fibers is the input for the
              solution.  The modeling   of pulse propagation and degradation involves two
              phases:  the   mathematical understanding and description of the solutions of
              these   equations for these special types of input data; and the transfer of
              the   mathematical insights and tools to practical understanding,
              identification of   problems, and suggestions for remedies.  The issues of how
              pulses degrade   and how to shape pulses to minimize degradation are
              fundamental   mathematical issues which form the core of the proposed research.
               The P.I.   has and will continue to communicate with the technological
              community,   consisting thus far of visits and conversations with staff
              scientists at Lucent   Technologies and Corning,  Inc.
