Title       : RPG: Social Behavior And Population Genetics of Subterranean Rodents
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 25,  1997      
File        : a9704462

Award Number: 9704462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : October 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eileen A. Lacey ealacey@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 9169,9221,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9704462  Lacey    The proposed research will explore relationships between
              social behavior, demography, and population genetic structure in two species of
              tuco-tucos (Rodentia: Ctenomyidae) from northern Patagonia.  Previous studies
              by the PI have revealed that these taxa exhibit marked differences in social
              behavior and demography that generate discrete predictions regarding
              interspecific differences in the apportionment of genetic variation within and
              among local populations.  To quantify population genetic structure, tissue
              samples will be obtained from multiple populations of each species by sampling
              along north-south transects through the Limay Valley, Neuquen Province,
              Argentina.  Ctenomyid-specific microsatellite primeers developed by the PI will
              be used to characterize levels and patterns of genetic diversity in each
              species.  To assess the role of historical factors in creating observed
              differences in population genetic structure, sequence data will be generated
              for two portions of the mitochondrial genome.   Sequence data from the
              mitochondrial control region will be used in phylogeographic analyses that
              distinguis between current and historical gene flow.  To place comparative
              studies of ctenomyids into an evolutionary framework, sequence data from the
              cytochrome b locus of the mitochondrial genome will be used to explore the
              phylogenetic relationship between the study taxa.    Although current
              hypotheses regarding the evolution of sociality among subterranean rodents
              suggestthat social behavior and population genetic structure are fundamentally
              linked, no studies have explicitly compared patterns of genetic variation in
              solitary and social taxa.  When combined with behavioral and demographic data
              from ongoing studies of tuco-tucos from theLimay Valley, the proposed molecular
              analyses will yield a uniquely detailed picture of ctnomyid population
              structure.  Data form these taxa will, in turn, provide the basis for
              comparative analyses of social behavior, demography, and population str ucture
              among ctenomyids from other portions of South America.  More generally, the
              proposed research will establish much needed links between the disciplines of 
              behavioral ecology, population genetics and evolutionary biology.
