Title       : Geophysical Models: Regularity, Justification and Long-time Behavior
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 5,  1997  
File        : a9704632

Award Number: 9704632
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edriss S. Titi etiti@math.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Titi  9704632       The investigator and his colleague study the validity of 
              approximations to complex geophysical fluid problems.  The basic  problem faced
              in geophysical fluid dynamics is that a  mathematical description based only on
              fundamental physical  principles, which will be called the ``Primitive
              Equations,'' is  often prohibitively expensive computationally, and hard to
              study  analytically.  More manageable approximate models, which should 
              represent the behavior of the physical system on time and length  scales of
              interest, are therefore used for making predictions  about the real world. 
              Naturally, the question of validity of  such simpler models arises.  The first
              theme of this project is  the justification of two prototypical models of
              shallow water,  called the "Lake" and the "Great Lake" equations, which
              describe  the long-time motion of an inviscid, incompressible fluid  contained
              in a shallow basin with a slowly spatially varying  bottom, a free upper
              surface and vertical side walls, under the  influence of gravity and in the
              limit of small characteristic  velocities and very small surface amplitude.  It
              is expected that  the shallow water approximation can be justified only for
              limited  intervals of time, the length of which can be estimated.  In  order to
              validate the long time behavior of fluid dynamical  models, one has to compare
              the statistical properties of their  attracting invariant sets, rather than
              compare individual  solutions.  To do so, it is necessary to focus on models
              that  include some mechanism of dissipation.  The second theme of this  project
              concerns damping as a possible ``smoothing''  mechanism---a mechanism that is
              weaker than the viscosity  normally considered.  Technically, the question is
              whether linear  damping is sufficient to assert existence of a smooth or even 
              analytic global attractor.  This is first investigated for the  nonlinear
              Schrodinger equation.  Although not a geophysical  model, it is an important
              prototype for which partial result s are  already available.  Next, the
              Stommel-Charney model for the Gulf  stream is considered, where the Coriolis
              force is expected to  play an important role as a second regularization
              mechanism.  Lastly, a model for Benard convection in a porous medium is 
              investigated.  Here the temperature is diffusive while the fluid  velocity is
              only linearly damped.       Computer predictions of phenomena on large or
              global scales,  for example weather or climate forecasts, need to compromise 
              between accuracy of the predictions and available computing  resources.  It is
              therefore a major scientific concern to devise  approximation schemes and
              models that are efficient as well as  trustworthy.  The first aspect of this
              project concerns the  validity of models of shallow water.  Oceans, for
              example, are  shallow in the sense that they are much wider than they are deep.
               The shallowness is one of the features that are usually  exploited to obtain
              less complex models.  The project aims at the  justification of this procedure
              in the context of two examples  that are simple enough to allow detailed study,
              and yet contain  most of the difficulties found in more generic situations. 
              The  second aspect of the project concerns the long time behavior of  models in
              the presence of weak damping.  When a physical system is  modeled for long
              periods of time, the balance of energy input  (``driving'') and energy loss
              (``damping'') becomes very  important.  The project focuses on a particular
              mathematical  manifestation of damping, the so-called weak damping, and in 
              particular on how it influences the model for large times.
