Title       : Acquisition of a Vibrating Sample Magnetometer for the Characterization of
               Nanocomposite Magnetic Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  1997       
File        : a9704110

Award Number: 9704110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71540              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew D. Gavrin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704110  Gavrin    This vibrating sample magnetometer will be used to perform 
              research on the magnetic properties of metal-rich granular  ferromagnetic
              solids.   These are nanocomposite materials in  which there exists a continuous
              meal matrix with inclusions  of an immiscible nonmagnetic phase (e.g., Al2 O3).
               Using  the language of percolation theory, they may be described as  well
              above the critical concentration, with a percolating  magnetic phase.  While
              recent years have seen an upsurge in  granular metals research, metal-rich
              materials have been  largely ignored due to the absence of the giant 
              magnetoresistance effect.  Although natural in the course of  research, this
              state of affairs should not persist; metal  rich systems offer several
              promising avenues of  research,  both in applied and fundamental science. 
              Compared with  granular metals below the percolation transition, these 
              materials are both easier to study and more technologically  promising.  There
              are two principle reasons for this:  There is no difficulty evaluating the
              effects of a particle  size distribution, and The net magnetization is much 
              greater, and Tc may be well above room temperature.  This proposal will detail
              two studies of these materials.  The first deals with the fundamental nature of
              magnetism in  disordered systems, while the second addresses a possible 
              application.  Respectively the projects are:  A study of the  magnetic phase
              transition as the nonmagnetic impurities  reduce the magnetic correlation
              length, and An evaluation of  potential magnetic recording characteristics of
              hard  magnetic alloys with nonmagnetic impurities.  %%%  This vibrating sample
              magnetometer will be used to perform  research on the magnetic properties of
              metal-rich granular  ferromagnetic solids.   These are nanocomposite materials
              in  which there exists a continuous meal matrix with inclusions  of an
              immiscible nonmagnetic phase (e.g., Al2 O3).  Using  the language of
              percolation theory, they may be described as  well above t he critical
              concentration, with a percolating  magnetic phase.  While recent years have
              seen an upsurge in  granular metals research, metal-rich materials have been 
              largely ignored due to the absence of the giant  magnetoresistance effect. 
              Although natural in the course of  research, this state of affairs should not
              persist; metal  rich systems offer several promising avenues of  research, 
              both in applied and fundamental science.  Compared with  granular metals below
              the percolation transition, these  materials are both easier to study and more
              technologically  promising.  There are two principle reasons for this:  There
              is no difficulty evaluating the effects of a particle  size distribution, and
              The net magnetization is much  greater, and Tc may be well above room
              temperature.  This proposal will detail two studies of these materials.  The
              first deals with the fundamental nature of magnetism in  disordered systems,
              while the second addresses a possible  application.  Respectively the projects
              are:  A study of the  magnetic phase transition as the nonmagnetic impurities 
              reduce the magnetic correlation length, and An evaluation of  potential
              magnetic recording characteristics of hard  magnetic alloys with nonmagnetic
              impurities.  ***
