Title       : Subdifferentials and Their Applications to Control Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9704203

Award Number: 9704203
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64754              (Estimated)
Investigator: Qiji J. Zhu zhu@math-stat.wmich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704203  Zhu    The main goals of this project are to investigate several
              important areas of   mathematical control theory in which nonsmoothness is
              intrinsic to the   problem and the usual assumptions of Lipschitz continuity or
              continuity   must be replaced by assumptions of lower semicontinuity even if
              the   original problem is defined by continuous or even smooth data. As an  
              important tool for such investigations, it is also proposed to further develop 
               a basic theory and a calculus of subdifferentials. The control problems that  
              are intended to be investigated by these methods include:   (1) Controllability
              properties of unbounded control and differential   inclusion systems;  (2)
              Bilevel optimization problems;  (3) Infinite horizon problems with both
              initial-value and natural system   perturbations;  (4) Necessary optimality
              conditions for distributed control problems starting   with those defined by
              quasilinear elliptic partial differential equations;  (5) Value function and
              sensitivity analysis for delayed control problems;   and  (6) Dynamical
              programming approach to control problems with discrete   stochastic variables. 
                The control problems proposed above naturally arise in resource   management,
              flexible manufacturing system scheduling,  transportation   scheduling and
              other industry and management problems. These control   problems have been
              studied with simplified models in which the system   performance is assumed to
              be free of abrupt changes. However, in real life   problems such abrupt changes
              are not only unavoidable but rather often   among the most important features
              of the problem. The discontinuous   aspects of these problems will be studied
              with recent methods of the   subdifferential theory.  New methods will also be
              developed as needed.   Research results in this project are likely to shed
              light on other applications   that involve similar discontinuous behaviors.
