Title       : Acquisition of an Advanced X-ray Diffractometer System, Equipped with an Area
               Detector
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9704210

Award Number: 9704210
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen K. Streiffer streiffe@eos.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Angus I. Kingon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Spontak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704210  Streiffer       This award provides partial support through the 
              Division of Materials Research and the office of  Multidisciplinary Activities
              for the acquisition of a  multiuser, four-circle x-ray diffractometer equipped
              with  parabolic condensing mirrors and an x-ray area detector.  Such an
              instrument presents the opportunity to perform  significant novel,
              nontraditional characterization of a wide  variety of materials because of its
              configuration.  This  instrument will benefit faculty and students in Materials
               Research, Nuclear Engineering, Physics, and Chemical  Engineering, and will
              provide training for students.       First, four rotation axes allow a sample
              to be  arbitrarily positioned in real space using three axes, while  the
              diffracted radiation distribution is scanned with the  fourth axis.  The
              ability to orient a sample in three  dimensions has become crucial as
              increasing physical  anisotropy is routinely engineered into bulk specimens and
               thin films, and as more single-crystal-like materials are  used in a wide
              range of applications.       Second, parabolic, graded multilayer x-ray optical
               elements allow collection of Cu, Ka radiation from a wide  acceptance angle
              followed by conversion into a parallel  beam.  The concomitant increase in
              intensity relative to  flat crystal optics along with a beam divergence 
              intermediate between that of parafocusing or slit optics and  that of
              multi-bounce monochromators yields a collimated,  parallel beam that is ideally
              suited for experiments  performed on highly-oriented, but not epitaxial,
              materials,  and for experiments utilizing very low incident beam angles, 
              namely glancing incidence x-ray scattering and small angle x-  ray scattering. 
                   Third, area detection of the scattered radiation  facilitates examination
              of large areas of reciprocal space  in an extremely time-efficient manner. 
              This is of paramount  utility for any case in which there is complicated 
              reciprocal space structure.  As examples, area detection  great ly simplifies
              the collection of pole figures from  textured materials and the determination
              of diffraction peak  shapes for complex microstructures.       This equipment
              is required to fulfill the general need  for advanced characterization in
              materials science and  engineering.  Current materials research programs will
              be  significantly impacted by the proposed instrumentation.  These include: 
              (i) structural characterization of  multicomponent oxide thin films and
              heterostructures; (ii)  investigation of complex morphologies in block
              copolymers;  (iii) characterization of semiconductor thin film 
              heterostructures; (iv) investigation of the effects of  texture on creep,
              deformation, fracture, and degradation of  metals and alloys targeted for use
              in aggressive  environments, and (v) phase identification, microstructure 
              determination, and investigation of transformations in  nanosized powders and
              powder composites.  There is great  scientific and commercial interest in each
              of these areas,  and the capabilities provided by new diffraction 
              instrumentation will significantly extend the scientific  contribution obtained
              from existing funding sources.  Finally, the importance of access to
              state-of-the-art  methodologies, as will be provided by such a diffractometer, 
              is emphasized for both graduate and undergraduate training.  ***
