Title       : Bridging The Gap Between Heuristic and Exact Approaches in Process Systems
               Engineering via Analytical Investigations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9704643

Award Number: 9704643
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152905             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nikolaos V. Sahinidis nikos@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Abstract - Sahinidis - 9704643      There are two approaches to process
              synthesis and optimization - heuristic and analytical.  Heuristics offer fast
              solutions but do not guarantee optimality.  Analytical integer programming
              approaches offer rigor but suffer combinatorial explosion of computational
              requirements (i.e. as the problems become larger, the solutions become
              computationally too large for most systems).  This project will pursue
              analytical investigations as a theoretical means to characterize the behavior
              of heuristics and optimization algorithms and produce a framework that combines
              the strengths of the two approaches while eliminating their weaknesses.    
              Preliminary results demonstrate the proposed paradigm in the context of the
              multi-period capacity expansion problem for chemical process networks.  The
              multi-period aspects of it makes this problem similar to discrete-time
              scheduling.  The same problem requires optimizing a superstructure as in
              synthesis problems.  Analytical investigations for this problem lead to the
              development of a heuristic which is proved to be asymptotically optimal under
              standard assumptions about the problem parameters.      In the more general
              scope of process synthesis and operations, analytical investigations present a
              large array of opportunities.  The work planned will deal explicitly with
              problems in (I) multi-period process operations, (ii) synthesis of heat
              exchanger networks, and (iii) synthesis of separation networks.  The PI's
              efforts will be directed towards (1) determining the computational complexity
              of these problems, (2) analyzing the worst case and expected behavior of
              existing heuristics, and (3) developing new, mathematical programming-based,
              polynomial time heuristics that are optimal in a statistical sense.
