Title       : Design of Mobile Computing and Communication Systems with Mobile Base Stations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1997      
File        : a9704101

Award Number: 9704101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9325               (Estimated)
Investigator: Ravi Prakash   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 2876      OPER SYSTEMS AND COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 2891,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Most existing models of mobile computing systems assume the  presence of
              stationary base stations connected by a high  bandwidth wireline network
              backbone. Such systems are not  suitable for digital battlefield situations and
              emergency  response operations. Hence, there is a need for mobile  computing
              systems with mobile base stations. The flexibility  and robustness of such
              systems is at the cost of  increased complexity. Some of the problems that
              arise are:  (i) Difficulty in providing cellular coverage to the entire 
              service area all the time. (ii) Changing configuration of  cells complicates
              wireless channel allocation. Also, some  wireless channels are needed for
              communication links  between the mobile base stations. (iii) Mobile base
              stations  and the backbone links between them are resource poor  compared to
              their static counterparts. (iv) Changing  cellular configuration makes location
              management and  communication handoffs between cells more complicated.  In
              order to solve some of the problems mentioned above, a  five step approach will
              be adopted: (i) Formalization of a  taxonomy of mobile computing systems based
              on the mobility  pattern of base stations. (ii) Development of stochastic 
              models with different base station mobility characteristics.  (iii) Employment
              of analytical results in the development  ofdistributed algorithms for cell
              planning, channel  allocation, location management, and handoff management. 
              (iv) Simulation experiments to measure the performance of  these algorithms.
              (v) Software implementations of the  algorithms. Time and resource permitting,
              the software  solutions will be ported to off-the-shelf computation and 
              wireless communication devices.***
