Title       : Polymer Surface Chemistry: Structure and Reactivity of Surface Segments and
               Oligomeric Chain Distributions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1997     
File        : a9704996

Award Number: 9704996
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven L. Bernasek                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $271000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Gardella gardella@acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                  This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface   Chemistry
              Program and the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities, addresses the
              question of surface segregation of  polymer segments at polymer surfaces. 
              Professor Gardella and   his research group at SUNY-Buffalo use methods of
              surface   analysis including secondary ion massspectrometry and X-ray  
              photoelectron spectroscopy to probe the composition of various   polymer
              surfaces.  This collaborative multidisciplinary project  combines the efforts
              of synthetic polymer scientists who will  make selected siloxane polymers with
              this group's expertise in  the application of a variety of surface
              characterization methods  to the study of these materials.  The kinetics of
              diffusion of  the components of siloxane polymer monolayer films through 
              overlayer polymers will be determined using this array of  methods.  Segment
              length and molecular weight distribution for a  range of siloxane copolymers
              will be examined as a function of  polymer architecture and preparation
              conditions.  The  determination of structure and reactivity at polymer surfaces
              and  interfaces is the overall goal of this work.     The connection between
              the bulk microstructure of copolymer   systems and the surface composition is a
              little explored area of   polymer surface chemistry.  This collaborative
              multidisciplinary  research project uses state of the art surface analytical
              methods  of this group to probe the segregation of polymer segments at 
              copolymer interfaces that will be prepared by collaborators with  synthetic
              polymer expertise, and addresses the effects of these  compositional changes on
              the surface properties of these  materials.  This information is vital to the
              design of new  polymer systems with useful surface properties.                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
