Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Biosensors for Trichloroethylene (TCE)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9704103

Award Number: 9704103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bruce K. Hamilton                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Steffan Steffan@Envirogen.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Envirogen, Inc.
	      4100 Quakerbridge Road
	      Lawrenceville, NJ  086484702    609/936-9300

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1168,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                This Phase II SBIR project involves the development and testing of biosensors
              to measure trichloroethylene (TCE) in groundwater.  During Phase I, TCE
              reporter strains were constructed by fusing a TCE-inducible transcriptional
              promoter from Pseudomonas mendocina KRl to a bioluminescence gene cassette. 
              The reporter strains produced light in the presence of TCE, and the amount of
              light produced was proportional to the amount of TCE present.  During Phase II
              we will determine and validate the performance characteristics of the
              biosensors by measuring TCE in a wide variety of TCE-contaminated groundwaters.
               We also will develop methods for applying the reporter strains in TCE test
              kits, including the use of freeze-dried cells.  Furthermore, we will use the
              reporter strains to develop on-line biosensor probes that can be used for
              continuous monitoring of TCE in bioreactors and/or down hole monitoring of TCE
              in groundwater monitoring wells.  In addition to TCE biosensors, new biosensors
              will be constructed to measure gasoline (BTEX) contamination in groundwater. 
              The BTEX sensors will also be used as QA/QC check standards to evaluate the
              accuracy of TCE measurements made with the TCE biosensors.  A new series of
              biosensors for both TCE and BTEX will be constructed by replacing the
              bioluminescence reporter cassettes with genes encoding the production of green
              fluorescent protein, thereby allowing microscopic examination of reporter
              stains used for modeling the migration and performance of degradative organisms
              in aquifers.  The biosensors and biosensor probes will be used commercially to
              measure TCE in groundwater, improve process control in bioreactors, and reduce
              the cost of in situ remediation technologies.                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
