Title       : Neuromolecular Computer Design through Adaptive Surface Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  2001     
File        : a9704190

Award Number: 9704190
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320437             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Hase wlh@traj.chem.wayne.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Conrad  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      5050 Cass
	      Detroit, MI  482023900    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              *** 9704190 Conrad Artificial neuromolecular (ANM) architectures are brain-like
              computer designs in which the input-output capabilities of the neuronal units
              are controlled by internal dynamics that serve to fuse signals in space and
              time.  These internal (or intra-neuronal) dynamics are motivated by molecular
              process believed to be operative in real neurons.  The pattern processing and
              control capabilities of the global architecture this draw on neuronal as well
              as network level dynamics.  Evolutionary algorithms orchestrate this repertoire
              into groupings suitable for coherent perception-action tasks, including tasks
              involving complex sequences of actions.  The system is being applied to Chinese
              character differentiation and recognition/effector control behavior in a
              maze-like environment. The objective of this project is to develop a
              methodology for designing networks to increase the effectiveness of
              evolutionary computing as an adaptation technique.  The AM architecture is use
              as the testbed.  Four submodels with different types of dynamics have bee
              developed for this purpose.  The first is an abstract (dual dynamics), network
              model that consist of pattern recognizing components subject to weak collective
              interactions.  The second, the cytomatrix neuron, is a softened cellular
              automaton.  the third is a coupled oscillator model motivated by the neuron
              cytoskeleton.  the fourth is a general simulation system that can be used to
              model motivated by the neuronal cytoskeleton.  The fourth is a general
              simulation system that  can be used to model a wide variety of intracellular
              dynamic processes involving the co-action of kinetic and structural processes. 
              These different submodels con be studied in their own right  and also can be
              embedded in the neural units of ANM system.  The comparative experimental study
              of these models complement theoretical analysis and provided guidelines for
              adaptive surface engineering pertinent to a wide variety of neural
              architectures. ***
