Title       : Arkansas Center for Membrane Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9704712

Award Number: 9704712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James Hoehn                             
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $588663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael L. Jennings   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                9704712  Jennings  The objective of the
              proposed project is to develop the Arkansas  Center for Membrane Biology at the
              University of Arkansas for  Medical Sciences (UAMS). The rationale for choosing
              membrane  biology for development is that expertise in the study of  membrane
              receptors, transporters, and channels will complement  and augment several
              existing basic research strengths at UAMS,  including neuroscience,
              glycobiology, endocrinology, virology,  and toxicology. The Chancellor and the
              Dean of the College of  Medicine at UAMS have made a major commitment to
              building in this  area with the hiring in 1995 of the P.I. of this proposal, 
              Michael L. Jennings, as Chairman of the Department of Physiology   and
              Biophysics. Newly renovated laboratory space and salary lines  to hire six
              faculty (three new positions and three replacements)   have been provided to
              Dr. Jennings. Two additional faculty  recently hired with adjunct appointments
              in Physiology and  Biophysics will also contribute importantly to the critical
              mass   of investigators in membrane biology. NSF EPSCoR funds are  requested to
              enhance the equipment startup packages for new  faculty and to support core
              facilities that are needed for  competitive research in membrane biology.      
                    Development of the Center will focus on two themes. The first is  the
              regulation of function of membrane receptors for hormones and 
              neurotransmitters. There are currently four members of this  group, with one
              established investigator, Lawrence E. Comett. The  others are George T.
              Blevins, Jr., Richard C. Kurten, and Dana  Gaddy-Kurten, all of whom study
              different aspects of peptide  hormone receptors. Dr. Blevins has been Assistant
              Professor for  three years; Drs. Kuden and Gaddy-Kurten were hired as Assistant
               Professors in August, 1996. Two additional faculty will be hired  in this
              area.         The other group of investigators will use biophysical approaches 
              to study membrane transport and electrophysiology.  The nucleus of  this group
              consists of M.L. Jennings, Gerald Dienel, and Z. Jimmy  Zhou. Dr. Dienel was
              hired as Associate Professor in April, 1996,  and Dr. Zhou was hired as
              Assistant Professor in August, 1996.  Two additional faculty will be hired in
              the area of transport  biophysics and electrophysiology. The two areas of focus
               (receptors and biophysics) will not be isolated from each other;  there will
              be constant interaction between the groups, and the  faculty to be hired will
              very likely have interests that overlap  both groups.         EPSCoR funds are
              requested for the purchase of equipment and the  support of core facilities
              that will enhance the competitiveness  of the target faculty: Blevins, Kuden,
              Gaddy-Kurten, Dienel,  Zhou, and four faculty to be hired. The core facilities
              are a  molecular biology laboratory, a transgenic mouse facility, and  computer
              facility for access to DNA sequence data bases. Funds  are also requested for
              an extensive extramural seminar program,  which will allow faculty to interact
              closely with leading experts  in membrane biology. Other funds will be used for
              summer salary  for visiting faculty from neighboring undergraduate institutions
               and for stipends for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows.         Three
              major equipment items are requested. The first is a work  station for the laser
              manipulation of cells (laser scissors and  tweezers), to be used by Drs. Kurten
              and Gaddy-Kurten to enable  them to select rare cells from a population and to
              do a variety  of other cellular manipulations. The second item is equipment for
               optical imaging of calcium, to be used by Drs. Zhou and Blevins  to quantify
              the time course and spatial pattern of calcium  release from intracellular
              stores or entry across the plasma  membrane. The third item is a brain imaging
              system to be used by  Dr. Dienel and several collaborators for analysis of
              transport  and metabolism in intact central nervous system. Additional 
              equipment funds are requested to enhance the startup  packages for  the four
              additional faculty to be hired.         A plan is in place for the professional
              development of the  faculty in the Center, including the provision of protected
              time   for junior faculty, publication goals, and assistance in  preparing
              grant proposals. The national reputations of faculty  will be developed by
              participation in national meetings and other  off campus learning experiences;
              hosting visits by seminar  speakers; presentation of seminars at other
              institutions; and  participation as peer reviewers of manuscripts and grants.
              The  goals over the next few years are for individual faculty to  become
              established investigators with extramural funding, and for  major
              multi-investigator grants to result from common interests  and complementary
              expertise among members of the Center.
