Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Surfactant Effects in Viscous Fingering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1997       
File        : a9704746

Award Number: 9704746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Siegel siegel@admin.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704746  Siegel    The goal of the proposed project is to study  the effects of
              surfactant on free surface flows in  their highly nonlinear regime.  This
              includes the  time-dependent evolution of an interface that is severely 
              deformed and contains many excited wavelengths.  Attention will be focused  on
              a simple model system, namely the  displacement of a viscous fluid by a less
              viscous  fluid in a Hele-Shaw cell (a cell consisting of  two closely spaced
              glass plates). The interface   between the fluids is subject to the
              Saffman-Taylor  instability and develops a finger-like pattern.  This system
              serves as a model for flow through porous media.    Moreover, since the
              Saffman-Taylor instability is  an undesirable phenomena in crude  oil recovery,
              the problem is industrially important.  The main emphasis will be on examining 
              the effects  of surfactants on   steady and time-dependent finger patterns, 
              and their role in enhancing or suppressing  finger-tip splitting and
              side-branching instabilities.  This differs from studies of surfactant effects 
              in most other systems, since typically the free surfaces  are assumed to be
              fixed in space or only slightly deformed,  or close to a steady state
              configuration.  Methods  employed will include asymptotic analysis  and
              numerical simulation. The practical goal  of such studies is to control the
              size  and shape of fingers, in the hopes of enhancing  oil recovery.    Free
              surface motions, such as waves on water or bubbles rising  in a liquid, are
              important in many areas of science and  engineering. A number of modern
              technological processes  involve free surface flows. Examples include coating
              processes,   ink jet printing processes, and oil recovery.  The presence of
              surfactant  on a free surface can significantly  affect the properties of the  
              surface.  Common surfactants include detergents,  fatty acids, and alcohols. 
              Even very small amounts of surfactant can  cause significant variation in the
              value of surface tension  at a fluid-fluid interface.  Thi s can have a
              dramatic influence on  the evolution of the free surface.   Such effects are
              particularly important during materials processing in   the microgravity
              environment of space.  Understanding  the role of  surface tension variations
              in interfacial evolution  will hopefully lead to better  control of free
              surface motion in engineering applications.
