Title       : Cooperative Games
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1997      
File        : a9704951

Award Number: 9704951
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126000             (Estimated)
Investigator: T.E.S. Raghavan ter@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Raghavan   DMS 9704951  Cooperative Games  NSF Abstract      The proposal
              addresses algorithmic problems of cooperative and  noncooperative dynamic
              games.  Cooperative Games: How should the common costs be allocated fairly 
              among the benefeciaries of a joint enterprise is a basic problem  widespread in
              both private firms and in public enterprises. While  cost accountants and
              practitioners have stuck to a few cost  allocation practises , these procedures
              are being questioned by  researchers especially by game theorists who would
              like the  procedures to be fair, equitable and reflective of the decision 
              makers power and influence in steering the course of actions.  Cooperative game
              theory addresses precisely these issues.  Till recently game theorists have
              been proposing many solutions  without any efficient solution technique to
              solve for them.  Often many practical cost allocation problems and profit
              sharing  problems can be modeled as games whose essential coalitions grow  only
              polynomially with he size of the player set.  The project is aimed at
              developing efficient  algorithms  that will  solve for the nucleolus and the
              Shapley value for  many models.  Stochastic games: In the area of stochastic
              games  the aim is to  study non-zero sum games in limiting average payoffs for
              finite  and arbitrary state spaces and to look for correlated and Nash 
              equilibria.  Unlike zero-sum games, non-zero sum  structured  stochastic games
              may not possess even epsilon -stationary  Nash equilibria in limiting average
              payoff. Even more important  is to develop allgorithms to locate Nash
              equilibria, at least  for structured stochastic games.    Increasingly
              industries and organizations and even federal  funding agencies want to measure
              the contributions of joint  efforts. In environmental  problems accurately
              allocating costs or  fines for industrial pollutions will be possible with 
              cooperative game theoretic solutions. In civil law suits and in  divorce law
              suits, the ad hoc but intuitively appealing decisions   by judges based on the
              individual cases can be backed up by  quantifiable approaches using cooperative
              game theoretic solutions.  The strategic behavior of price wars by airlines, 
              the tax evasion and auditing by tax offices, auto manufacturing  competitions
              can  all be analyzed using stochastic game theoretic  methods and models. The
              solutions backed up  by efficient algorithms  for computation is essential for
              the applicability of Game Theory  to real life problems.
