Title       : Topics in Heavy Tailed Modeling and Long Range Dependence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 26,  1999   
File        : a9704982

Award Number: 9704982
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $256500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sidney I. Resnick resnick@orie.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gennady Samorodnitsky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9218,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704982  Resnick    Sidney Resnick and Gennady Samorodnitsky will continue a
              program of research organized around the theme of heavy tailed modeling and its
              connections to long range dependence.  Heavy tailed modeling frequently implies
              infinite variances and thus departs from Gaussian methods. Broad themes of the
              research program include parameter estimation and prediction in heavy tailed
              models, model selection and confirmation, and the interplay between long range
              dependence and heavy tails. Special attention is given to application areas
              which include the financial and commodities markets and teletraffic networks
              such as the World Wide Web.  Both probabilistic modeling and statistical issues
              are emphasized.  Statistical issues include coping with changes of methods
              implied by non-standard data features such as long range dependence, lack of
              existence of moments and correlations, and dependencies which cannot be
              captured by linear structures.  Probabilistic models will be formulated and
              studied in an attempt to qualitatively explain observed features of the data.  
               The increasing instrumentation of both financial markets and broadband data
              networks makes possible the collection of huge quantities of data.  Examination
              of some of the data reveals features that classical statistics and probability
              models are not used to dealing with and hence, this project has a dual purpose:
               (a) To develop statistical tools which use the data to more reliably fit
              models and make predictions; (b) To build probability models which provide
              qualitative insights into the nature of the system under investigation.  For
              example, modern broadband networks exhibit characteristics much different from
              what is predicted by classical models.  A question which may be answered by
              this research is, "when is it economically advisable to add service capacity to
              the network?".
