Title       : University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs: Modelingand Computation of
               the Overall Magnetic and Rheological Properties of Magnetorheological Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9704963

Award Number: 9704963
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando Reitich   (Principal Investigator current)
              Beth Munoz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark R. Jolly  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kazufumi Ito  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              H. Thomas Banks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1504,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
                  MODELING AND COMPUTATION  OF THE OVERALL MAGNETIC AND  RHEOLOGICAL
              PROPERTIES OF  MAGNETORHEOLOGICAL FLUIDS:  A joint Lord Corp.--CRSC proposal
              submitted to NSF  author  Mark R. Jolly & Beth C. Munoz   Advanced Technologies
              Research Group   Lord Corporation  Thomas Lord Research Center  405 Gregson
              Drive  Cary, NC 27511-7900    Fernando Reitich, H. Thomas Banks & Kazufumi Ito 
               Department of Mathematics and CRSC  Box 8205   North Carolina State University
               Raleigh, NC 27695--8205    PROJECT SUMMARY    This project deals with the
              mathematical modeling, analysis and  computations of the magnetic and
              rheological characteristics of  ``smart'' fluids.  It has recently been
              demonstrated that many of the classical  obstacles for the development of
              industrially viable controllable  devices based on fluids can be overcome with
              the use of  appropriate magnetorheological (MR) suspensions. Indeed, the 
              successful synthesis of MR fluids with low power demand, high  achievable yield
              stresses, short response times and low  sensitivity to impurities has allowed
              the Lord Corporation, Cary,  North Carolina, to become the first ---and, so
              far, the only---  company to develop a variety of commercial dampers and brakes
               that operate on MR materials (see, for instance,  http://www.mrfluid.com).   
              Attempts at optimizing the macroscopic characteristics of such  products are
              still out of reach, however, due to the expense  involved in a thorough
              experimental investigation of their  properties and the lack of accurate and
              efficient predictive  mathematical models and computational tools.  It is the
              goal of this project to advance the present  capabilities in these latter
              areas. For this, the PI's will  appeal to newly developed techniques in the
              mathematical theory  of  nonlinear homogenization to investigate the overall 
              (nonlinear) magnetic and (small deformation) rheological response  of MR
              fluids. The investigation will include numerical and  analytical calculations
              of effective permeabilities and storage  modul i for realistic microgeometries,
              as well as a study of their  dependence on important design variables such as
              particle size  (volume fraction and size distribution) and shape. The proposed 
              analysis will also involve the derivation of tight bounds on the  effective
              properties, applicable to rather general  microstructures,by means of a method
              recently introduced by the  PI in the context of shape--memory polycrystalline
              alloys. In  every case, the research group intends to take advantage of  Lord's
              local facilities to periodically validate the models  through appropriate
              physical experimentation.    This project is jointly supported by the MPS
              Office of  Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA) and the Division of  Mathematical
              Sciences (DMS).
