Title       : Topology Optimization and Effective Properties of Composites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1997      
File        : a9704813

Award Number: 9704813
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $79997              (Estimated)
Investigator: Yury Grabovsky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704813    Grabovsky    This proposal aims to investigate three problems related
              to homogenization,  composite materials and their effective properties. The
              first problem  will combine homogenization theory, bounds on the effective
              moduli  of composites and Young measure techniques in order to study the 
              relaxation of the ill-posed optimization problems with  weakly discontinuous
              objective functionals. The method yields an answer  for a class of quadratic
              functionals.  The second project will seek out the exact relations for the
              effective behavior  of polycrystalline composites using a new technique that
              combines  PDE theory and variational principles. The method is successful in 
              at least one such problem.  The third project will study the critical behavior
              of high contrast  composites near the percolation threshold by utilizing the
              analogy  between the phase transitions in Ising ferromagnets and the random 
              resistor networks near the percolation threshold on the one hand,  and recent
              results on the high contrast continuum composites away  from the critical point
              on the other.    Composite materials are media that look homogeneous but in
              fact have  complex structure when viewed under a microscope. These materials
              are  finding their way into our everyday lives in objects such as skis, golf 
              clubs, automobiles, aircraft, computers, cement, construction components  of
              buildings and bridges, sensors and many many more. The idea of  composite
              materials is to combine beneficial properties of its simple  but imperfect
              constituents. The difficulty here is that the properties  of composites (called
              effective properties) depend not only on what you  mix but on how you mix it.
              In other words, they depend on the geometry  of what you see under a microscope
              (called microgeometry). Therefore  the goal is to specify which microgeometries
              produce the best composites  provided you use the same materials in prescribed
              proportions. In general  this is an ill-posed problem. That is, it may not be
              solved in its raw  form  by the most powerful computers. The first part of this
              proposal aims to  reformulate the problem into a form suitable for solution on
              a computer  (into a well-posed problem). The second part of this proposal will 
              seek out and investigate the very special cases when some effective  properties
              of polycrystalline composites do not depend on the microgeometry.   This work
              may have applications for the design of underwater sensors  based on
              piezoelectric polycrystals. The last part of this proposal  constitutes a long
              term project on studying "nature's composites"  like porous rocks or sea ice
              (consisting of ice with brine inclusions).  The problem here is that the two
              constituents comprising the composite  have extremely different properties
              (like air and rock, or brine and ice).  Modeling the properties of such
              composites presents a formidable  mathematical problem. The progress here would
              enhance our understanding  and give us more control of a diverse array of
              problems ranging from   extraction of oil from porous rocks to global climate
              change (that depends  to a great extent on what is happening to Arctic and
              Antarctic sea ice).
