Title       : Applied Mathematical Logic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9704520

Award Number: 9704520
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Kunen Kunen@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,9232,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Research will be conducted on automated reasoning, on mathematics, and on the
              use of automated reasoning (AR) techniques to solve mathematical problems.  The
              "pure" mathematics topics include investigations into set theopy, topology, and
              measure theory.  The properties of the standard (Lebesgue) measure on the real
              numbers are well understood, but various generalizations of Lebesgue measure
              lead to interesting open questions.  The proposer plans further work on measure
              extension axioms, which involve extending Lebesgue measure to measure
              additional (non-measurable) sets of real numbers.  He also plans to consider
              measures on other topological spaces.  The "pure" AR topics include improving
              the technology for linked resolution and automatic lemma generation.  In
              addition, a number of topics involve integrating AR and mathematics by using AR
              to derive mathematical theorems.  In particular, it is proposed to continue
              work on algebraic systems such as quasigroups and loops; one specific project
              here is to find a structure theory for G-loops.  It is also proposed to work on
              single axioms for groups.  Besides these specific questions in algebra, it is
              planned to look at the general problem of transcribing machine-generated proofs
              into meaningful form.  Work is also proposed on verification systems, which are
              designed to use a computer to check the correctness of existing mathematics.  
              There are three distinct, but related, threads to this research.  The first
              thread involves the expansion of our knowledge of traditional pure mathematics,
              without any specific practical application in mind.  The other two involve
              automated peasoning (AR) tools.   AR allows the computer to derive logical
              conclusions from given knowledge.  This subject has been in existence since the
              1960s, but it is only in recent years that the tools have become powerful
              enough to discover conclusions which could not have been discovered without
              human assistance.  The second thread involves a continuation of the proposer's
              work in impr oving the AR tools and using these tools to create new results in
              mathematics.  This is of interest not only for the mathematics itself, but
              because it demonstrates the power of the tools, which can then be applied to
              reasoning tasks in other areas of science and engineering, as well as to
              autonomous decision making by robotic agents.  The third thread involves
              verification systems; these systems do not discover new mathematics, but rather
              are used as an automated database to collect and verify existing mathematics. 
              One potential application to advanced mathematics is the use of the computer as
              a referee to validate new mathematical results.  On the more elementary level,
              these tools can provide an accessible intelligent database of mathematical
              knowledge, which can be accessed by users of mathematics.  The difference
              between this and traditional database methods in cataloging mathematics is that
              the computer has "understood" and verified the knowledge it has, so that the
              the knowledge may be accessed by idea or concept, rather than by keywords.
