Title       : Numerical Capturing of Multiscale Solutions in Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9704976

Award Number: 9704976
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Y. Hou hou@ama.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    818/795-4571

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,9216,HPCC,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                        Numerical Capturing of Multiscale Solutions in PDEs                   
               Thomas Y. Hou                    Applied Math                       Caltech   
                           Abstract of Proposed Research      We propose developing a new
              finite element method of computing  multiscale and multicomponent problems in
              composite materials and  porous media.  In this method, the base functions are
              constructed in  such a way that they contain the local microscopic properties
              of the  differential operators. These oscillatory bases are independent from 
              each other and can be constructed independently. In effect, we  break a large
              scale computation into many smaller and independent pieces,  which can be
              carried out perfectly in parallel. Thus, the size of  the computation is
              drastically reduced. Due to this drastic memory saving,  numerical computations
              of practical problems with  many small scales, which were previously
              unobtainable using a  traditional finite element method, now become possible
              using our method.  An advantage of our approach is that it can handle general
              multiscale  problems without the requirement of scale separation, a property
              which is very  important for practical applications. Several numerical examples
              are included  to demonstrate this effect. We will perform a careful numerical
              error analysis   of our method. The effect of grid resonance, and geometric
              singularities  of local inclusions, such as corners, cusps, will be analyzed.  
               Effective numerical simulations of multiscale phenomena play an essential 
              role in many engineering and industrial applications. A direct numerical  
              solution of the multiple scale problems is difficult even with modern  
              supercomputers. The major difficulty of direct solutions is the scale of  
              computation.  For oil reservoir simulations, it is common that millions of  
              grid blocks are involved, with each block having a dimension of tens of  
              meters, whereas the permeability measured from cores is at a scale of several  
              centimeters. This gives more th an hundred thousands of degrees of freedom per 
              spatial dimension in the computation.  Therefore, a tremendous amount  of 
              computer memory and CPU time are required, and they can easily exceed  the
              limit of today's computing resources. The goal of this proposed research   is
              to provide a coarsened reservoir model which gives simulation results in  
              close agreement with those of the original fine scale description but at  
              considerable computational savings. Many existing up-scaling methods  
              currently used in the oil industry are based on the homogenization theory  with
              periodic structures and separable scales. There is no guarantee that   they
              work for general random permeability without scale separation. In  comparison,
              our approach is more systematic and general.  We are very hopeful that this
              proposed research will provide an  effective alternative to perform oil
              reservoir simulations.
