Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Studies of Negatively Curved Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9704043

Award Number: 9704043
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43200              (Estimated)
Investigator: William J. Floyd floyd@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704043  Floyd       This project is an attempt to prove the conjecture that a 
              negatively curved group whose visual sphere at infinity is the 2-sphere  acts
              cocompactly, properly discontinuously, and isometrically on real  hyperbolic
              3-space.  The proof of this conjecture would be an  important step in proving
              Thurston's Geometrization Conjecture.  A  result of Cannon-Swenson reduced the
              conjecture to proving that a  particular sequence of shinglings of the visual
              sphere at infinity is  conformal.  In this setting, a result of
              Cannon-Floyd-Parry reduced  the two axioms of conformality to a single one that
              is weaker than  either of them.  This led to reducing the problem further to
              proving  that a finite collection of annuli have combinatorial moduli bounded 
              uniformly from 0 with respect to this sequence of shinglings.  A  promising
              approach to studying these shinglings is that of expansion  complexes and
              expansion maps.  Expansion complexes correspond to  horospheres in the
              hyperbolic case, and the expansion map corresponds  to shrinking to a smaller
              horosphere.  If the sequence of shinglings  is not conformal, expansion
              complexes based at different points should  show the infinitesimal distortions.
               The identification of the  expansion complex with a subset of the sphere at
              infinity enables one  to relate expansion complexes based at different points,
              and so the  infinitesimal distortions may provide a substitute for a "line
              field."  Cubulated 3-manifolds are a good starting point for checking this.    
                A central question in low-dimensional geometry and topology is  the extent to
              which geometry dominates topology in dimension three.  Thurston conjectured
              that 3-manifolds (topological spaces that locally  look like Euclidean 3-space)
              can be naturally decomposed into pieces  that can be equipped with geometric
              structures.  If this  Geometrization Conjecture were true, it would greatly aid
              the study of  these spaces, since the rigidity of the geometry enables one to
              use  much more powerful too ls.  This project is part of a multi-pronged 
              approach to settling this conjecture in the dominant case of  negatively curved
              spaces.  Because of previous work of the principal  investigator and coauthors,
              the main object of study here is tiling  patterns on the plane and on the
              2-sphere.  Given a tiling pattern  with finitely many model tiles and a finite
              rule for subdividing model  tiles, one can recursively subdivide the tiling
              pattern.  The problem  is to determine when there are geometric models for the
              tiles so that  under subdivision the shapes of the subtiles stay "almost round"
              (even  though they may have fractal boundaries).  These tiling problems can  be
              studied using discrete conformal geometry, and, in particular, can  be studied
              experimentally using circle packings.  The interplay  between the circle
              packing ideas and the subdivision ideas has been  very fruitful and suggests
              that the methods being developed here could  provide useful algorithmic
              techniques for studying geometrical tiling  problems.  ***
