Title       : Nonclassical PDO and Some Practical Problems of Local Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9704285

Award Number: 9704285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander Katsevich akatsevi@pegasus.cc.ucf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    Alexander Katsevich    ABSTRACT    Theory of pseudo-differential operators
              (PDO) is a powerful tool which  has been successfully used in diverse areas of
              mathematics and, in  particular, in tomography. In the classical theory, PDOs
              are assumed to  have infinitely differentiable symbols. Although this is
              frequently the  case, the assumption about smoothness is very restrictive and
              does not  allow one to address important practical problems. Two cases where
              this  assumption is especially restrictive are as follows: limited-angle  local
              tomography and Single Photon Emission Computed Tomography (SPECT)  with
              nonsmooth attenuation. Here one is interested in recovery of the  wave front of
              a distribution knowing only the result of applying a PDO  with nonsmooth symbol
              to that distribution. Known results on PDOs,  symbols of which have limited
              smoothness, do not apply because of  specific nature of the singularities of
              the occurring symbols. Main  objectives of the proposed research are as follows
              (1) To develop a  theory of certain classes of PDOs with nonsmooth symbols
              which occur in  tomography; (2) To develop algorithms for analysis of the
              limited-angle  tomographic data and SPECT data when the attenuation coefficient
              is not  smooth. In the case of the limited-angle data, our goal is to be able 
              to recover as much of the visible singularities with minimal  distortions as
              possible. This is especially important for the  singularities which are located
              close to the boundary of the visibility  range. In the case of SPECT, our goal
              is to demonstrate that local  tomography can be used in the case of nonsmooth
              attenuation; and (3) To  test the algorithms on numerical experiments. 
              Significance of the proposed research is twofold. First, the expected  results
              will advance our understanding of how PDOs with nonsmooth  symbols transform
              wave fronts of distributions. Second, the expected  results will help solve
              important practical problems. SPECT is a  popular tool for noninvasive medical
              imaging. It is  used in cerebral,  cardiac, and other kinds of medical imaging.
               SPECT is based on  reconstructing distribution of  radionuclides inside a
              patient knowing  counts of photons emitted from the patient along different
              directions  on a plane. Depending on what kind of the radiopharmaceutical is
              used,  the distribution provides different types of medical information about 
              the patient.  The main difficulty in analyzing the SPECT data comes  from the
              fact that, in general, the photons emitted inside a patient  are attenuated in
              a complicated, nonuniform manner. In this case, no  inversion formula is known.
              Therefore, even though the photons are  attenuated nonuniformly inside the
              patient, practically all current  algorithms must assume  that the attenuation
              coefficient is either zero  or a constant. This results in attenuation
              artifacts, which remain a  significant obstacle in the analysis of SPECT
              images. Even most recent  approaches, that are based on the idea of local
              tomography and take  into account variable attenuation, fail to consider the
              case of  nonsmooth attenuation. Our results will provide for more accurate 
              quantitation of SPECT images even when the attenuation coefficient  varies from
              point to point and has discontinuities. It appears that our  study will be the
              first to investigate theoretically effects of  discontinuous attenuation on
              SPECT images.    Research related to limited-angle local tomography is of
              importance in  applications involving nondestructive evaluation of big pieces
              of  equipment, where a scanning device cannot be rotated 360 degrees around 
              the object.  Examples are scanning of exit cones of rockets located on  a
              gantry, jet engines, turbines, etc.
