Title       : Research in Combinatorics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 14,  1997       
File        : a9704114

Award Number: 9704114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robert Perlis                           
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80340              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vojtech Rodl rodl@mathcs.emory.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Emory University
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  30322    404/727-2503

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                          Rodl  9704114      This award provides funds for an investigation
              into some research topics in three areas of discrete mathematics - Extremal
              Combinatorics, Ramsey Theory and Probabilistic Methods. Extremal combinatorics 
              is an important part of combinatorial mathematics.  For example a typical
              problem in graph theory is as follows:  given a graph F determine the maximum
              number  ex (n,F) of edges in a graph of order n not containing F.  Ramsey
              theory investigates structures that are preserved under restricted partitions.
              Naturally, the classical example is the theorem of Ramsey that, in its simplest
              form, tells us that arbitrarily large 2-edge-colored complete graphs must
              contain arbitrarily large monochromatic complete subgraphs.  Here the partition
              is given by the coloring and the structures that are preserved under this
              partition are the complete graphs.  Probabilistic Methods have proved to be a
              powerful technique in combinatorics, and the theory of random graphs is a
              branch of graph theory that has emerged from these methods.  Over the last
              three years, the proposer's research was mainly concentrated within these
              areas. The work in this project will include some problems in Ramsey theory,
              problems involved with possible extensions of the regularity lemma, extremal
              properties of random graphs, problems on delta systems and others.    This
              research is in the area of combinatorics. One of the goals of combinatorics is
              to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections  of objects can
              be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely  important to modern
              communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as those
              occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in  computer
              science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of 
              combinatorial research.
