Title       : Geometric Aspects of Random Spatial Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 6,  1999        
File        : a9704901

Award Number: 9704901
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $87507              (Estimated)
Investigator: Agoston Pisztora pisztora@asd4.math.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704901  Pisztora   The investigator proposes to study several inter-related
              projects in random spatial   models, more specifically in ordinary and invasion
              percolation, in Ising and random cluster   models, and in first passage
              percolation. In ordinary and invasion percolation the critical   behavior of
              the chemical distance will be investigated. Another project is concerned with  
              the large deviation behavior of the random resistor network. In Ising and
              random cluster   models the investigator intends to study the rigidity
              (roughness) of certain phase   boundaries. In particular, questions related to
              roughening in higher dimensional   percolation models will be studied.  The
              investigator also intends  to work on questions   concerning the shape of
              certain interfaces. The project in first passage type models   includes work on
              comparison principles between minimizing paths and certain random   walks, and
              (jointly with another colleague) on the confinement property of directed  
              polymers in a random environment.   The aim of this project is to study certain
              geometric aspects of random spatial   systems. In some random systems geometric
              objects (in this case surfaces) which are   deterministic on a macroscopic
              scale arise naturally. Examples of such objects are phase   boundaries and
              droplets ("crystals") in spin systems or the frontier of the invaded region in 
               first passage percolation, which is a basic model for randomly evolving
              (growing)   surfaces.  Both the (asymptotic) shapes and the fluctuations of
              these objects  are of  prime   concern  with great theoretical  and practical
              interest. Many of the proposed problems and   models have their origin (and 
              are still studied) in statistical physics, materials science,   chemistry, and
              condensed matter physics. The project's final goal is to gain some insight  
              into the behavior of random surfaces - objects which seem to appear just about 
               everywhere in nature, but are known to be difficult to understand from the
              theoretical   (mathematical) p oint of view.
