Title       : In-Situ Synchrotron Radiation Studies of GaN Growth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9704201

Award Number: 9704201
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : March 31,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Speck speck@mrl.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven P. DenBaars  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      c/o Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1775,9164,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9704201 Speck This collaborative project between researchers at the University
              of California, Santa Barbara and the Argonne National Laboratory, addresses
              fundamental research issues in the growth of GaN by metallo-organic chemical
              vapor deposition(MOCVD), in-situ atomic-scale characterization of the MOCVD
              growth process, with the scientific goal to understand the basic chemical and
              physical processes and the fundamental mechanism of crystal growth by MOCVD. 
              The approach utilizes real-time synchrotron x-ray techniques to measure
              structure, chemistry, and surface morphology evolution within a
              state-of-the-art MOCVD reactor.  The project emphasizes strong interlinking
              between growth, structural characterization, physical property measurements,
              and related device research efforts.  %%% The project addresses forefront
              research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
              technological relevance, compact and efficient light sources in the blue-green
              spectral region.  The research will contribute basic materials science
              knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/photonic
              devices and integrated circuitry, in general.  Additionally, the fundamental
              knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute
              to improving the performance of advanced devices and circuits by providing a
              fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved
              materials, and materials combinations.  An important feature of the program is
              the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
              fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***
