Title       : Numerical and Analytical Studies of Wave Phenomena in Fluid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1997    
File        : a9704606

Award Number: 9704606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Milewski milewski@math.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Milewski  9704606    We propose to apply numerical and asymptotic methods to
              study several   problems of physical relevance in fluid mechanics and wave
              propagation.   In particular we propose to study, together with several 
              collaborators:   The resonance phenomena of equatorial Kelvin waves and of
              certain   waves in stratified flows; The strong interactions of solitary waves 
               on a beach, and of the rotational-irrotational components in free   surface
              flows; The diffraction of nonlinear long waves due to abrupt  changes in the
              lateral boundaries. These projects are relevant both in   developing efficient
              psudo--spectral numerical methods and in understanding   resonance effects in a
              large class of geophysical wave propagation problems.   We also continue
              ongoing collaboration on  Singularities in two- and three-dimensional free
              surface gravity flows  and similarity solutions of jets impinging on rigid
              walls;  The evolution of hexagonal patterns in reaction-diffusion   equations
              with applications to the dynamics of stabilized flame fronts.     In this
              proposal we use mathematical and computational methods to study   problems of
              physical and geophysical importance in fluid mechanics.   Specifically we work
              on 1) Equatorial and mid-latitude waves in the   atmosphere. These waves are
              thought have an impact on the  global climate and a mathematical understanding
              of their interaction   with other waves and with topographical features is
              therefore of   practical importance. 2) the diffraction and amplification of  
              waves approaching a beach.  Here we attempt to predict mathematically   the
              size and pattern of ocean waves near a beach. The mathematical   predictions
              can then be compared to real data from ocean waves during a  storm. 3) Shapes
              of the free surfaces   of fluids.  We study different types of singular free
              surface flow   (such as sharp wave coasts) and the shapes of fluid jets
              impinging   on objects. 4) The evolution of patterns in flame-fronts.  Here, we
              study the propagation and stability  of flame fronts in a fuel-air   mixture.
              The mathematical formulation and efficient numerical method used   here is
              applicable to a wide class of physical problems.
