Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Leibniz Cohomology, Differential Geometry and Foliations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1998   
File        : a9704891

Award Number: 9704891
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44455              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerald M. Lodder jlodder@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704891  Lodder       A major topic of research in the 1970's was the interplay
              between  foliations and Lie algebra cohomology.  A foliation represents the 
              solution of a partial differential equation on a space, and the cohomology 
              classes that detect a given foliation provide a concise numerical invariant 
              measuring the (global) twisting of the solution set of the equation.  The first
              cohomology class to be discovered in this way was the  Godbillon-Vey invariant,
              a single class in dimension three that is  an element of the classical de Rham
              cohomology group of the underlying  space.  (For codimension one foliations
              there are no other invariants.)  This project is based on a fundamentally new
              method of computing  cohomology that does not require the classical symmetries
              needed for  de Rham cohomology.  The ideas for this construction arise from  
              work of Jean-Louis Loday of Strasbourg, France, and are referred to as  Leibniz
              cohomology.  The results of preliminary computations are  striking.  In the
              codimension one case alone, there are infinite  families of invariants for
              foliations.  They begin with the  Godbillon-Vey invariant and then continue in
              dimensions 4n and  4n+3 (n any positive integer).  Although the new classes
              result  from a one-parameter variation of a foliation, it remains an open 
              question to interpret their meaning in terms of physical properties.       A
              more general topic of research in mathematics remains to classify  space
              according to the criteria set forth by Riemann nearly 150 years  ago.  Much
              progress has been made in the past century, but the  classification is not
              complete.  As an unexpected and highly  non-trivial invariant of space, Leibniz
              cohomology will be a new tool  in this field.  To aid in the interpretation of
              Leibniz cohomology, a  construction for this invariant in terms of more
              familiar spaces would be  helpful.  It is auspicious that the formalism used to
              define the Leibniz  groups appears quite naturally in quantum field theory.  By
              work of V. Kac,   the elements of a field theory form a classical Lie
              algebra---but only  after a certain number of them are set to zero.  If these
              elements are  not set to zero, the original elements form a Leibniz algebra
              lacking  the symmetries of a Lie algebra.  The cohomology groups of this 
              Leibniz algebra will be new invariants of quantum field theory.  ***
