Title       : Surgery L-Groups, Algebraic K-Groups and Rigidity of Classical Aspherical
               Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9704765

Award Number: 9704765
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $126300             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lowell E. Jones lejones@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704765  Jones       The Borel Conjecture states that any aspherical closed
              manifold  should be topologically determined by its fundamental group.  This 
              research project will provide a new geometric tool that will enable  the
              investigator to verify this conjecture for any aspherical closed  manifold
              whose fundamental group is isomorphic to the fundamental  group of a
              non-positively curved Riemannian manifold.  The geometric  tool consists of a
              generalization of the geometric collapsing theory  developed by the geometers
              Cheeger-Fukaya-Gromov and others.  In this  project L. E. Jones (in
              collaboration with F. T. Farrell) will develop  a collapsing theory for
              foliated Riemannian manifolds.       A "two-dimensional manifold" is a "space"
              that looks exactly like  the Euclidean plane to an observer near any point in
              the space, but  which when observed as a whole may not be Euclidean space at
              all.  For  example the earth's surface looks like a flat plane if we are
              actually  on its surface, but when observed from space, it is seen to be a 
              sphere.  Two-dimensional manifolds were already well understood by 
              mathematicians of the 19th century.  There are also 3-dimensional  manifolds,
              4-dimensional manifolds, etc., manifolds that are less well  understood; in
              fact, the mathematician's quest to understand higher  dimensional manifolds has
              motivated much of the topological research  of the 20th century.  One way to
              investigate the nature of a manifold  is to focus on an associated algebraic
              object (that is much easier  to understand) called its "fundamental group."  A
              famous mathematical  conjecture states that for a special class of higher
              dimensional  manifolds (called "aspherical manifolds"), the fundamental group
              should  act like a genetic code for the manifold, revealing all of its inner 
              topological secrets.  The aim of this project is to verify this  conjecture. 
              ***
