Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: A Benthic Index of Coral Reef Integrity
               (BICRI) for use in Southest Asian Reef Management Programs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9704616

Award Number: 9704616
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88480              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark V. Erdmann   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5927,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704616  Erdmann      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twenty-four-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Mark V. Erdmann to work with Dr.  Mohammad
              Kasim Moosa at the Indonesian Institute of Sciences  (LIPI OSEANOLOGI) in
              Jakarta, Indonesia.    The goal of this project is to develop a method to
              quickly  and effectively assess coral reef health using a multimeric,  benthic
              invertebrate-based index of coral reef integrity.  The PI will use benthic reef
              invertebrates with proven  bioindicator potential and which are easily
              monitored using  a consistent, quantitative sampling protocol.  An initial 
              sampling period in the Spermonde Archipelago (Sulawesi), an  area with
              well-characterized pollution and environmental  gradients, will facilitate
              calibration of these various  bioindicators with known pollution impacts and
              comparison  with the bioindicator response of stomatopod communities,  which
              have been very well-studied in this area.  Using this  data as a baseline, the
              monitoring program will be expanded  to include four additional reef-rich
              regions of Indonesia,  selected with regard to the varying nature and extent of
               anthropogenic impacts, estimated biodiversity value, and  future development
              and management plans in the regions.  The  final results will be analyzed and
              refined into an  Indonesian benthic index of coral reef integrity (BICRI) 
              which can be adapted for use in reef management programs  throughout Southeast
              Asia.  Coral reef degradation is a  problem world-wide, thus the results of
              this project will  benefit other countries (including the U.S.) as well.     
              ***
