Title       : Postdoc: Brownian Dynamics of DNA Slithering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ACI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1997        
File        : a9704681

Award Number: 9704681
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Van Rosendale                      
	      ACI  DIV OF ADVANCED COMPUT INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $46200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tamar Schlick schlick@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 4083      POST DOC RESRCH ASSOC COMP S&E
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 4083,9178,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The PI's will develop and apply novel computational modeling techniques on
              high-performance computers to enhance our understanding of DNA on a global
              level, i.e., thousands of base pairs.  Specifically, the PI's will describe the
              dynamical features of slithering in supercoiled DNA over microsecond to
              millisecond time frames.  Slithering, which is thought to be important in
              recombination mechanisms, is a reptilian motion in which individual base pairs
              slide against each other in a "conveyor-belt" fashion.  The PI's will extend a
              previously developed Langevin dynamics model of supercoiled DNA to incorporate
              hydrodynamic interactions.  The DNA molecule will be represented by a B-spline
              model that smoothly transforms into a bead model. The singular value
              decomposition will be used to transform a vector in the space of the
              independent variables defining the DNA curve ("control" points) to a vector in
              the space of the actual curve (DNA) points.  Because the millisecond
              simulations are computationally intensive, a 12-processor Power Challenge
              computer and efficient parallel strategies will be employed.  To measure
              characteristic times related to slithering, the PI's will use three-dimensional
              graphics tools to analyze interparticle distance and curvature time-evolution,
              and thus determine the scaling of site juxtaposition times with DNA size.  The
              computational modeling of this project will complement experiments and provide
              insight into the vital role of supercoiled DNA in replication, recombination,
              and transcription.  The algorithms developed here are general and can be
              applied to a wide range of other important biomolecular problems.
