Title       : Homotopy Theory, Loop Spaces, and Group Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1999     
File        : a9704410

Award Number: 9704410
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frederick R. Cohen cohf@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Samuel Gitler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704410  Cohen       This project explores connections between topology, group
              theory,   and certain constructions inspired by the classical Yang-Baxter
              relations  in physics.  Three main areas arise as follows: (1) One could
              consider  ``braidings'' of a finite number of higher dimensional spheres (or
              suspensions)  in a fixed manifold as an analogue of the classical Artin braid
              group.  The  main examples here arise as the universal Lie algebra that
              satisfies the  Yang-Baxter relations of classical physics, which concerns
              collisions of  particles.  The homology of the attached function spaces is
              precisely the  universal enveloping algebras of these ``universal Yang-Baxter
              Lie algebras.''  The spaces under consideration are loop spaces of classical
              configuration  spaces as well as ``orbit configuration spaces'' as studied by
              M. Xicotencatl.  The loop space homology of many of these spaces is shown to be
              the universal  enveloping algebra of a Lie algebra that is defined in terms of
              the Yang-  Baxter or infinitesimal braid relations.  The underlying manifold
              can be a  homogeneous space or a manifold with a Euclidean factor.  In the case
              of  ``orbit configuration spaces,'' these same relations also appear in knot 
              invariants as studied by L. Kauffman.  (2) The intimate link between the 
              structure of certain choices of function spaces in homotopy theory and moduli 
              spaces of curves within classical algebraic geometry is studied.  The 
              connecting tissue is the link between Dehn twists and Whitehead products. 
              These connections are used to give homological calculations.  Here, the space 
              of maps from a fixed surface to a sphere is considered.  These spaces stably 
              split, while the stable summands are Thom complexes of bundles with base  given
              by certain moduli spaces of curves.  In the case of finite genus with  marked
              points, homological calculations are shown to be an analogue of cyclic 
              homology, while some specific calculations are carried out.  The plus 
              construction for the classifying space of th e stable mapping class group is 
              shown to split.  One factor gives the stable homotopy groups of spheres.  (3)
              Classical methods in combinatorial group theory are used to attack  problems on
              the growth of the torsion in the homotopy groups of certain  spaces. 
              Simplicial methods are used as well as techniques from classical  methods of W.
              Magnus on embedding groups as units in certain associative  algebras.  Here,
              the homotopy groups of double suspensions all of whose  homology is torsion are
              studied.  The main tool is an inverse limit of finite  p-groups.  This tower is
              an algebraic analog of the Goodwillie tower of the  identity; the groups at
              each stage are central extensions with centers at  each stage given by the
              mod-p reductions of modules Lie(n), a module of the  symmetric group on n
              letters of rank (n-1)! that has occurred ubiquitously in  homotopy theory.     
               Ordinary braidings of strings are at the foundation of these problems.  One
              could also imagine braiding other geometric objects such as planes,  spheres,
              or torii.  These braidings force symmetries that have occurred  previously in
              physics from considering collisions of particles and are known  as the
              Yang-Baxter relations.  The first part of this project is a study of  these
              symmetries for higher dimensional geometric objects.  Next consider the 
              surface of a doughnut with many holes removed.  In a second direction, the 
              ``smooth deformations'' of this surface are considered.  The main thrust here 
              is to analyze the ``holes'' in these spaces of ``smooth deformations'' as  they
              appear in many contexts in physics, string theory, geometry, algebraic 
              topology, and holomorphic maps.  A natural continuation is to understand how 
              spheres of large dimension move around in space provided only continuous 
              deformations are permitted.  This problem has been the key to others and is 
              one of the main problems in homotopy theory on which there has been 
              interesting progress.  These spheres move in much the same way that the hour 
              hand moves  around a clock.  The actual numbers are quite complicated, and 
              part of this project is to understand the uniform structure here.  ***
