Title       : Problems in Nonlinear Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9704589

Award Number: 9704589
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19233              (Estimated)
Investigator: Rachel A. Kuske   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704589  Kuske    The first objective of this project is understanding how small
              noise can   effect qualitative changes in nonlinear behavior. For example,
              small noise   can eliminate chaotic behavior in slow-fast dynamics. Recently
              the principal   investigator has developed a new approach for studying these
              systems in   terms of probability densities. These techniques will be adapted
              to   investigate small noise effects in delay phenomena in excitable systems
              and   chemical reactions. Comparison of these problems will provide a basis for
                characterizing a variety of noisy phenomena. The second objective is to  
              discover conditions for spatially localized oscillations in systems of coupled 
               oscillators. In particular, the principal investigator will consider
              bistability   of localized and nonlocalized dynamics in laser arrays and
              structural   dynamics. Numerical simulations and singular perturbation methods
              are   combined to  explore competing influences of the system parameters,
              initial   conditions, and resonance. The third objective is to explore pattern 
               dynamics in reaction-diffusion systems.  Complementary analytical   numerical
              methods are used to derive evolution equations and study the   dynamics and
              stability of modulated patterns. These techniques will be   applied in general
              reaction-diffusion problems and a specific application of   burner-stabilized
              flames. They will also be applied to investigate modulated   nonequilateral
              hexagonal patterns and transitions of two- dimensional   patterns in spatially
              inhomogeneous systems.    The first objective of this project is motivated by
              the dramatic effects of   small fluctuations in systems with interacting
              components. In some   examples of chaotic interactions, such as convection,
              waves in plasma,   turbulence and laser dynamics, small noise causes nearly
              periodic behavior   to replace large fluctuations and chaos. Noise can also
              change the transition   from a flat state to an oscillatory state in the
              propagation of nerve impulses   an d in laser intensities. When a time
              variation in a system parameter   controls the transition, there can be a delay
              or lag in the transition. The   introduction of small, rapid fluctuations in
              the control parameter reduces   this delay, as observed experimentally.
              Realizing the first objective will   facilitate the development of mathematical
              models which account for   system noise and describe realistic physical
              behavior. The second goal is   motivated by the effects of localized behavior
              in several examples of   interacting oscillations. Oscillating quantities
              include chemical   concentrations and  electrical currents which act as timing
              or reaction   mechanisms in biological and chemical systems. Localization of
              these   oscillations can limit the propagation of an electrical impulse or
              chemical   reaction. Coupled oscillators also model fluctuations in laser
              arrays, used   for applications which require a high optical power output, such
              as space   communications and high speed optical recording. The power of
              coupled   lasers is influenced by variations in intensities and
              synchronization, which   occur in localized oscillations about a steady
              intensity. Vibrations in   repetitive engineering structures are also coupled
              oscillations, such as in   large space structures and bladed disk and beam
              assemblies. Irregularities in   engineering structures can cause vibrations to
              be spatially localized.   Localization can result in increased local stresses
              and cracking or serve as a   desirable damping of energy. Understanding the
              causes of localization   allows the control of the phenomena by adjusting the
              physical system. The   third objective of this project focuses on the dynamics
              of two dimensional   patterns which occur away from equilibrium in many
              physical or chemical   systems, including convection, chemical reactions, and
              sedimentation in   rivers. Patterns occur as superpositions of periodic waves
              of components   such as temperature, concentration or velocity.  Spatial
              variation of   geometry  or physical control parameters can cause spatial
              intermittency of   the patterns. For example, in a meandering river, rippled
              sediment deposits   are found in certain regions and not in others. In
              reaction-diffusion systems,   slight spatial variation of control species
              causes periodic variation of   chemical concentration in limited regions of the
              reaction. Since the   equations describing pattern evolution appear in a
              variety of applications,   understanding these patterns in one application
              leads to the understanding   of patterns in others.
