Title       : Subgrid Scale Models Based on the Estimation of Unresolved Scales of Turbulence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1999      
File        : a9704728

Award Number: 9704728
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John F. Foss                            
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $224867             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julian A. Domaradzki jad@spock.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1443      FLUID DYNAMICS & HYDRAULICS
Fld Applictn: 0100000   Special Interest                        
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              The main goal of this project is to transform a new modeling procedure into a
              general large eddy simulations tool for engineering and geophysical flows.  To
              accomplish this goal the following tasks will be performed.  The modeling
              procedure will be further investigated and validated for several non-stationary
              flows and flows with additional physical effects like rotation.  The
              performance of the model for high Reynolds number flows will be evaluated.  The
              model will be extended to the physical space representation and to general
              finite difference codes.  Finally, the numerical implementation of the model
              will be optimized in terms of the computer memory and CPU time.    The
              motivation for this effort is the fact that  numerical simulations of
              turbulence at very high Reynolds numbers require models to account  for small
              scales which cannot be resolved explicitly because of inadequate capabilities
              of current as well as future supercomputers.  In large eddy simulations (LES)
              several competing subgrid-scale (SGS) models are currently in use, e.g. the
              classical Smagorinsky model, several variants of the dynamic model, the
              structure function model, the renormalization group model, similarity models,
              etc.  While these models successfully capture some features of turbulent flows
              they often fail to predict other, equally important features.  For instance,
              correct  predictions of backscatter present  a significant challenge for all
              eddy viscosity models while similarity models usually under-predict SGS
              dissipation.  In addition, the existing models require the calibration of
              adjustable constants and various ad hoc averaging procedures which depend on
              simulated flows.  Deficiencies of the models may be traced to inadequate
              representation of nonlinear  interactions between resolved and subgrid scales
              in the modeling procedures.    The model to be utilized represents a new
              approach to the problem of subgrid-scale modeling in turbulent that makes
              maximum use of the knowledge of nonlinear interactions acquired  during last
              several years through the analyses of direct numerical simulations databases. 
              This model has several important properties which distinguish it favorably from
              the traditional models: it does not contain any adjustable constants; no wall
              functions are required; the modeled SGS stresses exhibit very high correlations
              (50 - 90 %) with the exact stresses for all six SGS stress components; mean and
              rms values of modeled quantities (stresses, SGS forces, SGS dissipation, etc.)
              are accurately predicted; significant local backscatter is predicted in a
              numerically stable manner without any averaging procedures; and all the SGS
              stress components have correct near-wall behavior.    The model has already
              been implemented and tested for turbulent channel flow and for isotropic
              turbulence in statistically steady state.
