Title       : Arctic Research Initiative Expansion of the SuperDARN Radar Network
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1999     
File        : a9704717

Award Number: 9704717
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Bristow   (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond A. Greenwald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SuperDARN is an international HF radar network designed to measure global-scale
              magnetospheric convection by observing plasma motion in the Earth's upper
              atmosphere.  Plasma convection is controlled by a series of interactions
              between the solar wind, and Earth's magnetosphere, and the high-latitude
              (Arctic and Antarctic) ionosphere.  By measuring the global-scale plasma
              motions and studying their temporal evolution, we obtain a better understanding
              of the processes that couple the solar wind's energy and momentum to the upper
              atmosphere, and thereby obtain a better understanding of space weather
              processes at polar latitudes.    Currently, there is no SuperDARN coverage of
              the region extending from central Canada westward through Alaska.  It is
              proposed to install a SuperDARN radar at a site near Soldotna, Alaska. Since
              the radar measurements will extend 3000 km poleward from the radar location,
              data from this radar will complement data from all other geophysical monitoring
              instruments located in Alaska and will extend beyond Alaska's Arctic slope into
              the region over the Arctic Ocean where no other ground-based sensors are
              available.  The field of view of the Soldotna radar will include the Poker Flat
              Rocket Range, and the new HAARP and HIPAS ionospheric modification facilities. 
                The SuperDARN network has been developed by scientists in Canada, Finland,
              France, Great Britain, Japan, South Africa, Sweden, and the United States.  The
              network has components in the northern and southern hemispheres.  The northern
              hemisphere component consists of six radars with coverage extending from
              Finland westward to central Canada.  Measurements are made continuously over
              nearly 12 hours of local time from 65o-85o magnetic latitude.  It is truly a
              global-scale measurement system for studying physical processes occurring in
              the upper atmosphere and ionosphere in arctic and antarctic regions.
