Title       : Symplectic Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1999     
File        : a9704825

Award Number: 9704825
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dusa McDuff dusa@math.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704825  McDuff       One of the main tools that has recently revolutionized the
              study  of symplectic geometry is the use of analytic methods (non-linear 
              versions of the Cauchy-Riemann equations).  In the past year, a  serious
              technical problem in this theory has been overcome, so that it  now applies to
              all manifolds.  In collaboration with Lalonde and  Polterovich, McDuff is
              applying this improved theory to study  properties of the group of
              diffeomorphisms of a manifold that preserve  its symplectic structure.  This
              group has a subgroup of finite  codimension that is generated by Hamiltonian
              functions, but it is not  known in general whether this group is always closed
              in the full  group.  If it were, one might be able to formulate a topological 
              reason for a symplectomorphism to be generated by a function (rather  than a
              one-form).  Another question that McDuff is working on (in  collaboration with
              Abreu) is the extent to which the topological  structure of the group of
              symplectomorphisms changes as the underlying  symplectic structure changes.  A
              particularly simple version of this  problem appears when the underlying
              manifold is the product of two  two-dimensional spheres and one changes the
              relative size of the  spheres.  They have shown that there is an
              even-dimensional cohomology  class whose dimension jumps up by four each time
              the size of the  larger sphere increases by another unit.  They are working on 
              understanding the mechanism that produces this behavior.       A symplectic
              structure is a very basic kind of geometric  structure that underlies almost
              all the equations of classical and  quantum physics.  In the last fifteen
              years, new tools have been  developed that allow mathematicians for the first
              time to gain some  understanding of the global meaning of this kind of
              structure.  The  most significant developments of the past few years concern,
              on the  one hand, the elucidation of the structure of four-dimensional 
              symplectic spaces and, on the other, new understanding of the wa ys  that one
              can move around in a symplectic space.  Together with  Lalonde, McDuff
              completed the classification of a specially simple  kind of symplectic
              4-manifold called a ruled surface and is in the  process of studying the
              structure of more complicated examples.  She  is also investigating the
              question of how much energy it takes to  achieve a particular movement of
              space, and to find ways of estimating  this energy on curved manifolds.  ***
