Title       : Differentiable Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1999      
File        : a9704819

Award Number: 9704819
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145083             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wu-chung Hsiang Hsiang@math.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704819  Hsiang       One of the most astounding results of Donaldson is as
              follows.  There are h-cobordisms (W; M, N) of simply-connected smooth
              4-manifolds M  and N such that M and N are not diffeomorphic.  They are closed
              4-manifolds  with the same non-trivial second homology over the reals, and the 
              non-triviality of the h-cobordism is detected by gauge invariants.  It was 
              observed by Hsiang et al.  Inv. Math. 123 (1996) 343-348  that the  cobordism W
              may be decomposed into two cobordisms, the first being a  trivial one and the
              second being a non-trivial relative h-cobordism  of contractible 4-manifolds
              bounded by the same 3-dimensional homology  sphere.  This means that all the
              non-triviality of W is concentrated  inside a contractible piece.  Because the
              gauge invariants heavily depend  on the non-triviality of the quadratic form of
              the second homology of M,  two questions need to be answered.  (A) How can one
              detect the  non-triviality of a cobordism (W; M, N) of contractible 4-manifolds
               M, N (relative to the boundaries)?  In fact, there should be combinatorial 
              invariants related to the classical knot invariants to detect this 
              non-triviality, and, in particular, one should be able to describe  some
              explicit examples constructed from the explicit non-trivial  h-cobordisms of
              Akbulut.  (B) How do any such combinatorial invariants   relate to gauge
              theory.  Hsiang is seeking solutions to these two problems.  He has already
              found that (B) is related to Property P for 3-manifolds.       Geometric
              topology treats spaces known as manifolds that come in a  vast array of
              configurations and all different dimensions.  A manifold of  dimension n is
              referred to briefly as an n-manifold, and what the dimension  means is that an
              ant living on the manifold would think himself in  n-dimensional Euclidean
              space if he took only short excursions.  However,  he could learn otherwise on
              returning from a lengthy journey and finding  himself disoriented or
              constrained in some way.  Think of an ant on life  s upport that requires
              trailing an umbilicus behind him attached at the  other end to a base station. 
              Already in the 2-dimensional case, he will  discover if he travels widely
              enough that there are differences between  living on the surface of a sphere
              and living on the surface of a doughnut,  even if the sphere (or doughnut) is
              very large and appears to his myopic  gaze to be everywhere a flat Euclidean
              plane.  The 2-dimensional  possibilities have been understood since the 19th
              century, but the  possibilities become increasingly various and impossible to
              classify fully  as the dimension increases.  What is always surprising to the
              unitiate is  to learn that in spite of this dimensional complication, some of
              the most  intriguing problems, problems that have been solved for the higher 
              dimensions, remain unsolved for dimensions 3 or 4 or both, a fact of 
              importance to beings who live mostly in these dimensions and wish, for 
              example, to understand the physics of their cosmos.  The present project  takes
              note of the exciting new methods that have been introduced into 
              low-dimensional topology in recent years, first by Donaldson, and more 
              recently by Seiberg and Witten, the so-called gauge theoretic methods.  Then it
              asks some incisive questions about how these gauge invariants  relate to the
              vast arsenal of techniques with which algebraic topologists  had previously
              been equipped.  ***
