Title       : Topics in Dynamical Systems: Attractors, Dimension, Lattice Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9704564

Award Number: 9704564
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104073             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yakov B. Pesin pesin@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               The proposed work involves a broad range of problems in the theory of dynamical
              systems (in particular, hyperbolic theory) and its applications to and
              relations with dimension theory, mathematical physics (including coupled map
              lattices), ergodic theory, and statistical mechanics.  Projects in the
              dimension theory of dynamical systems include: the description of several
              multifractal spectra (including dimension spectra, entropy spectra, and spectra
              for Lyapunov exponents) and the corresponding multifractal decompositions for
              various classes of dynamical systems of hyperbolic type (non-conformal
              expanding maps, Axiom A diffeomorphisms, etc.); and the establishment of the
              multifractal rigidity phenomenon for multidimensional conformal expanding maps
              (the classification of dynamical systems up to multifractal spectra). In the
              theory of coupled map lattices (CML), the principal investigator will study:
              infinite-dimensional SRB measures for CML, which includes establishing the
              characteristic property and thermodynamical limit, describing the Lyapunov
              spectrum, and proving the entropy formula; and the stability of traveling wave
              solutions of CML and relations between traveling wave solutions for CML and the
              corresponding PDE (such as Ginzburg-Landau equation,
              Kolmogorov-Petrovski-Peskunov equation, Huxley equation, etc.).   The
              principles of symmetry and self-similarity are nature's most beautiful
              creations. For example, they are expressed in fractals which are famous for
              their beautiful but complicated geometric shapes.  Examples of fractals vary
              from well-known ones-cost lines or mountain ranges-to less known-distribution
              of stars in galaxies and galaxies in the universe or root systems of plants.
              Dimension theory is a mathematical theory which is designed to explain
              fractals' structure. And in dynamics the presence of invariant fractals often
              results in unstable ``turbulent-like'' motions and is associated with
              ``chaotic'' behavior. Thus the study of fractals can help understand the most
              complicat ed phenomena such as turbulence in the ocean or atmosphere.  The
              proposed work involves research in a recently developing area which lies in the
              interface between dimension theory and the theory of dynamical systems.
              Focusing on invariant fractals and their influence on stochastic properties of
              systems, the principal investigator intends to provide a comprehensive and
              systematic treatment of modern dimension theory in dynamical systems.  Results
              are expected to be of great importance not only to advanced mathematicians but
              to a wide range of scientists who depend upon mathematical modeling of
              dynamical processes, including physicists, specialists in numerical modeling,
              engineers, molecular biologists, etc.
