Title       : Analytical and Mechanistic Studies in Electrochemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 2,  1999      
File        : a9704211

Award Number: 9704211
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1997       
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $504000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis H. Evans dhevans@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0316000   Trace Contaminants                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                This research project, supported by the Analytical and Surface  Chemistry
              Program, focuses on the study of multiple electron  transfer systems with
              emphasis on two electron transfer processes.   Professor Evans and his students
              at the University of Delaware will  use low temperature fast scan cyclic
              voltammetry at  microelectrodes, electrochemical impedance measurements, and 
              electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance measurements to study  multiple
              electron transfer reactions of substituted anthracenes,  durenes, and
              bicyclooctane compounds.  Of particular interest in  this work will be multiple
              electron transfer reactions that are  coupled with atom transfer reactions. 
              Through a deeper  understanding of these reactions better electroorganic
              synthetic  schemes that can produce fine chemicals in environmentally superior 
              ways will be developed.  The preparation of organic chemicals by
              electrochemical means is an  under- developed area of synthesis due to the need
              to combine  expertise in both electrochemistry and organic synthesis.  This 
              work aims to develop electroorganic synthetic procedures that will  have
              technological impact and also be attractive for their  economics and
              environmental advantages.  Multiple electron transfer  processes that are
              coupled with atom transfer processes will be of  central interest in this work
              due to their common occurrence in  several areas of practical synthesis.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
