Title       : Problems in Nonlinear Geometric Field Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1999       
File        : a9704430

Award Number: 9704430
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Abdolreza Tahvildar-Zadeh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research is in the area of nonlinear hyperbolic systems of partial
              differential equations arising in mathematical physics and deals specifically
              with regularity, break-down, and large-time behavior of solutions to the
              initial value problem for wave maps.  While the ultimate goal of any study in
              this area is the understanding of the dynamics of physically relevant field
              theories such as General Relativity and Yang-Mills, valuable insight can be
              gained by first focusing on wave maps, which is a simpler geometric field
              theory exhibiting many similarities with the above, and in which many of the
              difficulties in dealing with those physical theories are present in a more
              transparent way.  Wave maps (known to physicists as sigma-models) are the
              hyperbolic analogue of harmonic maps between manifolds, where the domain
              manifold instead of being Riemannian is Lorentzian.  They thus satisfy a system
              of semilinear wave equations with a nonlinearity which is quadratic in the
              gradient.  Some of the problems to be studied are (1) existence of smooth
              stationary solutions to the equations and their stability under small
              perturbations, (2) constructing all possible self-similar wave maps of the
              Minkowski space, (3) investigating the genericity of singularities arising from
              self-similar solutions, and (4) finding examples of blowup in two space
              dimensions.  Hyperbolic partial differential equations lie at the heart of
              mankind's efforts to quantify and understand the evolutionary  phenomena in
              nature.  From subatomic particles to galactic clusters, every phenomenon known
              to Man which involves the propagation of signals and disturbances at finite
              speeds is modeled by a hyperbolic differential equation.  Examples of such
              phenomena are the production and propagation of  sound waves (acoustics), water
              waves (hydrodynamics), seismic body and surface waves (elastodynamics),
              electromagnetic waves (electrodynamics), and gravitational waves (general
              relativity).  Despite considerable progress in recent years in  the study of
              nonlinear hyperbolic systems, the basic questions regarding regularity,
              break-down and large time behavior of their solutions  in more than one space
              dimension remain largely unanswered.  Progress in this area requires a good
              understanding of continuum physics and is only possible through rigorous
              mathematical analysis of a host of simpler problems, each one modeling only a
              few of the many difficulties present in the actual physical problem.  With such
              a long-term plan, it is equally important to educate the next generation of
              scientists who will have the physical and mathematical ability, as well as the
              courage and enthusiasm, to continue the work being done today.  This requires a
              serious re-evaluation of the existing mathematics curriculum and the
              development of new courses dealing specifically with mathematics as it relates
              to continuum physics at all levels of college and graduate education.
