Title       : Catalytic Hydrocarbon Carbonylation and Aldehyde Decarbonylation: The Design of
               Soluble Transition-Metal Based Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  2000       
File        : a9704304

Award Number: 9704304
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Katharine Covert                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan S. Goldman agoldman@rutchem.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
Program Ref : 0000,9198,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     This award in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic   Chemistry
              Program supports research in the laboratory of Professor Alan   S. Goldman of
              Rutgers University to develop catalysts that will   photochemically
              functionalize at C-H bonds.  This photochemical   carbonylation of hydrocarbons
              is based on a developing understanding of   the chemical mechanisms whereby it
              occurs.  Representative catalysts will   be studied as to their kinetics,
              thermodynamics, and molecular orbital   transformations.  Systems are based on
              soluble late transition-metal   complexes, which are promising because of their
              success in related   catalytic processes, particularly industrial
              hydroformylation processes,   and their unusual regioselectivity.  The reverse
              reaction, aldehyde   decarbonylation, will also be studied as it is the
              microscopic reverse of   carbonylation and also of significant potential value.
                        Efficiently turning the world's major carbon-containing resources,  
              such as coal, natural gas and petroleum, into commodity chemicals and low  
              pollution fuels is essential to a thriving economy.  The chemically   difficult
              and economically important process of adding organic   functionality by
              activating stable C-H bonds will be undertaken using new   photochemical
              catalysts developed in Dr. Goldman's laboratory.  The   development of these
              catalysts depends on furthering our understanding of   how the catalysts work
              at a molecular level.  The mechanism of   photochemical carbonylation  is to be
              probed in a systematic series of   kinetic and thermodynamic experiments
              coupled with theoretical   calculations.                                       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
