Title       : Mathematical Models of Phase Transitions in Quartz
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2000 
File        : a9704621

Award Number: 9704621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Rogers rogers@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tao Lin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9704621  Rogers    This grant funds a program of mathematical investigations
              of the alpha-beta  phase transition in quartz.  In unstressed quartz this
              transition occurs at  about 574 degrees Centigrade, at which point a quartz
              crystal undergoes a  change in shape, volume, and symmetry.  The high
              temperature beta-phase has  larger volume and higher symmetry than the
              low-temperature alpha-phase.  The alpha-beta transition can be accompanied by
              an interesting triangular  microstructure that  is quite different from the
              layered microstructures  that are usually found in shape memory alloys and
              ferromagnetic materials.  An interesting mathematical feature of the problem is
              that the  microstructure is describe by the oscillation of a scalar order
              parameter.  Order parameters have been used in many other studies of phase
              transitions,  but they are usually hard to measure and are defined in fairly
              fuzzy  physical terms.  On the other hand, the order parameter in quartz is
              well  defined physically and there are good techniques for measuring it.  Thus,
               it provides an excellent test case for mathematical models using order 
              parameters.  The proposers plan to use techniques of differential equations,
              the  calculus of variations, scientific computation, and bifurcation theory to 
              study both standard  models for quartz and models that they will propose.   
              %%%    When a material undergoes a drastic change in its fundamental properties
              we  say it has undergone a "phase transition."  The obvious examples are 
              freezing and melting, evaporation and condensation, but more subtle atomic 
              rearrangements are covered by the term as well.  Despite the technological 
              importance of such material changes, the mathematical theory describing  them
              is nowhere near as well developed as theory describing the motion, 
              deformation, and thermal properties of materials.  This grant funds a program
              of mathematical investigations of a phase  transition in quartz.  The
              transition is caused by changing temperature and  occurs at  about 574 degrees
              Centigrade. At this temperature, a quartz  crystal undergoes a change in shape,
              volume, and symmetry.   The transition  can be accompanied by an interesting
              microscopic triangular pattern that is  quite different from the layered
              patterns that are usually found in shape  memory alloys and ferromagnetic
              materials.  An understanding of these  microscopic patterns (called
              "microstructures") is widely believed to be a  key to the understanding of the
              phase transitions that they accompany.  There are a number of reasons for
              focusing on this particular phase  transition.  Quartz has a number of
              important industrial applications such  as oscillators and optical waveguides. 
              In addition, the transition in  quartz is usually described mathematically by a
              quantity called an "order  parameter."  Order parameters have been used in many
              other types of phase  transitions, but they are usually hard to measure and are
              defined in fairly  fuzzy physical terms.  On the other hand, the order
              parameter in quartz is  well defined physically and there are good techniques
              for measuring it.  Thus, quartz provides an excellent test case for
              mathematical models using  order parameters.  ***
