Title       : Graphical Markov Models, Structural Equation Models, and Related Models of
               Multivariate Dependence: Structure, Equivalence, Synthesis, and Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9704573

Award Number: 9704573
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $313722             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Perlman michael@ms.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David Madigan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas S. Richardson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9187,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9704573    Graphical Markov Models, Structural Equation Models, and  
              Related Models of Multivariate Dependence: Structure, Equivalence,   Synthesis,
              and Extensions.    David Madigan, Michael. D. Perlman, and Thomas. S. 
              Richardson    University of Washington  (together with Steen. A. Andersson,
              Indiana University)                                 ABSTRACT     Graphical
              Markov models (GMM) and the closely related structural   equation models (SEM)
              use graphs (= path diagrams), either   undirected, directed, or mixed, to
              represent multivariate   dependencies among stochastic variables in an
              economical and   computationally efficient manner. A GMM or SEM is constructed
              by   specifying local dependencies for each variable (= node of the   graph) in
              terms of its immediate neighbors, parents, or both, yet   can represent a
              highly varied and complex system of multivariate   dependencies by means of the
              global structure of the graph.   Nonetheless, the local specification permits
              efficiencies in   modeling, inference, and probabilistic calculations. This
              research  involves the development of more complex and comprehensive classes 
              of GMMs and SEMs, determination of the mathematical structure of   these
              (extremely vast) classes, and the development of more   efficient statistical
              and computational algorithms for the   discovery and analysis of appropriate
              models within these classes  for specific real-world applications.     Among
              their many applications, GMMs have become prevalent in   statistical science
              for the analysis of categorical data in   contingency tables, for the modeling
              of spatially-dependent   processes such as the spread of epidemics in human and
              animal   populations, and for the development of early warning systems   for
              severe weather conditions; in computer science (as Bayesian   networks) for
              information processing and retrieval, for robotics,  computer vision, and
              pattern recognition, for the debugging of   complex programs (such as Windows
              95), and for the representation  of exp ert systems for medical diagnosis; and
              in decision science  (as influence diagrams) as models for information flow and
              control  and for combining the opinions of many decision-makers. SEMs have 
              long been used in fields such as genetics, sociology, econometrics,  and
              psychometrics as networks for representing the structure of   complex causal
              systems. A crucial feature of all these models is   that they are designed for
              fast computational implementation,  thereby facilitating the development of
              software that can "reason"  about real world problems.    Related Websites:   
              LA Times Article, October 1996    http://www.hugin.dk/lat-bn.html   (Hosted by
              Hugin Website)    Microsoft trouble-shooting systems, employing GMMs  
              http://www.microsoft.com/support/tshooters.htm     Lockheed News Release
              describing application of GMMs   in Unmanned Underwater Vehicles.  
              http://www.lmsc.lockheed.com/newsbureau/pressreleases/9604.html    Air Force
              Institute of Technology Bayesian Network Page  
              http://www.afit.af.mil/Schools/EN/ENG/LABS/AI/BayesianNetworks    Website
              describing a GMM for forecasting severe weather in   NE Colorado 
              http://www.lis.pitt.edu/~dsl/hailfinder/
