Title       : Computationally Tractable Estimation Methods for Markov Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9704648

Award Number: 9704648
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64503              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine B. Ensor ensor@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF DMS-9704648  Katherine Bennett Ensor     Markov process theory provides a
              rich analytic and probablistic structure which is intrinsically natural from a
              modelling perspective.  Much of the literature on inference for continuous-time
              Markov processes assumes that the process has been observed continuously over
              some time interval.  However, in practice, many of the data sets available
              involve observing only discrete ``snapshots'' of the process.  Existing theory
              on parameter estimation in this setting often results in computationally
              prohibitive methodologies.  This research addresses the issue of
              computationally tractable parameter estimation for discretely observed
              continuous-time Markov processes.  Many of the results utilize Monte Carlo
              simulation to achieve tractability.  The second fundamental question examined
              in this research is that of error propagation through a stochastic system. 
              When the output performance measure of the stochastic system cannot be
              evaluated in closed form the output measure is simulated from the modelled
              system.  To address this situation, the investigators develop estimators and
              their sampling properties for functionals of the stochastic system.   
              Statistical models have always proven a powerful tool for purposes of
              modelling, understanding and predicting complex systems.  This research
              advances the frontier of statistical models for dependent observations.  For
              example, the statistical methods of this research are applicable to the diverse
              areas of modelling levels of pollutants and contaminants in air, soil and water
              which evolve over time and/or space; forecasting changes in the stock market;
              and predicting or assessing demand for the development of an optimal
              communications network.  The use of statistical models for purposes of
              modelling complex systems has been limited in the past due to the state of
              computing power; a state which has certainly improved in recent years.  In this
              research, the investigators develop a framework for practical implementation 
              of advanced statistical methodologies which capitalizes fully on the high
              performance computing available today. The research addresses the issue of
              modelling under partially observed information.  For example, the electrical or
              computer engineer may use such models to assess network status when only
              partial information is available on the state of the system; in predicting air
              quality for a given region, observations of pollutant levels are made at sites
              irregularly located over the region and often at irregular points in time.  The
              theoretical constructs necessary to implement the models in the more common
              scenario when only partial information is available are presented. 
              Additionally, this research involves error assessment of the predictions or
              output performance measure of an estimated complex system again capitalizing on
              the availability of high powered computing.
