Title       : Harmonic Maps, Loop Groups, and Integrable Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2000      
File        : a9704443

Award Number: 9704443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68211              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas C. Ravenel drav@math.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Martin A. Guest  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704443    Guest    The investigator will study topological and geometrical
              properties   of the space of  harmonic maps from certain compact Riemann  
              surfaces to compact Lie groups and symmetric spaces.   He will   continue his
              collaboration with Y. Ohnita and others to determine   the connected components
              and the fundamental groups of these spaces,   in the case where the domain is a
              two sphere. The method uses   suitable group actions on these spaces to produce
              continuous   deformations of harmonic maps, together with Morse theoretic
              arguments.   He will also collaborate with F. E. Burstall and others to
              establish   a common understanding of the construction of harmonic maps in the 
               cases where the domain is a two sphere or a torus, i.e. harmonic maps   of
              finite uniton number or harmonic maps of finite type, respectively.   The
              method here uses the geometry of loop groups, together with methods   from the
              theory of integrable systems. The investigator will continue   his previous
              work on the topology of spaces of holomorphic maps.    This is an essential
              ingredient in the study of spaces of harmonic   maps, and also of independent
              interest, being related to recent   developments in the topology of moduli
              spaces.    This work is motivated by the role played by symmetry in solving  
              equations of mathematics and physics.  Over the past thirty years, 
              mathematicians have come to realize that some of the most important  
              differential equations which describe the real world are subject  to very
              extensive but "hidden" (and therefore somewhat mysterious)  symmetries.  Even
              when the equations describe a finite-dimensional  process, such as a simple
              mechanical system, hidden symmetries can  be infinite dimensional in extent. 
              Such symmetries often turn out to  be the key to solving the equation. As a
              consequence, mathematical  research in this area aims to predict the existence
              of hidden  symmetries for a particular equation and then attempts to use  these
              symmetries to solve the equation.  The inves tigator aims to do   this for the
              harmonic map equation. Studying the symmetries of  individual equations like
              this will lead eventually to a general theory of  equations with hidden
              symmetries.  Such a theory would be a significant  advance in understanding the
              many natural phenomena which are  governed by equations of this type.
