Title       : Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations in Applied Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9704155

Award Number: 9704155
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98223              (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Hunter jkhunter@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704155      Hunter      The proposal is to study a number of nonlinear partial 
              differential equations which model various physical and biological  systems. 
              The first equation is a free-boundary value problem which  models the
              deposition of surfactant on a surface by a liquid droplet.   There is a complex
              interaction between the motion of the droplet on the  surface and the
              deposition of surfactant. The second equation is a system  of
              reaction-diffusion equations which models an islet of beta-cells in  the
              pancreas. The aim of Professor Hunter's research is to understand the 
              collective dynamics of the beta-cells and the formation of spatial  patterns in
              an islet.  The third equation is a two dimensional Burgers  equation which
              models the diffraction and reflection of weak shock waves  in two space
              dimensions, where there are longstanding discrepancies  between theory and
              experiment.  The fourth equation is a modulation  equation which describes the
              propagation of nonlinear gravitational waves  in Einstein's theory of general
              relativity. Professor Hunter proposes to  study this equation with the aim of
              understanding the formation of  space-time singularities in a nonlinear
              gravitational wave.    Mathematical models of physical and biological systems
              provide a way to  understand, predict, and control the behavior of those
              systems. The  proposed research involves the study of a number of mathematical 
              models of systems of importance in engineering, biology, and basic  science.
              One model describes the deposition of surfactant on a surface by  droplets. 
              Surface deposition has many applications in materials science,  including the
              printing of very small structures on surfaces for the  control of fluids, and
              as an experimental means of preparing liquid  crystal display screens. A second
              model describes the collective  behavior of beta-cells in the pancreas. These
              cells produce insulin and  play a central role in diseases like diabetes. A
              third model describes  the propagation of shock waves, which  are generated by
              transonic or  supersonic aircraft, in turbines, and in many other high-speed
              fluid  flows.  The mathematical theory of shock waves remains very poorly 
              understood. The fourth model is a set of equations which describe the 
              propagation of nonlinear gravitational waves in Einstein's general theory  of
              relativity.  The general theory of relativity is the fundamental  physical
              theory of gravity, and it describes the large scale cosmological  structure of
              the universe.  The main obstacle to understanding the  predictions of the
              theory is the nonlinearity of the Einstein equations.  This work is directed
              towards an increased understanding of the effects  of this nonlinearity.
