Title       : Development of a Tetrahertz Spectrometer for Investigating Correlated-Electron
               Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  1998       
File        : a9704032

Award Number: 9704032
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $254000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ward P. Beyermann Ward.Beyermann@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harry W. K. Tom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              l 8 -w- l  9704032  Beyermann  Measurements of the optical response of materials
              at terahertz  frequencies are the most difficult to perform with existi.pg 
              e,xperimental techniques. This is unfortunate since interesting  physical
              phenomena in manwsnms leads to a strongly  frequency-dependent conductivity at
              terahertz frequencies. The  objective of this project is to construct a
              terahertz  spectrometer for measuring the frequency dependent properties of 
              correlated materials at low temperatures using a new technique  for generating
              and detecting broad-band terahertz radiation. The  project requires
              interdisciplinary expertise that is provided by  the two principal
              investigators (P.I.'s).    The terahertz spectrometer is based on recent
              advances in the  ultrafast laser community. A femtosecond pulsed laser is used 
              to photogenerate carriers in a GaAs crystal. The injected  carriers accelerate
              and approach drift velocity in the  depletion electric field on a subpicosecond
              timescale. The  radiation from these carriers is a 
              coherent-picosecond-electromagnetic pulse which propagates away  from the
              crystal in the direction of the pump pulse. The source  is reasonably efficient
              with a peak power of several mW. Using  ordinary optical components, the
              terahertz beam can be  reflected from a sample, which is located inside a
              cryostat  with a variabletemperature capability, and the electric field  can be
              detected as a function of time by measuring the  electro-optic phase
              retardation induced on a time-delayed  femtosecond probe pulse in a nonlinear
              ZnTe crystal. With this  technique, radiation can be produced that is centered
              between  0.5 and 1.0 THz with a bandwidth of ~1 THz. The complex Fourier 
              transforms of the incident and reflected electric fields can be  used to
              determine the real and imaginary parts of the complex  dielectric function of
              the material as a function of frequency.  The broad-band terahertz spectrometer
              represents a significant  advancement over traditional methods in its ability
              to  measure  the response at frequencies important in correlated systems.  For
              one thing, it is currently very difficult to measure both  the real and
              imaginary parts of the dielectric function at  terahertz frequencies without
              invoking the Kramers-Kronig  relation.    After building and testing the
              spectrometer, the terahertz  response of several heavy-fermion and mixed-valent
              systems will  be measured over a temperature range from 1.5 to 300 K. In  these
              systems, strong electron correlations lead to an enhanced  Fermi-liquid ground
              state at low temperatures. Measurements  using microwave and far-infrared
              spectroscopy have observed a  narrow Drude response in some of these systems,
              but the  limitations of the conventional techniques prohibit a complete 
              characterization of the response on a variety of materials.  Some new systemse
              such as small-gap Kondo insulators and  materials that display nonfermi-liquid
              behavior, will also be  examined. Features in the conductivity are expected at 
              terahertz frequencies in both these systems. Other systems,  including quantum
              magnets, quantum well and dot structures,  compounds with charge and
              spin-density-wave ground states, and  materials where disorder-induced
              localization is important are  all examples where strong correlations produce a
               frequency-dependent conductivity at terahertz frequencies, and  experiments
              are planned for many of these systems in the  future. Finally, the
              spectrometer's utility goes beyond the  measurements that are being proposed.
              After developing  capabilities to reduce the sample' s temperature below 1 K,
              we  could examine the electrodynamic response in the exotic  superconducting
              ground state of some heavy fermion materials.  ***
