Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Coordination of Optokinesis & Locomotion
               during Visual Course-Control in an Invertebrate Model System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  1997      
File        : a9704097

Award Number: 9704097
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44780              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Layne   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510404   Sensry Physiology & Perc                
              0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5946,5956,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704097  Layne      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. John E. Layne to work with Dr. William J.
              P.  Barnes at the University of Glasgow in Scotland.    Dr. Layne will examine
              the physiological mechanisms that  underlie the course control during
              locomotion in the Blue  Land Crab, Cardisoma guanhumi.  This will by a lab
              study in  which extracellular recordings from visual and statocyst 
              interneurons, eyecup motoneurones and muscles will be  correlated with
              measurements of the eye and leg movements  induced by rotation of the visual
              field and of the body.  A  related field study will be done to observe how
              crabs make  use of visual information during locomotion in their natural 
              environment, by disrupting their sensory guidance systems  (vision, statocyst
              organ), and observing its affect on basic  locomotion and oriented behavior
              (escape, homing).  This  study will provide an understanding of the process of
              visual  flow analysis.  The host lab is part of the Division of  Environmental
              and Evolutionary Biology, which contains  several behavioral scientists.  It
              will also provide close  links with neuroscientists in other divisions of the 
              Institute of Biomedical and Life Sciences.  The host, Dr.  Barnes, has studied
              eye movements at a behavioral level for  many years, and has established the
              current behavioral  models fmr flow field analysis in invertebrates.      ***
