Title       : Boundaries of Nonpositively Curved Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9704939

Award Number: 9704939
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim E. Ruane   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      512 Kirkland Hall
	      Nashville, TN  37240    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704939  Ruane       An important class of groups for which geometric ideas have
               proven useful is the class of word hyperbolic groups proposed by M.  Gromov. 
              These are groups which discretely approximate a geometry more  like that of the
              hyperbolic plane than the Euclidean plane.  It is  currently of interest to
              extend this well-developed theory of word  hyperbolic groups to the
              ``nonpositively curved'' setting.  Just as  word hyperbolic groups are a
              generalization of the classical  hyperbolic groups, finitely generated free
              groups, and certain small  cancellation groups, there should be a general class
              of nonpositively  curved groups that includes finitely generated free abelian
              groups,  more general small cancellation groups, and fundamental groups of 
              Riemannian manifolds of nonpositive curvature.  Recently, there have  been
              several proposed classes of nonpositively curved groups.  One  such class
              consists of groups that arise via geometric actions on  ``CAT(0)'' spaces. 
              These are spaces which enjoy many of the same  geometric properties of
              universal covers of Riemannian manifolds of  nonpositive curvature.  Both the
              Euclidean and hyperbolic planes are  examples of CAT(0) spaces.  The boundary
              of a CAT(0) space which  admits a geometric group action is an object of great
              interest in the  area.  Recently, several important problems in group theory
              have been  solved with the use of geometric methods.  For word hyperbolic
              groups,  the boundary has proven a useful tool.  Many of the theorems which 
              hold in that setting should have generalizations to the nonpositively  curved
              setting, and that is the point of view taken here.  It is  already known that
              replacing the phrase ``word hyperbolic'' with  ``CAT(0)'' in many of these
              theorems is not going to work, but finding  the right theorems is an important
              step in unifying the theory of  nonpositively curved groups, much like the
              theory of nonpositively  curved manifolds.       The basic idea of Geometric
              Group Theory is to study the  structure of  an infinite group G by studying
              ``geometric'' actions of  G on different geometries.  In this way, any such
              group is viewed as a  set of rigid motions of a geometry.  An example to keep
              in mind is  that of the Euclidean plane.  This is a geometry whose boundary can
              be  identified with the unit circle, where each point of the circle  represents
              a direction in the plane which heads out to infinity.  A  rigid motion in a
              straight line is known as a translation.  This space  (the plane) may be acted
              upon by translations in any direction, but  translations in two independent
              directions will suffice to give all of  them.  Thus two (commuting) copies of
              the group of integers can be  thought of as acting on the plane by translation.
               In fact, this  geometric setup determines this group almost uniquely.  In
              general,  when a group acts geometrically on a geometry, there is a ``picture''
               of the group inside the space created by following the image of one  point
              under all of the group elements.  Then the group, which started  out as an
              abstract mathematical object, can be studied by studying the  geometry of the
              space, where the problems are now geometric instead of  algebraic.  In the
              example above, the group consists of moves from one  square to another on an
              infinite chess board.  The collection of moves  may then be given a concrete
              geometric picture by indentifying each  square with its center, the totality of
              moves becoming a lattice that  discretely approximates the plane.  ***
