Title       : Finite Element Methods for Problems in Solid Mechanics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1997      
File        : a9704556

Award Number: 9704556
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Falk falk@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  Proposal NO: DMS-9704556  Title: Finite Element Methods for Problems in
              Solid Mechanics  P.I.:  Richard S. Falk      Abstract:    The first main area
              of study of this project is the finite element  approximation of plate and
              shell models.  One objective is to develop methods  which avoid the ``locking''
              problem which leads, for standard approximations,  to poor results for thin
              shells and plates.  A second part of the project is  to design and analyze
              effective multigrid preconditioners for least squares  and mixed finite element
              approximations to second order elliptic boundary  value problems.  A third
              general area of study, using both computational and  analytical techniques, is
              to understand the predictions of mathematical models  which are concerned with
              stress driven instability of recrystallizable rods  and films and with
              curvature driven surface diffusion.  The last part of the  project will attempt
              to develop finite element methods for first order linear  hyperbolic systems
              and also for the approximation of simplified versions of  the Einstein
              equations.    Many problems in solid mechanics can be studied by using
              mathematical models.  These models offer a cost-effective way to make
              quantitative predictions about  how mechanical systems will change under
              various conditions, such as the  application of external forces. In particular,
              they offer an alternative to  the use of costly or difficult experiments. 
              Typically, when realistic  mathematical models are formulated, they are in
              terms of equations whose  solutions, which represent physical quantities of
              interest to engineers and  scientists, are not able to be determined
              analytically, i.e., in a simple form  one can easily write down.  However, by
              employing numerical methods, good  approximations to the physical quantities
              which are described by the  mathematical models may still be found. Typically,
              these numerical methods use  high-speed computers to do the large number of
              calculations involved.  This  project is concerned with the  design and
              analysis of numerical approximation  schemes for a number of important
              mathematical models used in mechanics.  Among the mathematical models
              considered are those for thin shells and films.
