Title       : Waves and Particles: Nonlinear Microlocal Analysis of Microstructures in Partial
               Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 9,  1997       
File        : a9704762

Award Number: 9704762
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luc C. Tartar tartar@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9704762  TARTAR  As part of a much larger project, the Principal Investigator
              plans to  develop variants of the tool of H-measures that he has introduced a
              few  years ago under NSF grants. One question concerns variants able to 
              observe large domains of frequency, as is supposed to occur in  turbulence.
              Another question concerns parabolic effects, which require a  variant using
              different scalings in different directions. Another  question concerns the
              taking into account of oscillating initial data in  studying the propagation of
              oscillations and concentration effects for  general hyperbolic systems with
              variable coefficients, a particular  emphasis being put on questions of
              Elasticity in connection with seismic  problems. Another question concerns the
              effects of limited regularity of  coefficients or interaction with the
              boundaries, reflection, refraction,  grazing rays. The Principal Investigator
              also plans to study which  constitutive relations in Elasticity are admissible
              under the necessity  of having the finite propagation speed property for
              mixtures.       The Principal Investigator has developed under NSF grants a new
              approach  to general questions of Continuum Mechanics and Physics, which 
              corresponds to explaining how waves can appear to behave like particles.  The
              repercussions of having now such a new rigourous mathematical  framework will
              be enormous in many different areas, but at the moment  the developments are
              still of a very technical nature, and apart from  problems related to
              Elasticity which are connected to seismic problems,  the work of the Principal
              Investigator during the coming year will be  mostly theoretical, opening new
              directions for future research and  applications.
