Title       : SBIR PHASE II: New Architectures and Applications of Multiwavelength Optical
               Networks using Waveguide Grating Routers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1998    
File        : a9704126

Award Number: 9704126
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $251891             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelvin K. Chau   (Principal Investigator current)
              Feiling Jia  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Optivision Incorporated
	      3450 Hillview Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  94304    415/855-0200

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 4090,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
               This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from Optivision,
              Incorporated will demonstrate the advantages of wavelength routing in
              telecommunication networks through the prototyping of an integrated optical
              add/drop multiplexing (OADM) system which combines waveguide grating routers
              (WGRS) with network management and control functionality.  The prototype OADM
              system, including an electronic control board, will serve as the basic platform
              to experiment and evaluate solutions to system issues, especially on network
              management and control.  The continued investigation of network architectures
              that incorporate wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) network system elements
              will explore opportunities for interconnecting the prototype OADM with other
              network systems for commercial/testbed deployment.  The Phase I effort of this
              SBIR identified the optical crossconnect (OXC) and the optical add/drop
              multiplexer (OADM) as two important system elements in multiwavelength
              telecommunication transport networks.  Different system architectures were
              designed utilizing the unique wavelength routing capability of the waveguide
              grating router (WGR) device.  Optivision also identified a set of system issues
              that are critical to the successful commercial applications of WDM systems,
              including network control and management, network restoration strategy, and
              network architectures that interwork with existing equipment.  Solutions to
              these issues are currently open research topics and are expected to comprise a
              significant part of the proposed Phase II research effort.  The project will
              produce a prototype 4-wavelength optical add/drop multiplexer, the optical
              performance measurement results, the specification for network management and
              control functions, algorithms and analytical results for wave-length
              assignment, and a set of recommendations on network interconnection
              architectures and automatic fault-recovery mechanisms.   The proposed optical
              add/drop multiplexer (OADM) has enormous potential applications in
              telecommunication infrastructure.  By integrating the unique feature of
              waveguide grating router (WGR) devices with management and control functions,
              results from this research effort can be utilized in (WDM) network testbeds as
              well as commercial networking environments.  The proposed wavelength routing
              technology, if successful, will benefit the nation in the cost-effective
              realization and management of wavelength routing in the next generation
              multiwavelength telecommunication transport networks.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
