Title       : Studies in Industrial Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9704711

Award Number: 9704711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $132450             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis K. J. Lin DKL5@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF DMS-9704711    Topics in Industrial Statistics  Dennis K.J. Lin   Penn State
              University    PROJECT SUMMARY      A major objective of the National Science
              Foundation is to improve the   nation's capacity for intellectual and economic
              growth.  It does this by supporting the discovery of new knowledge and the  
              enhancement of a skilled workforce.  American industry is becoming increasingly
              aware of the benefits   of running statistically designed experiments.  In
              complex experimental work, the number of potential factors is   large, but
              often only a few active factors are expected.  A problem frequently encountered
              is how to   identify the factors that matter, and consequently  improve the
              quality and productivity of the products.  The basic results we hope to obtain
              here will be extremely   useful to practitioners, since new designs will be
              furnished   that will save considerable cost when real world issues are
              involved.    When the number of potential factors is large and   only a few
              active factors are expected,  we do not need unbiased estimates to detect those
              active factors.  In this project, we propose the use of supersaturated  
              designs  --  allowing for a slight bias in estimation but   significantly
              reducing the design size in experimental work.  Some initial results were
              actually utilized in electronic   and chemical industries (specifically, IBM
              and Lonza).  The proposed methodology helps extract useful information that  
              may not be provided by "traditional wisdom."  From these practical experiences,
              it is anticipated that a much   wider application is possible.  On the other
              hand, this research has broad theoretical implications.   Some theoretical
              results have been obtained, and  it is shown that those results can be applied 
              to other statistical areas, such as linear models,   information theory and
              optimal design.  Another statistical area that has received a great deal of  
              attention in industry involves reliability problems.  The estimation of system
              (or component) reliability    is a common problem for many industries.  When a
              system consists of several components, and when the   cause of failure is
              unspecified, the estimation problem is   unresolved. This project proposes the
              use of a Bayesian approach.  Some initial results applied to IBM PS/2 personal
              computer data   have been obtained.  More general fundamental research will be 
               further studied.  Problems given here are very specific to be  realistically
              solved during the funding period.  However, it has a much wider research impact
              for both industrial   applications or academia type research.
