Title       : Statistical Methods for Models with Comstraints and Incomplete Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9704983

Award Number: 9704983
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181068             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yehuda Vardi vardi@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cun-Hui Zhang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,9183,AMPP,BIOT,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              NSF: DMS 9704983   Statistical Methods for Models with   Constraints and
              Incomplete Data    Y.Vardi and C-H Zhang  Rutgers University    ABSTRACT     
              Statistical methods and inference tools for problems with   incomplete - data
              and constrained -parameters will be developed.    There are four main research
              topics: The first topic covers   regression and multisample data under
              selection bias that   depends on the response variable. A number of
              semiparametric   models (parametric weight functions, nonparametric  base 
              distribution) are studied and  maximum likelihood procedures  with related
              inference tools are developed. Applications to  HIV clinical trial are
              proposed.  The second topic focuses  on estimation in multinomial models
              subject to upper and lower  bound constraints on the cell probabilities. This 
              method is  incorporated into an  EM algorithm for image reconstruction  in
              discrete tomography . The third topic   extends current   semiparametric
              regression models to truncation-censoring   cases and heteroscedastic
              regression models with censored   data. The fourth topic centers on inference
              for   right-censored random (growth) curves, where the censoring  mechanism
              depends on the progression of the curve. This is  informative, nonignorable, 
              censoring and it poses  methodological challenges for the problems of comparing
              two  groups of curves (treatment and control). Methodolgy based  on U-type
              statistics is developed, and a semiparametric  accelerated growth regression
              model  is  introduced  to model relationship between the curves and their 
              corresponding covariates.    The research centers on statistical methods for
              problems  in which data collection is impaired by sampling bias,  missing
              observations, and models with partial information  on the  parameters.  The
              developed   methods contributes   directly to certain scientific areas
              considered of strategic  national importance. The research on estimating 
              cell-probabilities in constrained multinomial models is  incorporated in  an
              algo rithm for image reconstruction of  binary images in electron transmission
              tomography;   an important high-tech technology, still in research stages,  for
              estimating the atomic structure of a crystal layer by  taking projection
              measurements.  This is important in material  studies and in manufacturing. 
              The research on semiparametric  selection-bias models  relates to applications
              in   biotechnology, as it is  developed in preparation   for planned HIV
              vaccine trials. The goal here, is to have a   methodology  in place  for
              analyzing HIV-1 sequence data arising    from forthcoming  vaccine trials.
