Title       : Improved Estimation in Multivariate Location Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9704524

Award Number: 9704524
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $82434              (Estimated)
Investigator: William E. Strawderman straw@stat.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9169,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704524  STRAWDERMAN    This research project is devoted to the development of
              improved estimators in problems where several parameters are to be estimated. 
              Attention will be primarily focused on estimation of location parameters.  The
              types of improved estimators to be studied fall under the general category of
              shrinkage estimators and will typically be hierarchical bayes, empirical bayes
              or Stein-type estimators.  Attention will be focused on deriving improved
              estimators when the normality assumption is removed or the loss function is
              other than quadratic.  Conditions on prior distributions which lead to improved
              procedures will also be emphasized.    One of the most important problems in
              science involves the estimation of unknown quantities based on data obtained
              via experimentation and sampling.  It is typically the case that several
              parameters are to be estimated.  A standard method of estimating such 
              quantities ( called  parameters by statisticians) is to take the averages of
              several observations based on a series of experiments.  In certain
              circumstances, when several such parameters are to be estimated, it has been
              shown that one may obtain improved estimators by combining data across
              (seemingly) unrelated experiments.  We study this phenomenon, extend the class
              of problems where such improved estimators exist, and study the extent  of
              improvement possible over standard procedures.  This research is applicable  in
              virtually all areas of physical, biological and social science science.  In
              particular the author has been involved in a number of studies in environmental
              sciences where these techniques have been successfully employed.
