Title       : Radar and Numerical Modeling Investigations of Dynamical and Microphysical
               Processes Within Deep Subtropical Convection During CaPE
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1999      
File        : a9704547

Award Number: 9704547
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202663             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin R. Knupp kevin@nsstc.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704547  Knupp        In a continuation of previous research, the Principal
              Investigator will pursue  investigation of the interactions between storm
              dynamics and microphysics in deep  tropical convection.  The analysis
              components include: (a) multiple Doppler radar  for determination of internal
              flows, (b) multiparameter radar for determination of  bulk microphysics, and
              (c) aircraft data for determination of in situ microphysics and  kinematics. 
              Integration of these data sets will yield a comprehensive description of  the
              interacting microphysical, kinematic and electric fields within deep
              convection.  Further integration of these data will facilitate evaluation of
              the accuracy of radar  measurements. In addition, numerical simulations will be
              used to further study the  dynamical and microphysical processes of deep
              convection, and will facilitate  interpretation of the various radar and
              aircraft observations.         Specific tasks included under this continuation
              proposal include:   determination of the time-dependent vertical profiles of
              latent heating, identification      of the important microphysical processes
              associated with latent heating within     deep convection, and the impact of
              latent heating on the dynamics of deep     precipitating convection; 
              investigation of the various mechanisms by which cells in proximity interact   
               dynamically and microphysically;  a) examination of the cell (storm)
              entrainment properties using aircraft and multiple     Doppler data, and 3-D
              numerical simulations;  b) quantification of errors and filtering associated
              with multiple Doppler wind     retrievals and multiparameter radar
              measurements.        Successful completion of this project will advance
              understanding of how  precipitation is produced in tropical convection.   ***
