Title       : The Kepler Conjecture
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1998      
File        : a9704129

Award Number: 9704129
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : November 30,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas C. Hales hales@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project will give a solution to the Kepler conjecture, the oldest problem
              in discrete geometry. It asserts that the face-centered cubic packing is one of
              the densest possible packing of spheres.  There is now a well-developed program
              for proving the conjecture. In fact, it has been known since the 1950's,
              through the work of L. Fejes Toth, that this problem can be reduced to an
              optimization problem in a finite number of variables. Over the last two years,
              the computational methods have been developed to the point that the Kepler
              conjecture finally appears to be within reach.  The proof will rely heavily on
              computer calculations.  Linear relaxation techniques will be used to replace
              the nonlinear optimization problem with a series of linear programming
              problems.  These linear programming problems tend to involve about a hundred
              variables and less than two thousand constraints.  Problems of this size are
              routinely solved by computer. To guarantee the reliability of computer
              calculations, IEEE/ANSI standards of machine computation, which permit directed
              rounding in floating-point arithmetic, will be used.  This will be based on
              methods of interval arithmetic, which give control over the round-off errors
              that arise in computer calculations.   In a booklet published in 1611, Kepler
              described the densest known arrangement of spheres.  He asserted that "the
              packing will be the tightest possible, so that in no other arrangement could
              more pellets be stuffed into the same container." This claim has come to be
              known as the Kepler conjecture. The Kepler conjecture is the oldest problem in
              discrete geometry. The problem is notoriously difficult. It has a long and
              distinguished history. By now, there is a well-developed program for proving
              the conjecture.  This project will complete a proof of the Kepler conjecture.
              In addition to the historical importance of the conjecture, the theory of
              sphere packings has developed as an important mathematical tool in various
              scientific pursuits, such as error-correc ting codes, experimental design, and
              quantization problems.  One of the most fundamental questions of this rapidly
              growing branch of mathematics will be answered.  The solution will make a novel
              application of linear programming, global optimization, interval arithmetic,
              and other computer-based technologieq.
