Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Topological Structure of Planar Continua
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9704903

Award Number: 9704903
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81296              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lex G. Oversteegen overstee@math.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research project is centered around the class of weakly chainable plane
              continua (plane continua which are the continuous image of the pseudo arc).
              Given that the pseudo arc is very non-locally-connected, this class includes
              many pathological continua as well as all locally connected continua. The
              proposer has shown that it includes all non-separating homogeneous continua,
              Lelek has shown that it includes all chainable continua and Minc has shown that
              all non separating continua in this class have the fixed point property. Kato
              has shown that no chainable continuum admits an expansive homeomorphism. A
              natural question which arises is whether weakly chainable plane continua admit
              an expansive homeomorphism. We will establish connections between this problem
              and the structure of invariant continua of branched covering maps of the plane,
              including the structure of the boundary of invariant simply connected domains.
              We will make use of prime end techniques as well as results from continuum
              theory and dynamical systems. The problems in this proposal are related to the
              classification of homogeneous plane continua, the fixed point property of
              non-separating plane continua, and the topological structure of
              non-locally-connected Julia sets of complex polynomials.  Planar continua arise
              in many applications, most notably as invariant sets in dynamical systems.
              Dynamical systems is an area of mathematics which studies properties of
              mathematical models of systems which change over time. Invariant continua often
              determine the long term behavior of a dynamical system and are particularly of
              interest in case these systems exhibit chaotic behavior. The study of such
              continua has a long history dating back to the late 1800's. Despite significant
              advances during the last 80 years, several long-standing problems remain
              unresolved. In this proposal we will establish connections between some of
              these old problems and new ones which arise from other areas of mathematics. We
              will indicate possible solutions to th ese problems using a mixture of old
              ideas and new tools and techniques from adjacent mathematical fields. We will
              focus on the topological aspects of these problems although solutions may well
              have an impact on work in adjacent fields.
