Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Asymptotic Topology, Analysis and Dynamics of Spaces and
               Foliations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9704768

Award Number: 9704768
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2001        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98774              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven E. Hurder hurder@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               This project has two themes: the study of the asymptotic geometrical,
              topological and analytical properties of complete open manifolds and
              foliations; and the study of geometrical and topological invariants for
              operator algebras arising from geometric constructions.  Regarding the
              asymptotic properties of open manifolds, we propose to investigate:   1)    the
              structure and applications of entropy of spaces; 2)  coarse cohomology for  
              foliations and mapping spaces;  3)  ergodic theory of leaves of foliations and
              asymptotic invariants; and 4)  index invariants of geometric operator algebras.
                Regarding operator algebras arising from geometric models, we propose to
              study  a variety of invariants derived using techniques based on geometric  
              constructions.  We propose to consider:  5) entropy and spectral properties of 
               operators;  6) index theory of non-taut Riemannian foliations; and 7)  
              differential topology of foliations and the structure of operator algebras.   
              Finally, this project includes a computer aided research component - with the  
              work to be done jointly with a graduate student - to study the geometry and  
              dynamics of surfaces via computer modeling.  Our research is related to many
              areas of mathematics, especially to topics in   differential topology,
              dynamics, and spectral theory of operators.  These are   all areas of pure
              mathematics which have proven in the past to have   applications to "real -life
              problems" - including the investigations of    questions in mathematical
              physics, the modeling of phenomenon in nature, and  for understanding
              symmetries in the behavior of physical systems. This project  is broad in its
              scope and variety of topics, reflecting outgrowths of many fruitful research
              projects and collaborations with other mathematicians    supported by previous
              funding of the National Science Foundation. This breadth  ensures that the
              proposed projects will find new connections with other areas  of mathematics,
              enables the participation of graduate and undergraduate  students in the
              research, and increases the probability of  the broad applicability of the
              results obtained.
