Title       : Acquisition of a Visible/Near-IR Raman System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1997      
File        : a9704127

Award Number: 9704127
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106650             (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Rabolt rabolt@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704127  Rabolt    This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a 
              new Raman system for the departments of Materials Science,  Chemical
              Engineering and Chemistry at the University of  Delaware.  The Raman instrument
              utilizes a high sensitivity  Charge Coupled Device (CCD) for detection of the
              laser light  scattered from the materials under investigation.  In order  to be
              able to investigate a large collection of materials  ranging from catalysts to
              polymers, the input laser  excitation must be varied from the visible to the
              near  infrared region (532.-950. nm.).  Hence this Raman system  will include a
              frequency-doubled diode pumped Nd:YAG laser  which will be used to pump a
              tunable solid state Ti:Sapphire  laser together which will provide the large
              range of  wavelengths needed to study the problems of interest in all  three
              departments.    The proposed instrument will be used by researchers in a 
              number of different areas of advanced materials design and  characterization. 
              These include high surface area materials  used for chemical separations,
              transition metal oxygen-anion  catalysts, organic self-assembled monolayers on
              metallic  substrates, microemulsions, high temperature  superconductors,
              polymers and ionomers.  This Raman system  will serve as a focal point for
              materials research, bringing  together a multidisciplinary group of researchers
              who have a  common goal-to understand the structure/property  relationships in
              advanced materials.  The presence of such  an instrument in the Materials
              Science Department at the  University of Delaware will serve to facilitate
              interaction  and collaboration between the different research groups on  campus
              but, just as importantly, it will also promote  industrial
              interaction/collaboration in the more global  materials community in Delaware. 
              A number of small  companies have expressed interest in exploring the use of 
              Raman spectroscopy in the characterization of materials in a 
              process-monitoring mode, a capability which could be  acc omplished with
              fiber-optic probes.  Limited feasibility  studies could be conducted at the
              university with the  proposed Raman instrument.    This instrument will also be
              utilized as part of a larger  course in materials characterization which is
              required for  all graduate students pursuing an advanced degree in  materials
              science.  In addition it will be used to train  students in chemical
              engineering, physics and chemistry  because of the large amount of
              materials-intensive work that  is currently being carried out in those
              departments.  ***
