Title       : Reliability, Statistical Applications of Order Restricted Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9704400

Award Number: 9704400
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $275657             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry W. Block hwb@stat.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Allan R. Sampson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas H. Savits  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Block, Sampson and Savits  9704400    This research focuses on the development
              of methodology and theory for some major problems facing the  statistics and
              reliability communities. One major emphasis is on the topic of burn-in.
              On-going research  involves determining optimal burn-in for classes of
              distributions and families of cost structures. Of  particular interest is the
              family of distributions with bathtub shaped hazard functions.  A second major 
              emphasis of this research is in the development of methods to support the use
              of the modern nonparametric ideas of order restricted inference in data
              analysis involving multivariate observations. A  great deal of theory has been
              developed for order restricted inference; however, the research focus here is 
              to utilize some of these results in important estimation and testing problems,
              in part, supported by the application of some of the computational results
              obtained by the investigators. This research makes   effective use of this
              elegant class of nonparametric procedures in modern data analysis.  Two other
              areas  of research are the further development of models and methodologies for
              data arising from accelerated  degradation experiments, and the continued
              development of the modeling of random length multivariate  data. These four
              research areas, while dealing with varied problems, utilize theory and methods
              from the  allied areas of reliability, order restricted inference and
              multivariate analysis.              Burn-in is a widely used engineering
              practice for increasing reliability by eliminating weak industrial  products
              before they are released for sale or use. This is an important topic in many
              modern American  industrial processes. Statistical tools are being developed to
              implement new production strategies which  are useful in determining how to
              deal with items which might fail early in critical uses.  The clinical 
              development of cost-effective new bioengineered pharmaceuticals often requires
              identification of those  patients who would b enefit substantially more from
              new biopharmaceuticals than from standard available  treatments. Some of this
              research focuses on developing improved statistical techniques to better
              identify  those patients who would significantly benefit from the new
              biotechnology.  Other aspects of the research  involve obtaining more effective
              statistical approaches to allow clinicians to predict the likelihood of 
              specific patients having a successsful response to a new treatment.
