Title       : Acquisition of a Variable-Temperature Scanning Probe Microscope for a
               Multi-Chamber Molecular Beam Epitaxy System Fabrication of Semiconductor
               Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1997      
File        : a9704255

Award Number: 9704255
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123650             (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew B. Johnson johnson@mail.nhn.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael B. Santos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. McCann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704255  Johnson    A variable-temperature scanning probe microscope will be 
              installed in an ultra-high-vacuum system that already consists of  two growth
              chambers for molecular beam epitaxy and a surface  analysis chamber.  One
              growth chamber is currently used for the  heteroepitaxy of fluoride and IV-VI
              (lead-salt) materials on  silicon, while the other growth chamber produces
              InSb-based  heterostructures.  Incorporating the requested instrumentation 
              with this growth facility will result in a powerful tool for in  situ
              characterization of surfaces produced during the epitaxial  growth of
              dissimilar materials.  This instrument will operate as  a scanning tunneling
              microscope or an atomic force microscope.  Samples can be studied at
              temperatures somewhat higher than the  typical growth temperatures and the same
              region of a sample can  imaged every time the sample is transferred from a
              growth chamber  to the microscope.  Materials research issues that will be 
              addressed include:  the effects of buffer layers in large-  mismatch
              heteroepitaxy; the atomic structure of novel surface  reconstructions;
              mechanisms of alloy ordering and clustering, and  dopant incorporation; and the
              real time progression of strain  relaxation for systems with thermal expansion
              mismatch.  Some  information derived from the proposed studies will uniquely
              apply  to the material studied, while some effects will be prototypical  of
              many materials.  As in the past, improved understanding of  such issues will
              clearly lead to improved heterostructures and  devices.  In addition to the
              direct research benefits,  acquisition of the instrument will enhance the
              training of  graduate students from several different departments through 
              interdisciplinary research using state-of-the-art facilities.  ***
