Title       : Saddlepoint Approximations for Survival Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1997      
File        : a9704570

Award Number: 9704570
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Snehalata Huzurbazar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3434 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713434    307/766-1121

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Re: NSF DMS-9704570  Saddlepoint Approximations for Survival Analysis  
              Snehalata V. Huzurbazar  University of Wyoming      The primary goal of this
              research is to develop saddlepoint   approximations to survival and hazard
              functions used for   bio-medical data or alternatively, approximations to
              reliability  functions used for engineering data. Modelling of survival data 
              results in complicated waiting times whose exact distributions   are
              intractable but they can be approximated using saddlepoint  methods. The latter
              are based on `higher-order' asymptotic  methods and yield extremely accurate
              approximations for density  and distribution functions which can then be
              combined to give  approximate survival and hazard functions.  The methodology
              is  extremely computer-intensive due to the nature of the calculations.   
              Survival analysis is primarily concerned with the modelling of  waiting time
              distributions arising from various scenarios.  The  investigator studies models
              for linear as well as acyclic  progression of diseases, models for competing
              risks, models with  feedback for cyclic behaviour as well as frailty models for
               populations which are heterogeneous. Due to the complexity of the  
              distributions that describe waiting time behaviour in these  situations,
              conventional methods are restricted to models which  mainly use the exponential
              distribution. Use of saddlepoint  methods removes this restriction, yielding
              much more flexibility  in modelling.      The above models are tremendously
              useful in studying the  progression of various diseases.  For example,
              progression of  the HIV virus is mainly from one stage to the next; but in some
               cases, patients can skip stages and also get better before  getting worse.  
              Progression of diseases is also studied using  frailty models, that is,
              situations in which the whole population  does not have the same risk for a
              disease. For example, certain  subgroups are more susceptible to diabetes than
              other subgroups,  or subpopulations may have different ri sks due to exposure
              to  different environmental factors.  Again, modelling the  progression of a
              disease in the different subgroups can lead to  fairly complicated models which
              tax currently used methodology  but can be handled using saddlepoint methods. 
              Finally, the  methods obtained from this research are easily transferred  into
              reliability models used in engineering and manufacturing.
