Title       : Dissertation Research: Animal Exploitation and the Middle to Late Woodland
               Transition: A Comparison of Animal Use at Mound Centers and Hamlets in the
               Lower and Central Illinois
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 21,  1997  
File        : a9704018

Award Number: 9704018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1997      
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11990              (Estimated)
Investigator: Pam J. Crabtree   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Pamela Crabtree, MS Julie Holt will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation.  She will analyze faunal materials from two
              archaeological sites, Ogden-Fettie and Baehr-Gust  the former in the Central
              the latter at the junction of the Central and Lower Illinois Valleys. Both of
              these large sites date to the Middle Woodland period, between ca. 150 BC and
              450AD. In addition to ceramic, shell and lithic remains both sites have yielded
              extensive series of faunal materials which have the potential to provide
              important insights into both prehistoric subsistence practices and social
              organization. With National Science Foundation support, MS Holt will travel to
              the Illinois State Museum and use their extensive comparative zoological
              collections to identify the archaeological faunal remains. She will also obtain
              radiocarbon and thremolumeniscense dates from both sites to allow for a more
              exact chronological placement. Ogden-Fettie and Baehr-Gust are large mound
              sites and the patterns observed there will be compared to results of similar
              studies of smaller counterparts which lack such impressive architecture.  The
              goal of the research is to understand the specific functions mound sites played
              within a larger Middle Woodland social system.  The Middle Woodland period
              provides the first evidence for a high level of social complexity within the
              Midwestern United States. Although groups lived by hunting and gathering, they
              constructed large earthen mounds and the amount of labor involved indicates
              some degree of large scale centralized control. Many Middle Woodland sites
              yield `exotic` and valuable objects manufactured from non-local stone or shell
              which was obtained from a considerable distance, evidence of organized
              long-distance trade networks. It is clear, based on extensive archaeological
              research that the settlement system consists of both mound and much smaller
              sites but archaeologists do not understand the function which the large ones
              served and how the two were integrated into a single system. MS Holt has
              hypothesized that mounds were, in fact, elite residences which were provisioned
              from smaller settlements. This implies that social and status differentiation
              was present in these hunting and gathering societies. Through the analysis of
              faunal remains will be possible to test this idea.  This research is important
              for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists
              and increase understanding of this little known period of American prehistory.
              It will shed new light on the emergence of social complexity and assist in
              training a promising young scientist.                                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                            
