Title       : Low-Dimensional Manifolds and Gauge Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1999       
File        : a9704507

Award Number: 9704507
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Morgan jm@math.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704507  Morgan       The study to be carried out in this project is two-fold. 
              Both  aspects of the study lie at the intersection of geometry and topology, 
              on the one hand, and theoretical physics (quantum field theory and  string
              theory) on the other.  One aspect concerns gauge-theoretic  invariants of
              four-dimensional manifolds, in particular, the Donaldson  polynomial invariants
              and the Seiberg-Witten invariants.  Here the aim  is to understand the relation
              of these invariants to more classical  geometric descriptions of a
              four-manifold, for example, a handlebody  description.  The other aspect is the
              study of holomorphic vector  bundles over elliptically fibered manifolds and
              the relation of these  to families of K3 surfaces that arise in F-theory in
              mathematical  physics.  Here the aim is to establish mathematical results for
              both  sides of the putative F-theory duality and then to check that the 
              predictions of this duality do indeed hold.       There has been a resurgence
              in recent years of the interactions  between the areas of geometry and topology
              in mathematics and the areas  of quantum field theory and string theory in
              theoretical physics.  This  interaction has proved very fruitful for both
              disciplines -- the physics  brings new methods to the study of low dimensional
              spaces, and the  mathematics provides the framework in which the studies in
              theoretical  high-energy physics are done.  This project will investigate in
              more  detail two of these interactions.  One is the study of four-dimensional 
              spaces, using tools provided by theoretical physics.  These tools  have yielded
              much insight in the last few years, and there is much more  information about
              four-dimensional spaces that should be accessible  using these tools.  The
              other aspect of the project involves the  mathematics of a new physical theory.
               This theory makes very precise  predictions about two kinds of mathematical
              objects that, on the face of it,  bear little relation to each other.  On the
              other hand, these mathemat ical  objects can be studied in their own right by
              purely mathematical tools  that have been developed independently of physics. 
              The results of the  mathematical analyses of these objects can be used to check
              the  predictions of the physical theory in much the same way as physical 
              experiments are used.  ***
