Title       : Knot Groups and Symbolic Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9704399

Award Number: 9704399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90155              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Silver silver@mathstat.usouthal.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan G. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Alabama
	      307 University Boulevard
	      Mobile, AL  36688    205/460-6101

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators have developed a new method for applying concepts of symbolic
              dynamical systems to the study of knot and link groups. The set of
              representations into a finite group of the commutator subgroup of an oriented
              knot group or the augementation subgroup of an oriented link group has the
              structure of a shift of finite type, a special type of dynamical system that
              can be completely described by a finite graph. The set of representations into
              a finite abelian group of the commutator subgroup of an oriented link group is
              a higher dimensional shift of finite type. Dynamical invariants of the shift
              such as topological entropy, directional entropy and the zeta function produce
              new, computable knot invariants, and give useful information about branched
              cyclic covering spaces. Elementary and effective obstructions to conjugacy for
              free group automorphisms result as a byproduct. The project will expand the
              investigators' previous work, using these new techniques to address several
              open questions in knot theory. DNA, solar plasma filaments and garden hoses
              have a common feature: each exhibits knotting and linking.  The mathematical
              theory of knots and links began in the mid-nineteenth century, and today its
              importance is recognized in diverse areas of physics, chemistry, biology and
              engineering. Until recently, the methods employed in this field have come from
              topology and algebra.  The two principal investigators have discovered tools
              from the field of symbolic dynamics that are novel and effective for studying
              knots and links.  Symbolic dynamics, which studies arrays of data, is central
              to information and communication theory and has important applications in the
              analysis of chaotic systems and the science of materials.  This project will
              extend the investigators' techniques, address unanswered questions in knot
              theory and establish new bridges between disciplines.
