Title       : Development of a UV-laser Based Ultra-High Resolution Angle-Resolved
               Photoemission Capability for Electronic Structure Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 8,  1999       
File        : a9704045

Award Number: 9704045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $290750             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Dessau dessau@spot.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Tracy S. Clement  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704045  Dessau       A state-of-the-art high resolution photoemission
              capability  will be developed at the University of Colorado with support from 
              The Division of Materials Research and The Office of  Multidisciplinary
              Activities. A novel and particularly powerful  aspect of the instrumentation
              will be the development and usage  of a high power femtosecond UV laser system
              as an excitation  source for photoemission experiments of electronic materials.
                    The UV-laser system will provide:        (1) a photon flux orders of
              magnitude higher than is  achievable by other means, including the best wiggler
              or  undulator sources at a synchrotron.        (2) Very high energy resolution
              (1-10 meV), depending  upon the temporal length of the pulses.       (3)
              Greater ease in controlling the photon polarization  (linear, circular, etc.),
              which is very helpful for obtaining the  symmetry of the electronic states.    
                (4) Much greater bulk sensitivity because the electron mean  free paths get
              very long at low kinetic energies.  For studies of  the bulk electronic
              structure, this will overcome one of the  major difficulties of photoemission
              today, and open up the  technique to the study of many materials systems which
              have not  to date yielded high enough quality surfaces for reliable 
              photoemission experiments.       (5) Pump-Probe based photoemission which will
              enable us to            (a) Study the unoccupied levels near the Fermi energy. 
                   This may replace inverse photoemission as the too of choice       for this
              purpose, as inverse photoemission suffers from poor       resolution (a few
              tenths of an eV), low count rates, and is       damaging to a sample surface.  
                       (b) Study the dynamics of the system by varying the       delay
              between the pump and the probe beams.              The system will make use of
              the most advanced electron  spectroscopic and laser instrumentation.  To our
              knowledge, this  powerful combination does not currently exist anywhere in the 
              world.       The requested  instrumentation will also fill a hole in the 
              techniques available in the greater Boulder area, and will be  available to the
              local scientific community.  ***
