Title       : Bayesian Time Series and Dynamic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9704432

Award Number: 9704432
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $272000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mike West mw@isds.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9183,9197,BIOT,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Bayesian Time Series and Dynamic Models  Mike West    Abstract    This research
              involves development of new statistical models,   methods and computational
              algorithms for analysis and forecasting  of time series. The investigations
              will include various aspects  of Bayesian state-space modelling for time
              series, introducing  new models for non-stationary time series models,
              methodology for  structured latent process analysis and time series
              decompositions,  new models and computational methods for multiple time series 
              analysis including dynamic latent factor models, dynamic Bayesian  hierarchical
              models, and non-Gaussian and non-linear models.   Part of the research involves
              investigation of strategies for   dealing with high-dimensional time series
              data sets and issues of  time series data reduction and summary. Stochastic
              simulation   and computer algorithms are ingredients, and will lead to new  
              computational tools for simulation-based Bayesian analyses in  various problems
              of dynamic modelling and time series analysis.  Related areas of the research
              will include time series model  uncertainty, assessment and prior
              specifications, problems of  contamination structures and data cleaning, and
              models   involving statistical mixture structure.     These projects represent
              advances in time series modelling and  analysis, and contributions to other
              areas of statistical science,  that will be of broad interest and practical
              relevance to   scientists and researchers in various disciplines as well as  
              to statisticians.  The new statistical methods resulting from  this project
              extend the scope of applicability of current time   series analysis tools to
              more complex, non-linear and multivariate  problems. A significant component of
              the research involves  computationally intensive methods to fit and explore
              models to  data in applications. The research is motivated, in part, by 
              existing problems of statistical modelling and inference in  current
              application areas in several fields, specifically  inclu ding projects in the
              neurosciences, in geology driven by  issues of global environmental change, in
              financial modelling  and forecasting, and in biomedical engineering and signal 
              processing.
