Title       : Algorithms and Numerical Analysis for Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9704106

Award Number: 9704106
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233527             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred H. Schatz schatz@math.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Schatz Abstract:     We propose to investigate various aspects of the finite
              element  method for elliptic and parabolic problems including, (1) A posteriori
               error estimation. Conditions were recently given by the proposer, W.  Hoffman
              and G.  Wittum under which a class of averaging operators are  asymptotically
              exact error estimators for the max norm of the gradient  on each element in a
              model smooth Neumann problem. The class includes  the Z-Z estimator.
              Preliminary estimates indicate that these methods do  not work for problems on
              polygonal domains where pollution effects  dominate. We propose cures which we
              shall analyze.(2) We propose to  investigate a unifying theory for
              superconvergence which includes  several previously developed by the proposer
              and co-authors.  We shall  focus on a theory which is applicable to smooth and
              nonsmooth  problems.(3) We will investigate an a priori "universal" mesh
              grading  algorithm which can be used to provide  optimal relative error for 
              problems with power type singularities.These meshes should be  particularly
              useful for elliptic problems on three dimensional  polyhedral domains where the
              optimal meshes are highly anisotropic. (4)  Problems with highly anisotropic
              diffusion will be investigated which  are singularly perturbed elliptic
              problems which degenerate to  parabolic problems. These problems often exhibit
              boundary layer  behavior and the standard finite element method does not
              perform well  when this occurs. These problems are not convection dominated.   
                 The investigation and solution of the many complex problems  which arise in
              science and the manufacturing industry have increasingly  benefited from
              mathematical and numerical studies of their underlying  mathematical models.
              The successs of this approach is due to advances  both in the developement and
              unders tanding of new numerical algorithms  and in advances in high performance
              computing. In this proposal we  study various aspects of the finite element
              method for solving a large  variety  of problems which arise in practice and
              which are modeled by  partial differential equations. As just a very few
              examples we mention  problems in elasticity to determine the strength of
              complex structures  a nd problems in fluid dynamics. The latter includes such
              diverse  problems as the determination of ground water flows for pollution 
              studies to the study of the ab sorbtion of medicinal ointment through  the
              skin. This project is oriented toward suggesting and analyzing new  methods for
              the efficient and accurate solution of such problems.We  shall seek better
              approximations by enlarging the theory of sup  erconvergence and investigate a
              means of universally grading meshes for  problems on domains with corners which
              arise very often in industry.  Among other things we shall study means for
              obtaining an estimate for  the error between the compute d solution and the
              unknown true solution  to determine a posteriori the quality of the
              approximation.
