Title       : Smooth Dynamics, Dimension Theory, Geodesic Flows, and Mathematical Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9704913

Award Number: 9704913
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51800              (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard N. Weiss weiss@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Invariant sets of dynamical systems are not generally self-similar in the strict
              sense. However, in work with others, the PI has shown that in some important
              cases, these sets can be decomposed into subsets each possessing a type of
              scaling symmetry. Sets which admit such structure are called multifractals
              (MF).  This proposal involves the continuing investigation of the fine
              structure of these multifractals and an attempt to use the MF analysis to give
              new insights into dynamical systems and possibly yield a new (physical)
              classification of dynamical systems.  In addition, the proposed work involves
              various problems in dimension theory which arise in mathematical biology as
              well as research on the relations between non-negative curvature and
              complicated dynamics of the geodesic flow. Regarding the latter, the (in)famous
              (xy)^2 Hamiltonian system, a model for a classical Yang-Mills field, which is
              orbit equivalent to a geodesic flow on a non-negative curved surface will be
              studied.    Many physical and biological systems (including turbulent fluids,
              root systems of plants, stressed pieces of metal,  NMR images of the brain,
              clouds, and galaxies in the universe) seem to possess some type of complicated
              fractal structure.  Mathematically such objects are called multifractals. In
              previous work, the principal investigator presented a rigorous mathematical
              foundation for the study of some important classes of multifractals. The plan
              is to extend this work to larger classes of systems and to use this
              mathematical analysis to help understand the underlying physical or biological
              systems.  The PI is particularly  interested in applications to plant biology.
              In a different area, a large class of physical systems which are central to
              celestial mechanics and plasma physics can be studied by first transforming
              them to a ''geometric system'' called a geodesic flow and then studying the
              geodesic flow. In previous work, the PI showed  that a large class of these
              flows, which some thought were easily understood  and mathematically and
              physically boring, have extremely complicated behavior and are in fact chaotic.
               The investigations into some specific examples including an example from gauge
              field dynamics, which is one of the central theoretical problems in particle
              physics will be continued.
