Title       : Computational Methods for Mixed Effects Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1997      
File        : a9704349

Award Number: 9704349
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70402              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas M. Bates bates@stat.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                     Computational Methods for Mixed-Effects Models        Douglas M. Bates,
              U. of Wisconsin - Madison              Abstract    This research extends
              current computational methods and software  implementations for the estimation
              of parameters in mixed-effects  models.  There is a special emphasis on
              extensions to models where  there are several levels of random effects nested
              within each other.  Another emphasis is on models where the within-subject
              response  depends nonlinearly on the parameters of interest.  The primary 
              implementation is in the S computer language and complements current  graphical
              and analytical methods available in that language.    When a response is
              measured on several occasions for each of several  "subjects" or experimental
              units, the resulting data are called  repeated-measures data.  If the data on
              each experimental unit are  collected over time, they are also known as
              longitudinal data.  A  statistical model for such data will usually incorporate
              both fixed  effects, parameters that describe the typical behaviour in the 
              population from which the experimental units are selected, and random  effects,
              quantaties that describe the variation within the population.  Models with both
              fixed effects and random effects are called  mixed-effects models.  This
              research provides new computational  methods for fitting mixed-effects models
              to observed data.  The new  methods are suitable for use with parallel
              computers and with other  high performance computing environments.  This is
              important because  some of the applications of mixed-effects models in
              manufacturing  (evaluation of integrated circuit designs) and biotechnology 
              (modelling of genetic effects in animal breeding) involve fitting  complicated
              models to thousands and sometime millions of observations;  a task that pushes
              the limits of current computers.
