Title       : Information Theory and Statistical Model Selection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9704809

Award Number: 9704809
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William B. Smith                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean P. Foster dean@foster.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert A. Stine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704809  Foster and Stine    The research studies the use of information theory
              for selecting   statistical models.  The first component of the research
              characterizes  statistical model selection criteria as methods for data
              compression.  From this viewpoint, criteria for model selection choose the
              model   which minimizes the length of a compressed version of the observed  
              data.  The proposed research will allow one to make these   characterizations
              precise and to extend this paradigm.  The second   area of research exploits
              the relationship between model selection   and data compression, leading to
              methods of adaptive model  selection.  This research builds on and extends
              context trees which   are the underlying statistical devices used to obtain
              some of the   most effective data compression algorithms.  The third body of  
              research concerns the statistical properties of the  information theoretic
              estimators implied by these techniques. In   order to allow one to estimate
              such statistical properties from   observed data, the research also seeks to
              develop practical   bootstrap resampling methods to determine the accuracy of
              the   statistical estimates.  Each phase of the proposed research   combines
              statistical theory and  information theory with computing.  In addition to the
              use of  simulations to validate the proposed   methods, the research will
              provide publically available software   distributed via the Web that implements
              the various selection   criteria and associated modeling techniques.  Further
              numerical   simulations will benchmark the various large sample results,  
              measuring the practical performance of these procedures.    Given the
              increasing prevalence of large data sets in science and  economics, traditional
              statistical model building faces new   challenges.  The use of traditional
              variable selection methods   lead to overfitting, characterized by overly
              complex models   that result from chance variation.  This research attacks this
                problem in several ways, first by using in formation theory to   construct a
              common framework in which to study the latest   developments in statistical
              model identification.  Building on   this framework, the research expands the
              scope of model selection   to encompass models that can adapt to structural
              changes.  In   addition, this work develops the associated statistical
              properties   of these methods, allowing comparison to classical procedures and 
               practical use in real-world applications.
