Title       : Topics in Model Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9704364

Award Number: 9704364
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65712              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. C. Laskowski mcl@math.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Principal Investigator proposes to continue his research on five problems of
              model theory, a branch of mathematical logic.  The first three problems are
              connected with extending and generalizing Shelah's dichotomy theorem. 
              Specifically, the PI proposes to study the possible types of branching that can
              occur in decomposition trees of models of classifiable theories, inherent
              limitations on extending Shelah's theorem to uncountable languages, and those
              theories whose models are characterized by systems of invariants involving
              finite subsets of the model.  The first of these problems emanated from the
              completion of the classification of the uncountable spectra of countable
              theories.  The last two problems deal with new methods of constructing models
              that are reminiscent of forcing constructions.  In work with Shelah, the PI
              defined  two new methods of constructing models of small, stable theories with
              a type of infinite multiplicity, one based on choosing realizations of the type
              with positive measure and the other based on choosing non-meager realizations. 
              Whereas the notions of measure and category typically go hand in hand
              throughout mathematics, there is an essential asymmetry between the notions in
              this context.  The final problem is to investigate the feasibility of obtaining
              an o-minimal expansion of the reals containing a function whose growth rate
              exceeds any exponential polynomial.  It seems possible that by using new
              results of Wilkie and Macintyre, such an expansion could be constructed in the
              manner of Cohen forcing.    As the term is used here, "model theory" is
              essentially the systematic study of algebraic structures.  A theory is simply a
              set of sentences and its class of models consists of the possible universes in
              which each of the sentences of the theory is true. It turns out that if one
              asks rather general questions about the class of models of a theory (such as
              the number of models of a certain size) the answer depends only on a small set
              of combinations of elements.  Tha t is, the number of models of a certain size
              is determined by which of these combinations are permitted by the theory and
              which are prohibited.  Much of the focus of this proposal is to better
              understand what these sets of combinations look like in various contexts.  The
              study of some of these sets of combinations has recently found applications in
              PAC learning theory and in the study of the expressive power of neural network
              architectures.
