Title       : Acquisition of a Scanning Force Microscope and a Cryo-preparation System for a
               SEM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  1997       
File        : a9704089

Award Number: 9704089
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176790             (Estimated)
Investigator: Recep Avci avci@physics.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David W. Mogk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704089  Avci       An award is provided for the acquisition of a Scanning Force
               Microscope (SFM) and a Cryopreparation System, the latter as an  accessory for
              an existing scanning electron microscope (SEM), in the  Image and Chemical
              Analysis (ICAL) of Montana State University (MSU).  These instruments will
              complement existing imaging and analytical  equipment used to characterize the
              morphology, atomic structure,  composition and chemistry of solid state
              materials, and will also  expand the capability of ICAL to undertake similar
              studies involving in  situ characterization of biological specimens in their
              natural state.       ICAL is a central, multi- and interdisciplinary user
              facility.  It  was established in order to serve research-needs and promote 
              collaboration in research, education, and industrial technical  applications in
              the physical and life sciences, as well as engineering  disciplines.  ICAL
              provides critically needed analytical facilities  based on microscopy and
              spectroscopy for bulk and surface analysis of  materials.  At present, the
              laboratory is home to an SEM with energy  dispersive X-ray microanalysis (EDS),
              cathodoluminescence spectrometer  (CL), and backscattered-electron (BSE)
              microanalysis capabilities; a  scanning Auger microprobe (SAM); a small-spot
              X-ray photoelectron  spectrometer (XPS); a time of flight secondary ion mass
              spectrometer  (ToF-SIMS) with the ability to do ion microscopy; and an
              automated X-  ray powder diffractomer (XRD).       A high resolution SFM will
              augment and extend the range of these  capabilities to provide in situ,
              nanometer-scale characterization of  the morphology and variations in
              composition, adhesion, friction, and  viscoelasticity on the surfaces of
              natural and synthetic solid  materials as well as biological samples.  The SFM
              can operate under  fluid environments, and thus, can be used to monitor
              materials that  have undergone sorption, catalytic, and
              dissolution/precipitation  processes.  A high-resolution SFM in tapping or
              contac t mode of  operation in liquid or air makes complex biological
              structures as well  as complex macromolecules accessible to study in their
              natural  environment, a capability outqide the scope of traditional electron 
              microscopy.  The cryo-preparation stage for the SEM will allow high- 
              resolution imaging of biological samples in their natural state,  without the
              risk of introducing artifacts associated with standard  sample preparation
              procedures.  With the crucial advantage of cryo-  fixation allowing the
              specimen to be preserved in a state closest to  its natural living state, added
              to the imaging and spectroscopic  compatibility of the electron microscope,
              study of living organisms  preserved in their hydrated environments become
              possible.  The cryo-  state will also enhance the CL signal in studies of trace
              element  distribution in synthetic and natural materials.       The ICAL
              facility serves researchers in all fields of science and  engineering at MSU
              and also supports research in the private sector and  government agencies.  The
              existing items of equipment support many but  not all the research needs of
              many groups.  For example, the  researchers from the NSF-supported Center for
              Biofilm Engineering who  study biofilm formation on surfaces can currently
              obtain chemical  mapping over the region of interest, but are unable to obtain
              simple  high resolution images of bacteria in their natural surrounding, since 
              the existing equipment is not equipped to carry out such research.  The 
              proposed equipment will augment in a very essential way the  instrumentation
              available to these researchers.  Other projects are  proposed to characterize
              the distribution and geochemical pathways of  organic and heavy metal
              contaminants in natural systems.  Related  projects are proposed by life
              scientists in Microbiology and Plant  Pathology as well as materials scientists
              in Physics, Chemistry, Earth  Sciences, and Plant and Soil Sciences.
