Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Low-Dimensional Geometry and Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1999      
File        : a9704135

Award Number: 9704135
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320664             (Estimated)
Investigator: William P. Thurston thurston@math.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704135  Thurston       This project is a multi-pronged investigation into
              low-dimensional  geometry and topology with the central long-range goal of
              supporting  and establishing the Geometrization Conjecture, namely, that every 
              3-dimensional manifold has a canonical decomposition into pieces with  locally
              homogeneous Riemannian metrics.  The first of these prongs is  an
              investigation, partially aided by computer, of geometric Dehn filling  spaces
              for 3-manifolds.  Geometric Dehn fillings interpolate between  manifolds with
              distinct topology.  A suitable variation of this idea  has the potential to
              connect all possible 3-manifolds and equip them  with geometric decompositions.
               The second prong is an investigation  of the geometry of taut foliations and
              essential laminations and their  relationships to hyperbolic structures and
              other geometric structures.  This approach has the promise to give a common
              generalization of the  canonical decompositions of surface homeomorphisms
              developed by Thurston  in 1976, and the geometrization of Haken manifolds
              developed by Thurston  in the late 1970's and early 1980's.  Additional prongs
              of this project  involve contact structures, confoliations, and geometric group
              theory.  In addition, the project will explore connections of low-dimensional 
              geometry and topology to biology, particularly genetics.       Low-dimensional
              geometry and topology is a beautiful area of  mathematics that has undergone
              tremendous growth and transformation over  the last two decades.  Paralleling
              this internal development of the  subject, lagging slightly behind, has been
              the external development of  new connections and strengthened connections to
              other areas of mathematics  and of science.  Some of these connections are
              direct, like the  cosmological issue of the shape of our universe or the more
              down-to-earth  issue of the shapes of crystals.  Other connections are
              indirect, to  diverse topics such as databases, group theory, genetics, or
              computational  chemistry.  Any topic tha t can be formulated in a quantitative
              way can be  studied with geometric methods (alongside the more prevalent
              symbolic,  algebraic and analytic methods), so that in any particular case, the
               powerful discoveries and tools of low-dimensional geometry and topology  have
              a reasonable chance to have a direct bearing.  The aim of this  project is
              further development of the tools of low-dimensional geometry  and topology to
              make them more portable, more powerful and more universal.  ***
