Title       : Kinetic and Hydrodynamic Limits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9704565

Award Number: 9704565
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Fraydoun Rezakhanlou rezakhan@math.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704565  Rezakhanlou   An outstanding and long studied problem in statistical
              mechanics is to establish the   connection between the microscopic structure of
              a fluid (or a gas) and its macroscopic   behavior. Perhaps the most celebrated
              problem in this context is the derivation of the   hydrodynamic and kinetic
              equations from small scale dynamics governed by the Newton's   second law. This
              problem is still wide open but some variants have been recently treated.   The
              investigator's research concerns the analysis of particle systems modeling
              fluids and   gas. Recently the investigator in collaboration with James Tarver
              has derived a Boltzmann   type equation for the macroscopic particle densities
              of a class stochastic particle systems   modeling dilute gases. Roughly
              speaking one shows that after a suitable scaling the   microscopic particle
              density converges to a solution of a Boltzmann type equation. The  
              investigator also shows that the convergence is exponentially fast and derives
              an explicit   expression for the exponential rate of convergence. This result
              allows us to go beyond the   macroscopic description given by the Boltzmann
              equation and obtain some valuable   insight about the microscopic structure of
              the particle system under study.   Our world appears differently at different
              scales. For example a fluid or a gas is a   collection of an enormous number of
              molecules that collide incessantly and move   erratically without any
              particular aim. How do these molecules then manage to organize   themselves in
              such a way as to form a flow pattern on a large scale? Roughly the reason is  
              that the local conservation laws of mass, momentum and energy impose
              constraints not   immediately visible on the microscopic scale. The
              investigator's research concerns the   relationship between the microscopic
              structure and the macroscopic behavior of fluids and   gases. The analysis of
              the mathematical models consisting of a large number of interacting   particles
              has proved to be useful in understanding  the intricate behavior of fluids and 
               gases. Moreover, interacting particle systems turn out to be the most
              efficient way of   simulating the flow patterns of dilute gases.
