Title       : Bifurcations of Excitable Systems Exhibiting Bursting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1997     
File        : a9704966

Award Number: 9704966
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Pernarowski pernarow@math.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Pernarowski  9704966       The investigator studies several problams related to
              the  electrical activity of the pancreatic beta cell.  Fast and slow  subsystem
              bifurcations yielding different global behaviors in  single cell, cell pair and
              continuum models of the islet are  examined.  The emphasis in the single cell
              analysis is to extend  previous asymptotic procedures to models having more
              than one  slow variable.  For the cell pair analyses, the effect of phase 
              differences in the slow variables and coupling conductance is  examined using
              standard bifurcation and linearization techniques.  One goal is to explain the
              prolongated active phase duration that  is indirectly responsible for elevated
              insulin secretion.  Lastly,  a continuum model for the electrical activity in
              large  collections (islets) of beta cells is examined using asymptotic, 
              linearization and global monotone methods.  The effect of  heterogenity and
              coupling strength on fast subssystem  bifurcations is studied in the context of
              a system of reaction  diffusion equations used to model the islet behavior.    
                The investigator studies mathematical models of the  electrical and chemical
              behavior of the insulin secreting  pancreatic beta cell.  The salient feature
              of the study lies in  the identification of electrical behaviors that lead to
              increased  insulin secretion in both individual pancreatic cells and 
              collections of such cells as they occur in the body.  Knowledge of  such
              behaviors facilitates an understanding of the cellular  mechanisms that are
              most relevant in diabetic conditions.  All  mathematical analyses are motivated
              by experimental studies.
