Title       : Development of a Unique Interactive Growth Chamber for Magnetic Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  1997     
File        : a9704196

Award Number: 9704196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $190510             (Estimated)
Investigator: Max G. Lagally lagally@engr.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704196  Lagally    This award is for the partial support of a new ultra-high 
              vacuum chamber for the investigation of nanostructure  magnetism.  The chamber
              will be a mobile self-contained  system that will be located at the Synchrotron
              Radiation  Center, University of Wisconsin.  It will be coupled to one  of
              three existing chambers built specifically for measuring  magnetic circular
              dichroism, spin-resolved photoelectron  spectroscopy, and x-ray resonant
              magnetic scattering.  These  methods provide element resolved magnetic moments,
              spin-  split energy bands, and magnetic roughness, respectively.  The proposed
              growth chamber will provide a wide variety of  magnetic nanostructures with
              well characterized morphologies  for these magnetic measurements.  Special
              emphasis will be  placed on sputter deposited magnetic nanostructures and 
              comparisons between sputter deposited and evaporated  nanostructures.  %%%% 
              This award is for the partial support of a new ultra-high  vacuum chamber for
              the investigation of nanostructure  magnetism.  The chamber will be a mobile
              self-contained  system that will be located at the Synchrotron Radiation 
              Center, University of Wisconsin.  It will be coupled to one  of three existing
              chambers built specifically for measuring  magnetic circular dichroism,
              spin-resolved photoelectron  spectroscopy, and x-ray resonant magnetic
              scattering.  These  methods provide element resolved magnetic moments, spin- 
              split energy bands, and magnetic roughness, respectively.  The proposed growth
              chamber will provide a wide variety of  magnetic nanostructures with well
              characterized morphologies  for these magnetic measurements.  Special emphasis
              will be  placed on sputter deposited magnetic nanostructures and  comparisons
              between sputter deposited and evaporated  nanostructures.  The fundamental
              knowledge gained and the  availability of the chamber will facilitate magnetic
              device  development and will lead to significant fundamental  research advances
              in the understanding of magnetic  thin  films and interfaces.  ***
