Title       : Efficient Algorithms for Large-Scale Linear and Nonlinear Finite Element
               Computations with Applications to Thin Shell Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9704509

Award Number: 9704509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $441000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Coleman coleman@tc.cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy J. Healey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Coleman  9704509       The investigator and his colleagues focus on the
              efficient  numerical computation of global solutions of problems of  nonlinear
              elastostatics in a high-performance computational  environment.  Particular
              attention is paid to the global  post-critical behavior of symmetric
              imperfection-free elastic  shell structures --- the analysis of which has great
              significance  in understanding the large deformation response and ultimate 
              collapse scenario of realistic engineering structures.  A major  theme of the
              work is to exploit the natural parallelism, via  group theoretic techniques, in
              an important class of engineering  problems characterized by underlying
              symmetries.  They also  investigate the use of automatic differentiation
              software in the  context of those problems.  Finally, they study the
              effectiveness  of symmetry-motivated preconditioners, within the context of 
              Krylov iterative subspace methods, for a class of  ``almost-symmetric''
              problems in structural mechanics.       Due to their high strength-to-weight
              ratios, thin shell  structures have been used extensively in aerospace, civil, 
              mechanical and nuclear engineering applications, e.g., dome  roofs, aerospace
              vehicles, pressure vessels, containment vessels,  etc.   Yet the ability of
              engineers to predict the ultimate  failure of such systems has heretofore been
              more of an art than a  science (relying heavily upon costly experimental
              verification --  see "Computerized Buckling Analysis of Shells", by D.
              Bushnell,  Martinus Nijhoff 1985).  The investigators combine new  mathematical
              ideas of symmeytry and nonlinear analysis with  high-performance computing
              methodology to analyze such systems  efficiently and systematically.  A
              long-term goal is to provide  engineers with useful tools for the sytematic
              analysis (and  ultimately better design) for this important class of
              structures.  Funding for the project is provided by the Computational 
              Mathematics program and the Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities in MPS and
              b y the New Technologies program in CISE.
