Title       : Nonlinear Dynamic Forecasting for Signal Processing Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9704911

Award Number: 9704911
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70594              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin M. Short kevin.short@unh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of New Hampshire
	      Service Bldg., Room 111
	      Durham, NH  03824    603/862-1234

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9216,9263,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9704911  Short    This project will attempt to develop signal processing
              techniques based on   nonlinear dynamic (NLD) forecasting. Traditional signal
              processing   approaches have generally relied upon the assumption that systems
              are   either periodic/quasi-periodic or random.  The NLD forecasting approach  
              attempts to bridge the gap between these approaches by assuming that there  
              may be a deterministic component which is responsible for the observed  
              complex behavior.  Prior work on a test case has shown that it is possible to  
              use NLD forecasting to predict seismic background noise sufficiently well  
              that it is possible to reduce the noise by over an order of magnitude, making  
              it possible to see hidden teleseismic events.  In other applications, NLD  
              forecasting has been used to unmask secure chaotic communication   schemes by
              predicting the dynamics of the chaotic carrier with sufficient   accuracy that
              the hidden messages may be extracted.  The proposed research   will expand the
              use of multi-step forecasting methods so that predictions   can be made for
              longer times, and so that signal extraction may be   improved.  Resumming
              techniques will also be studied, where a series of   short-term predictions
              will be used to rebuild the hidden signals.  Seismic   data from various sites
              will be examined to explore the limits of   predictability, and an attempt will
              be made to develop real-time processing   techniques which will aid in
              monitoring of nuclear treaties.  The link   between spectral signal processing
              methods and NLD processing will be   studied so that the tools can be used in a
              complementary and integrated   manner.  Curvature-based methods of NLD
              processing will be developed   for time series where it is difficult to get a
              nice phase space reconstruction.    NLD forecasting will be used to create
              statistical ensembles which can then   be considered from a statistical
              processing perspective.  Success in these   research areas will represent
              significant progress in the developme nt of   NLD signal processing as an
              important new technology.    This project will attempt to develop a new signal
              processing technology   based on nonlinear dynamic (NLD) forecasting.
              Traditional signal   processing approaches have generally relied upon the
              assumption that   systems are either periodic or random.  NLD signal processing
              recognizes   that many systems which appear to be random may be produced by  
              processes which are inherently predictable, at least in the short-term.  In  
              fact, it is the ability to make accurate short-term predictions which  
              distinguishes nonlinear dynamic systems (also known as chaotic systems)   from
              typical random systems.  These NLD prediction techniques have   already been
              used on a test case of seismic background noise provided by   the Air Force
              Technical Applications Center (AFTAC), where it was shown   that the background
              noise could be predicted so well that after the predicted   background was
              removed, one could clearly see the presence of hidden   signals which were
              essentially equivalent to distant nuclear test detonations.    In another
              application, NLD prediction techniques have been used to extract   hidden
              messages from chaotic communication systems, where the   predictions about the
              behavior of the chaotic carrier signal were so accurate   that when they were
              removed, the hidden message signal could be observed.    The proposed research
              will expand these NLD forecasting methods to   improve the extraction of
              signals from noisy environments.  The seismic   problem will be examined using
              various data sources to determine the limits   of predictability, and a
              parallel processing implementation will be used to   attempt to develop a
              real-time processing system which may be useful for   monitoring of nuclear
              treaties.  Further research will examine the   connection between NLD
              techniques and traditional signal processing   techniques.  Success in these
              research areas will represent significant   progress in the development of NLD
              signal processing  as an important new   technology.
