Title       : Topics in Fluid Mechanics and Hydrodynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1999       
File        : a9704546

Award Number: 9704546
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $136000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Stephen Childress childres@math3.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704546   Childress    This research deals with several problems in fluid
              dynamics and   magnetohydrodynamics (MHD). Continuing work on the MHD dynamo
              problem  will focus on the dynamical fate of intense small-scale magnetic 
              structure creating duing the kinematic phase of fast dynamo action.  This
              question is important since observations of galactic magnetic  fields indicate
              that the equilibrated fields have no dominant  small-scale structure. A second
              project deals with separation in the  corner region of Prandtl-Batchelor flows
              within a domain (such as a   rectangle), where the Euler limit has boundary
              stagnation points. The   breakdown of boundary layer theory due to the presence
              of  boundary stagnation points can be investigated in the limit of  large
              Reynolds number R by imposing wall data which is within  close to that of the 
              Euler limit with core vorticity 1. A third con-  tinuing study deals with an
              experiment in non-Boussinesq convec-  tion at high Rayleigh and Prandtl numbers
              and an analysis of the  large-scale motion which occurs in this flow.  In a new
              research initiative, we will study analytical and numerical   modeling of
              high-lift mechanisms in flapping insect flight, with  particular emphasis on
              hovering. We will study by simulation the  shedding of vortices from a sharp
              edge in time-dependent 2D Navier-Stokes  flows at Reynolds numbers of several
              thousand. We shall analyze the   significance and implication of the Kutta
              condition, the optimal use  of shed vortices in the production of lift, and
              applications  within conical symmetry to 3D flapping motions.    The Universe
              is pervaded by magnetic fields, threading through  galaxies, and surrounding
              stars and planets. However, the origin of  these fields is not well understood.
              In particular the galactic fields  pose many unanswered questions. This
              reseapch concerns the dynamo theory of  this magnetism. This unifying theory
              proposes that all fields  originate from amplification of a seed magnetic field
              developed during  the big  bang. The process of amplification, dynamo action, 
              resembles the laboratory dynamo effect but is more complicated because  it
              occurs in free fluid motion, usually turbulent motion. Our research  is
              attempting to understand the processes underlying this  amplification and the
              structure of the fields which result, especially how  this structure is
              developed by the natural processes available in turbulence.  Other parts of our
              research program deal with aspects of classical  fluid dynamics of importance
              in the convective flows within planets  and stars. It is flows of these kinds
              which are often  responsible for the dynamo effect. For example, convection
              within the   Earth's fluid core is believed to drive the Earth's dipolar
              magnetic  field. A new initiative in our research program will deal with the 
              fluid mechanics of insect hovering flight. Our ilterest  is in utilizing
              lifting mechanisms of flapping insect hoverers in the  design of small unmanned
              airborne vehicles. These mechanisms utilize   vortices which are shed into the
              fluid near the flyer, and interact  with it so as to augment the lift. We shall
              study the basic  process of shedding of vorticity from surfaces, the
              optimization of  the resulting lift, and the numerical simulation of the flows
              in two   dimensions. Important three-dimensional effects will be modeled using 
               conical symmetry of the flow field.
