Title       : Studies in Efficient Design of Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1999      
File        : a9704548

Award Number: 9704548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $144000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ching-Shui Cheng cheng@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Proposal #DMS-9704548    Studies in Efficient Design of Experiments   
              Ching-Shui Cheng  University of California    ABSTRACT      This research
              involves several problems in experimental design.  Optimal blocking of
              fractional factorial designs is studied.    Blocking is an effective method for
              improving the efficiency of  an experiment by grouping the experimental units
              into more  homogeneous blocks.  How to choose a fractional factorial design 
              and a blocking scheme simultaneously in an optimal way is of  interest to both
              theoreticians and practitioners.  A new criterion  for choosing good blocking
              schemes by examining the alias patterns  of the interactions is formulated. 
              Methods of constructing optimal  and efficient designs under this criterion are
              investigated.  Some  unsolved problems in the unblocked case are also studied. 
              Another  area of research is the projection properties of orthogonal arrays. 
              In factor screening, often only a few factors among a large pool of  potential
              factors are active.  Under such assumption of effect  sparsity, it is important
              to consider projections onto small subsets  of factors.  An extensive study of
              the projection properties of  orthogonal arrays is carried out.  Connections
              with search designs  are also explored.  In addition to factorial designs,
              optimal and  efficient regression designs under random block-effects models are
               studied by adopting the approach of approximate theory.    Experimental design
              is used extensively in a wide range of   scientific and industrial
              investigations.  In industrial experiments,  often a large number of factors
              have to be studied, but the  experiments are expensive to conduct.  In this
              case, the so called  fractional factorial designs in which only a small
              fraction of all  the possible combinations are observed are particularly
              useful.  In recent years, factorial designs have received considerable 
              attention, mainly due to the Japanese success in applying them to  improve
              quality and productivity in industrial manufa cturing.  One objective of this
              research is to study the construction of  efficient designs to extract more
              information, especially when  systematic sources of variation (such as
              heterogeneity of  experimental material or day-to-day environmental variations)
               need to be eliminated to improve the precision.   Since often   only a few of
              the many potential factors are actually important,  this research also looks
              into the properties of some commonly  used designs when only a small number of
              factors are active.  Another research involves a problem arising from a recent 
               optometry experiment, which also has industrial applications.
