Title       : Global Continuation Methods in Nonlinear Elasticity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  1997      
File        : a9704730

Award Number: 9704730
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $93000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy J. Healey tjh10@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704730  Healey    We plan to carry out research in global nonlinear analysis of
              partial  differential equations of nonlinear elastostatics.  A major thrust of
              the  proposed work will be focused on applications of a new general existence 
              tool developed recented by Simpson & myself (from past partial NSF  support),
              viz., a generalization of the Leray-Schauder degree for global  continuation
              and bifurcation.  In the context a concrete problems, we seek  a-prior bounds,
              symmetry/positivity properties, etc., all with a view  toward obtaining
              meaningful constitutive restrictions for entire classes of  materials.  Our
              study will include both traditional (strongly elliptic)  problems and those
              involving phase change (loss of ellipticity).  For the  latter, a new approach
              based upon higher-gradient regularization, global  continuation and singular
              limits is being proposed.  The analysis of such  models at a very general level
              is fundamental to the understanding of  traditional engineering
              materials/structures and martensitic  transformations and shape-memory effects,
              which are observed in many  advanced engineering alloys. The work has two major
              goals: (i) To obtain  new qualitative results and detect new phenomena - of
              both mathematical and  physical significance; (ii)  To obtain new
              global-continuation (existence)  results in problems of 2 and 3-dimensional
              elasticity - including problems  involving phase transformations.    Broadly
              speaking,the proposed work will provide important mathematical  underpinnings
              to difficult nonlinear problems arising in traditional  engineering fields like
              structural & mechanical engineering and also in  more modern areas like
              materials science. The work has the potential to:  (i) deliver new mathematical
              tools for the analysis of difficult problems  of engineering practice,leading
              ultimately to safer and more optimal design  of structures; (ii) lead to a
              better understanding of the nonlinear  material behavior of certain engineering
              alloys, with potential  application s to manufacturing engineering and the
              design of non-passive or  "smart" structures.
