Title       : Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Virtual Proving Ground
               Simulation: Mechanical and Electromechanical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EEC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  2000        
File        : a9704242

Award Number: 9704242
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alex Schwarzkopf                        
	      EEC  DIV OF ENGINEERING EDUCATION AND CENTERS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1997     
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1238700            (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward J. Haug haug@nads-sc.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 5761      INDUSTRY/UNIV COOP RES CENTERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5761,9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              EEC-9704242  Haug, Ed/U of Iowa    The long time and high costs of developing
              new vehicles and equipment for future products are becoming prohibitive. 
              Companies and the Government are increasingly turning to simulation to
              determine the effectiveness of the design of new products.  Research to develop
              a virtual proving ground will provide the data necessary for product testing
              without producing expensive prototypes.  The University of Iowa and the
              University of Texas at Austin have joined together to form an
              Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) for Virtual Proving
              Ground Simulation:  Mechanical and Electromechanical Systems.  About a dozen
              companies and Federal agencies have committed to become members of the Center. 
              The Center meets all requirements of the Industry/University Cooperative
              Research Centers Program.    The multi-university Center brings together unique
              capabilities of research teams from three universities (two of which will
              receive NSF I/UCRC funds) to address research areas that none of the  schools
              could address alone.  The Center will utilize unique capabilities and
              facilities for vehicle system simulation developed at the University of Iowa as
              part of a prior NSF I/UCRC in Simulation and Design Optimization of Mechanical
              Systems.  These capabilities, with the new addition of the University of Iowa's
              National Advanced Driving Simulator (NADS) for the driver-in-the-loop real-time
              simulation, combined with expertise at the University of Texas at Austin in
              electromechanical system simulation and design and expertise at Auburn
              University in vehicle-terrain simulation, will allow the proposed Center to do
              virtual proving ground simulation.  Virtual proving ground simulation
              incorporates the dynamics of the interaction between a vehicle and the surface
              on which it moves.      The research program consists of core research projects
              funded from center membership fees, and pilot projects funded by both member
              companies and Federal agencies.  The proposed core resea rch projects are:   
              Vehicle and Equipment Virtual Proving Ground Modeling and Simulation,  Virtual
              Proving Ground Modeling,  Dynamic System Simulation,  Tire/Track-Soil
              Interaction Modeling (Auburn University),  Numerical Methods for Virtual
              Proving Ground Simulation,  Electromechanical System Modeling,  Power System
              Simulation in a Virtual Proving Ground Environment,  Simulation-Based Design of
              Power Systems, and  Power System Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation.   
              The bulk of the funding for the universities to work on pilot projects will
              come from the Department of Defense and other Federal agencies.  These projects
              are within the fundamental goals and objectives of the Center's research
              program.  They greatly expand the Center's research base and effectively guide
              the direction of the research to meet industrial needs.  The proposed pilot
              projects are:    Simulation-Based Design of Hybrid-Electric Vehicles, 
              Agricultural Equipment Virtual Proving Ground,  Construction Equipment Virtual
              Proving Ground,  Military Vehicle Virtual Proving Ground,  Rocket System
              Virtual Proving Ground,  Simulation-Based Design of Advanced Electromechanical
              Devices, and  Simulation-Based Testing and Evaluation of Critical Power System
              Components.    The DoD and other Federal agencies will support pilot projects
              with funds as they become available during the five year period.    The
              Director (Principal Investigator) and co-Director and their colleagues are
              eminent researchers and uniquely qualified to run this Center.      The Center
              is being cost shared by the Engineering Design Program of ENG/DMII and will be
              coordinated with NSF's participation in the interagency Partnership for a New
              Generation of Vehicles (PNGV) Program.    The Program Manager recommends the
              University of Iowa be awarded $43,000 annually for a five year continuing
              award.    Near the end of each 12-month period, the Program Director / and or
              the Division Director of the Engineering Education and Centers Division will
              review the Center on  a number of renewal criteria including the following:  1)
              the extent to which the industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the
              extent to which the support base is developing; 3) the extent to which a robust
              research program is developing.  If the review is satisfactory, the Program
              Director will recommend support for the next period of this continuing award.  
               An additional authorization of $9,826,236 over five years is recommended for
              pilot projects.  Funding of the pilot projects from the DoD and other Federal
              agencies will occur through a series of separate interagency transfers of funds
              by the collaborating Federal agencies, identifying each project and task and
              the total amount of funds that are allocated to it.      As part of the above,
              $600,000 is recommended for a one-year award for an initial pilot project with
              funds provided by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.    An
              additional authorization of $400,000 annually for five years is recommended for
              anticipated Federal agency Center memberships.
