Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Algebraic Cycles, Group Schemes, K-Theory and Connections
               between Stable Homotopy and Group Cohomology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1999  
File        : a9704794

Award Number: 9704794
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $185400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric M. Friedlander eric@math.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stewart B. Priddy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704794  Friedlander       Eric M. Friedlander will study algebraic cycles from
              two points  of view: the first is more topological and differential-geometric
              in  nature, whereas the second is more algebraic and is allied with the study 
              of motivic cohomology.  Particular attention will be given to relationships 
              with algebraic K-theory, long-standing problems in algebraic geometry, and  the
              challenge of producing concrete examples.  Moreover, the study of 
              representations of various Hopf algebras associated to algebraic groups  will
              continue.  Of special interest are the representations of infinitesimal  group
              schemes.  Stewart B. Priddy will study connections between stable  homotopy
              theory and the cohomology and representation theory of groups.  The goal is to
              develop a global point of view by working at the interface  of these fields,
              using insights from the stable homotopy theory of  classifying spaces.  One
              avenue of research is the study of the stable  type of classifying spaces of
              products of groups.  Another is the study  of the representation theory
              conjectures of Alperin and Broue', which  may be amenable to equivariant
              topological methods.  One of the principal  techniques is the use of stable
              decompositions of classifying spaces to  suggest concepts in cohomology of
              groups, as was the case with Swan groups.       Aspects of Friedlander's
              research relate to fundamental problems in  mathematics whose history can be
              traced back to the previous century.  Many central problems of algebraic
              geometry, especially those involving  algebraic cycles, have challenged
              generations of mathematicians.  New  techniques from topology and formal
              algebraic geometry hold promise of at  least partial solutions.  In a different
              mathematical arena, the classical  representation theory of algebraic groups is
              reflected by the representations  of related algebraic structures.  The
              interplay between the classical theory  and the latest techniques involving
              categorical constructions presents  opportunities for i mportant developments. 
              In contrast with Priddy's  emphasis, the field of algebraic topology has long
              sought, with much success,  to apply algebraic methods to the solution of
              geometric or topological  problems.  By reformulating topological problems in
              algebraic terms, one  is often able to answer a more tractable question.  In
              general, however,  there are many connections between these areas, which
              enables one to  reverse this procedure and bring topological methods to bear in
              algebra.  Priddy's project studies the interaction between topology and group
              theory,  with the aim of uncovering fundamental algebraic structures.  Powerful
               symbolic manipulation techniques using high speed computers comprise part  of
              the project.  ***
