Title       : Study of Point Defects in Semiconductors using Optical Detection of Magnetic
               Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a9704386

Award Number: 9704386
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : November 1,  1997   
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284500             (Estimated)
Investigator: George D. Watkins gdw0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704386  Watkins  This experimental research project centers on the atomic scale
               defects present in technologically relevant semiconductors as  probed by
              optical detection of magnetic resonance and by  optically detected
              electron-nuclear double resonance.  The  defects of interest include intrinsic
              defects such as vacancies,  interstitials and anti-sites, as well as important
              chemical  impurities and simple complexes resulting from interactions  between
              them.  The purpose of the research is to understand the  electronic and
              vibronic structure of the ground, metastable, and  excited states of such
              defects, and to determine on a microscopic  scale the role they play in the
              electronic and optical properties  of this class of materials.  The emphasis in
              the renewed research  is toward the wide bandgap semiconductors, including
              II-VI  compounds, III-V nitrides, diamond, and SiC.  The rationale is  that
              relatively little is known about the defects in these  materials and there is
              good reason to anticipate surprises and  new important physics in their
              properties.  This is because of  competition between the increased
              recombination energy available  from the bandgap on the one hand, and the
              increased role of many-  electron effects due to the greater electronic
              localization on  the other.  Theory is pressed in dealing with deep defects,
              and  high quality experimental information will be useful to guide and  test
              new theory.  In addition, these materials are of  technological interest for
              their potential as visible and uv  light emitting and high temperature
              electronic devices.  Such  applications will require an understanding of point
              defects  greatly in excess of what little is now known.  A major  experimental
              approach will be to produce intrinsic defects by  2.5MeV electron irradiation
              for study by the ODMR and ODENDOR  techniques.  In some cases irradiation in
              situ at 4.2K in a  special ODMR facility will allow study of pristine Frenkel
              pair  defects (vacancy-interstitial close pairs) at low temper ature and  as
              they are slowly warmed.  %%%  This experimental project focuses on important
              atomic scale  defect structures that occur in crystalline samples of 
              semiconductors.  Such defects, which include vacant lattice  sites, additional
              atoms located interstitially, and chemical  substitutions (as for example As as
              an impurity in Si) are well  known to have important consequences on the
              electronic properties  of semiconductors.  Such point defects as As in Si
              introduce an  extra electron for electrical conduction (these are called donor 
              impurities); others introduce holes, and all point defects have a  "scattering"
              effect on the motion of electrons and holes when an  accelerating field is
              applied, tending to reduce the current for  a given voltage.  The present
              project makes use of an advanced  optically detected magnetic resonance method
              for study of various  point defects.  The work will focus on those "wide
              bandgap"  semiconductors which are now being considered for unique 
              applications for which silicon and gallium arsenide are not  suitable. 
              Possible applications of the wide bandgap  semiconductors are for visible and
              ultraviolet light emitting  diodes and for high temperature electronic devices.
               The  semiconductors of interest include, for example, SiC  and GaN.  A 
              special aspect of the experimental work will be deliberate  introduction of
              point defects by electron irradiation.  This work  involves a postdoctoral 
              fellow who will be excellently trained  in the course of this research for a
              position in industry,  government, or academia.  ***
