Title       : Development of a Submillimeter Spectrometer Operating at He-3 Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1998      
File        : a9704299

Award Number: 9704299
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dmitri N. Basov dbasov@physics.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert C. Dynes  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              M. Brian Maple  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704299  Basov      This award is provided to develop a submillimeter 
              spectrometer operating at He-3 temperatures for the studies  of fundamental
              properties of novel materials.  Experimental  methods of infrared and optical
              spectroscopy are extremely  informative in condensed matter science.  However,
              usually  these methods do not permit to perform measurements at  frequencies
              below 30-50 cm-1 and at temperatures below 6-12  K.  An immediate consequence
              of these common restrictions is  the existence of a vast unexplored territory
              of new  materials phenomena which lie beyond the scope of routine 
              spectroscopic techniques.  Instrumental prerequisites for  the experimental
              study of these phenomena include the  ability to reach frequencies as low as
              2-3 cm-1 while  keeping the specimens at T down to 0.3 K.  Development of  the
              facility that meets the above stringent requirements is  the primary goal of
              this proposal.    The initial research project will be devoted to one of the 
              forefront problems of condensed matter physics which is  Unconventional
              Conductivity and Superconductivity in  Intermetallic Compounds.  The exotic
              transport properties of  intermetallic materials pose fundamental questions
              which  challenge the foundation of the theory of metals.  Currently  several
              groups at the UCSD physics department are involved  in the study of
              intermetallic systems with strongly  correlated electrons.  This spectroscopic
              program will  greatly enrich the joint research capabilities by extending 
              measurements in the infrared region where the effects due to  interactions and
              correlations dominate the response of these  correlated systems.    An infrared
              facility described in this project will provide  the means to launch
              experiments which were previously  impossible because of instrumental
              limitations.  In  particular, super-conducting state electrodynamics has not 
              been explored in heavy fermions, in organic materials or in  borocarbides.  A
              thorough study of the infrared response of  the above compound s is one the
              primary targets of the  initial research program.  Another direction will be 
              concerned  with Nd2-yCeyCuO4 which is an electron-type  cuprate superconductor.
               Unlike all other cuprates this  specific materials shows certain similarities
              with  conventional BCS superconductors.  On the other hand,  transport
              experiments indicate that this system reveals  heavy fermion-like low-energy
              excitations.  The  controversial nature of this material may be clarified 
              through a survey of its electro-magnetic response in the  superconducting
              state.  Finally, experiments aimed at the  spectroscopic study of the
              superconductor-insulator  transition (SIT) and of a pseudogap in
              (Y-Pr)Ba2Cu3O7-x will  be performed.  %%%  It is expected that the detailed
              investigation of  superconducting state in synthetic metals and of the SIT 
              physics will enhance our understanding of unconventional  superconductivity and
              of general behavior of highly  correlated electrons.  ***
