Title       : Periodic Orbits, Magnetic Fields, and Other Topics in Symplectic Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9704763

Award Number: 9704763
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154596             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard W. Montgomery rmont@math.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Viktor L. Ginzburg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The bulk of the proposed work concerns the existence and number of periodic
              orbits for Hamiltonian systems. In addition, the investigators will research
              the possible validity of an infinite-dimensional version of Sard's theorem
              arising in subRiemannian geometry and control theory.  Finally, the
              investigators propose to compute certain equivariant symplectic cobordism rings
              relevant to non-Abelian versions of the Duistermaat-Heckman formula and to
              geometric quantization. The motivating example for the periodic orbit
              investigations is the dynamics of a particle in magnetic fields, henceforth
              referred to as magnetodynamics. The horocycle flow on a Riemann surface is an
              example of such a dynamics. This flow is crucial to the work since it is the
              basic building block for constructing Hamiltonian systems which have no
              periodic orbits on bounded energy surfaces. The smallest number of degrees of
              freedom for which this non-existence phenomenon is known to hold is four. The
              investigators will construct examples where this number is equal to three.
              Magnetodynamics was also one of the examples motivating Arnol'd's conjectures
              concerning lower bounds for the number of periodic orbits. A number of
              instances of the conjecture are still open in the magnetodynamic case. The
              investigators plan to answer some of these. The planar three-body equations,
              after symplectic reduction, becomes an instance of magnetodynamics. The
              (fictitious) ``reduced'' particle moves on a three-manifold (with a singularity
              corresponding to triple collisions) whose points represent congruence classes
              of planar triangles. The general investigations into magnetodynamics should be
              of help in understanding some of the open problems remaining in ``the
              three-body problem''. The main goal in this regard is to prove the existence of
              a closed trajectory representing any given free homotopy class for the reduced
              space (three-manifold) minus collisions.  The investigators will be studying
              what motions are possible for various systems. They will be  concentrating
              primarily on two types of systems, a type involving charges moving in magnetic
              fields, closely related to the problem of controlling fusion, and a type
              involving planets or satellites moving according to Newton's laws. Our main
              interest is in the periodic orbits for these systems. A periodic orbit is a
              motion which infinitely repeats itself, coming back to its starting point after
              some fixed period of time. A familiar example is the rising of the sun every
              morning. The periodic orbits are thought to be the key to understanding the
              behavior of systems, especially complicated chaotic systems. One of the most
              surprising recent developments has been the discovery of complicated systems
              with no periodic orbits. The investigators plan to find more systems with no
              periodic orbits and to simultaneously look for simple conditions which would
              guarantee the existence of a certain number of periodic orbits. This would be a
              significant step towards a general understanding and control of motions of
              physical systems.
