Title       : Robust Parameter Design: Modeling, Analysis and Layout Techniques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  1999      
File        : a9704649

Award Number: 9704649
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $262609             (Estimated)
Investigator: C. F. Jeff Wu jeffwu@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Hamada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9148,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704649  Chien-Fu  J. Wu     Robust parameter design employs statistical methods
              and engineering ideas to improve the quality of a product or process by making
              it less sensitive to uncontrollable variation.  It has had a big impact on
              manufacturing as demonstrated by many industrial case studies.  The main focus
              is to study modeling and analysis of data from parameter design experiments and
              layout techniques for efficient experimental planning.  First, three aspects of
              robust design with static characteristics are considered:  1. theoretical
              characterizations of robust factor settings and their relation to commonly used
              graphical methods; 2. loss due to poor quality using very general loss
              functions, especially where no adjustment factor can be identified; and 3.
              assessment of measurement systems that collect ordered categorical data.  A
              related problem to the last aspect is the modeling and analysis of ordered
              categorical data from designed experiments when some of the data responses are
              misclassified.  Next, two aspects of robust parameter design with functional
              characteristics (i.e., whose response is a functional relation, instead of a
              single value) are studied: comparison of generalized signal-to-noise ratio
              based method to a response function modeling method that employs a two-stage
              modeling, and the modeling and analysis of degradationcurves from experiments
              for robust reliability improvement. Finally, efficient planning of experiments
              is studied for parameter designswith static characteristics and with
              signal-response systems.  Novel theoretical and computational tools are
              employed to solve this problem.    Robust parameter design employs statistical
              methods and engineering ideas to improve the quality of a product or process by
              making it less sensitive to uncontrollable variation.  It has been successfully
              implemented as demonstrated by many industrial case studies.  The investigators
              study the use of robust parameter design in more complicated situations than
              considered to date, thereb y, extending the scope of robust parameter design. 
              Robust parameter design uses experiments whose two major issues are how to
              properly choose the experimental conditions (i.e., experimental plans) and how
              to model and analyze the data (i.e., analysis) to identify the important
              factors and recommend the optimal settings for these factors.  In Part I, (i)
              theoretical characterizations of robust factor settings are obtained and
              related to graphical methods, (ii) new strategies are developed for minimizing
              loss due to poor quality as measured by very general loss functions,
              (iii)assessment and analysis of measurement systems that collect ordered
              categorical data.  In Part II, (i) two methods of analyzing signal-response
              systems (e.g., gas gauge where the signal is the amount of gas in the gas tank
              and the response is the reading from the gas gauge) are compared (ii) general
              models and methods for analyzing degradation curves are investigated, (e.g.,
              fluorescent light intensity decreases over time).  Using degradation data is
              strategic because information about reliability can be obtained sooner and more
              efficiently.  The research results in Part II will be tested on an automobile
              project.  In Part III, the problem of efficient and economic planning of
              experiments is studied for parameter design problems.
