Title       : Infinitary Ramsey Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 16,  1999     
File        : a9704477

Award Number: 9704477
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $157746             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andras P. Hajnal ahajnal@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposal consists of research plans going in four main directions.  In a
              past work, the investigator proved the strongest known theorem about true
              embedding partition relations. For every finite graph H and for every cardinal
              t there is a graph G "arrowing" H with t colors.  Recent results give some hope
              of extending this result to countable target graphs and developing a
              "Nesetril-Rodl" type Ramsey theory for partition relations with infinitely many
              classes.  The second direction is the investigation of polarized partition
              relations using a far reaching new method called "double ramification"
              developed jointly with Professor James Baumgartner of Dartmouth College.  The
              third direction is a continuation of a successful collaboration with Professor
              Peter Komjath of the Eotvos Lorand University of Budapest, Hungary.  Extensions
              of partition relations will be investigated- for the case in which noncomplete
              graphs are partitioned, a theory of simultaneous chromatic number of graphs and
              set systems will be developed.  Theqe will involve forcing methods and new
              proof techniques.  The fourth direction is a continuation of a long standing
              collaboration with Professor Istvan Juhasz of the Mathematical Institute of the
              Hungarian Academy of Sciences.  Specific targets will be investigations of
              partitions destroying the topology of a space, and study of invariants of CCC
              structures.  Combinatorial problems and methods have proved to be a powerful
              tool in inspiring new developments in set theory, and new metamathematical
              methods have led to spectacular advances in set theory and its applications to
              set theoretical topology. The project plans to enhance this fruitful
              cooperation.
