Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Study of Electron-Deficient Intermetallic Solids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2001     
File        : a9704048

Award Number: 9704048
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $679531             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chong Zheng zheng@cz.chem.niu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bogdan Dabrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northern Illinois Univ
	      
	      De Kalb, IL  60115    815/753-1000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,1762,9166,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704048  Zheng    This research project entitled Experimental and Theoretical
              Study  of  Electron-Deficient  Intermetallic Compounds  focuses  on  the 
              synthesis  and characterization of this novel class of compounds.  Since  many 
              of  these  compounds  exhibit  interesting  physical  properties such as
              superconductivity, unusual magnetic  behavior,  valence  fluctuations and heavy
              fermion phenomena, and since  the  structure  of  these  compounds often
              strongly  influences  these  physical    properties,    studying   their   
              structure-property  relationships  will  also be emphasized.  Theoretical 
              electronic  structure calculations and computer simulations of the structural 
              changes will be carried out.  %%%  Understanding  the chemistry and physics of
              this class  of  solid  state  compounds  has  relevance for device  fabrication
               at  the  molecular  level,  and investigating the degree  to  which  solid 
              state  chemical  synthesis can be applied to the  fabrication  of  molecular 
              electronic devices is of high technological  interest.  Some   of  these 
              compounds  have  the  capability  of  confining  electrons  in  two-dimensional
               layers,  similar  to  that  of  a  superlattice.     Others   show   the   
              tendency    of    charge  disproportionation, a mechanism being explored for
              the occurrence  of superconductivity in the cuprate materials.  Investigating
              the  chemical and physical properties of these compounds is crucial to 
              exploring new routes to material processing and fabrication,  and  new  device
              applications. This focused research group project  is  funded  by  the  Office
              of Multidisciplinary  Activities  of  the  Directorate for Mathematical and
              Physical Sciences and the  Solid  State Chemistry and Polymers Program of the
              Division of Materials  Research.  ***
