Title       : Graphical Markov Models, Structural Equation Models, and Related Models of
               Multivariate Dependence: Structure, Equivalence, Synthesis, and Extensions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9704516

Award Number: 9704516
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120026             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steen A. Andersson standers@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9196,9197,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS 9704516    Graphical Markov Models, Structural Equation Models, and  
              Related Models of Multivariate Dependence: Structure, Equivalence,   Synthesis,
              and Extensions.                            Steen A. Andersson                  
                     Indiana University            (together with David Madigan, Michael. D.
              Perlman,            and Thomas. S.  Richardson, University of Washington)      
                                        ABSTRACT     Graphical Markov models (GMM) and the
              closely related structural   equation models (SEM) use graphs (= path
              diagrams), either   undirected, directed, or mixed, to represent multivariate  
              dependencies among stochastic variables in an economical and   computationally
              efficient manner. A GMM or SEM is constructed by   specifying local
              dependencies for each variable (= node of the   graph) in terms of its
              immediate neighbors, parents, or both, yet   can represent a highly varied and
              complex system of multivariate   dependencies by means of the global structure
              of the graph.   Nonetheless, the local specification permits efficiencies in  
              modeling, inference, and probabilistic calculations. This research  involves
              the development of more complex and comprehensive classes  of GMMs and SEMs,
              determination of the mathematical structure of   these (extremely vast)
              classes, and the development of more   efficient statistical and computational
              algorithms for the   discovery and analysis of appropriate models within these
              classes  for specific real-world applications.     Among their many
              applications, GMMs have become prevalent in   statistical science for the
              analysis of categorical data in   contingency tables, for the modeling of
              spatially-dependent   processes such as the spread of epidemics in human and
              animal   populations, and for the development of early warning systems   for
              severe weather conditions; in computer science (as Bayesian   networks) for
              information processing and retrieval, for robotics,  computer vision, and
              pattern recognition, for the debugging of   complex  programs (such as Windows
              95), and for the representation  of expert systems for medical diagnosis; and
              in decision science  (as influence diagrams) as models for information flow and
              control  and for combining the opinions of many decision-makers. SEMs have 
              long been used in fields such as genetics, sociology, econometrics,  and
              psychometrics as networks for representing the structure of   complex causal
              systems. A crucial feature of all these models is   that they are designed for
              fast computational implementation,  thereby facilitating the development of
              software that can "reason"  about real world problems.    Related Websites:   
              LA Times Article, October 1996    http://www.hugin.dk/lat-bn.html   (Hosted by
              Hugin Website)    Microsoft trouble-shooting systems, employing GMMs  
              http://www.microsoft.com/support/tshooters.htm     Lockheed News Release
              describing application of GMMs   in Unmanned Underwater Vehicles.  
              http://www.lmsc.lockheed.com/newsbureau/pressreleases/9604.html    Air Force
              Institute of Technology Bayesian Network Page  
              http://www.afit.af.mil/Schools/EN/ENG/LABS/AI/BayesianNetworks    Website
              describing a GMM for forecasting severe weather in   NE Colorado 
              http://www.lis.pitt.edu/~dsl/hailfinder/
