Title       : Development of Instrumentation for High Field Ultrasound Studies of Highly
               Correlated Electron Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9704020

Award Number: 9704020
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $410000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bimal K. Sarma bksarma@uwm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John B. Ketterson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Milwaukee
	      P O BOX 340
	      Milwaukee, WI  532010340    414/963-4444

NSF Program : 1743      NATIONAL FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704020  Sarma    This award provides partial support for the development of 
              instrumentation to perform acoustic propagation experiments at  the two sites
              of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory  (Tallahassee, Florida; Los
              Alamos, New Mexico), by the Division  of Materials Research and the Office of
              Multidisciplinary  Activities of the National Science Foundation, and by the 
              University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.  The primary quantities to be  measured are
              the velocity and attenuation of high frequency sound  waves, which would be
              studied as a function of magnetic field and  absolute temperature.  The
              materials of interest are primarily  highly correlated electron systems; our
              specific expertise  involves the high electron effective mass (heavy fermion) 
              systems, such as the interrnetallic compound UPt3, and the high  temperature
              superconductors.  For the heavy ferrnion materials,  the interesting physics
              arises from the fact that the magnetic  energy of the spin system, H (where  is
              an effective magnetic  moment), can be made comparable to a characteristic
              f-electron  energy describing the heavy fermion state (loosely, a Kondo 
              coherence energy or an f-electron resonance bandwidth).  For the  high
              temperature superconductors, an interesting area of study  involves observing
              changes in the elastic constants (as mirrored  in the sound velocity)
              accompanying phase transitions or  structural changes in the Abrikosov vortex
              system and  accompanying changes in the dissipation (as mirrored in the 
              acoustic attenuation); an example, though not relevant here, is  the two
              dimensional, liquid-solid melting transition.  %%%  The Tallahassee and Los
              Alamos sites focus on steady state and  pulsed magnetic fields respectively,
              which necessitates some  differences in the acoustic measurement techniques
              employed.  We  will utilize the pulsed-transmission/phase-sensitive-echo- 
              detection approach developed earlier at Milwaukee, Northwestern  and elsewhere.
               Steady state fields permit the use of a low  repet ition acoustic pulse rate
              with relatively long averaging  times (via "box car integration") of the
              received acoustic  echo(s).  Pulsed acoustics requires very high repetition
              rates  (essentially at the reciprocal of the echo decay rate) and  separate
              sampling and storing of the received echo(s).  For this  purpose digitizers of
              the type used at the Los Alamos site will  be incorporated in instrumentation
              purchased from this proposal..  ***
