Title       : Mathematical Sciences: General Frameworks for Classification Theory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 5,  1999        
File        : a9704541

Award Number: 9704541
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven A. Buechler steven.a.buechler.1@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Buechler's proposed research is in stability-theoretic classification
              theory, a subfield of model theory. In recent years, methods developed in the
              context of stability theory have been used to analyze structures such as
              pseudo-finite fields, pseudo-algebraically closed fields, difference fields,
              and quadratic forms over finite fields. This research has yielded applications
              to arithmetic number theory (due largely to Hrushovski).  Model-theorists now
              have a good understanding of how these dependence relations fit in a general
              framework. Buechler proposes to generalize techniques from the geometrical
              stability theory of superstable theories to this broader class.  This research
              is likely to give insight into the model-theoretic properties of bilinear forms
              and groups definable in structures such as those mentioned above. Buechler also
              intends to set a more general framework for arguments based on ranks and
              dependence relations.   Much of mathematics involves the classification of an
              abstract collection of objects in terms of  concrete, well-understood objects. 
              The classification of finite simple groups is one instance of this principle. 
              Model theorists study classification results in an abstract setting, addressing
              questions such as:    When can we prove that a classification theorem exists,
              even when the particular theorem is unknown?  How can we tell when a particular
              classification theorem is the best possible result for a given collection of
              objects?  When are two classification theorems special cases of a more general
              result?  In the past twenty years model theorists have gone a long way towards
              answering these questions for collections of objects axiomatized in a
              relatively simple manner.  While this research is carried out in abstract
              setting, it has spawned  concrete results in differential algebra and
              arithmetic number theory.  Buechler proposes to expand the mathematical context
              in which these results apply.  He will also find a more abstract notion of
              classification theorem  which encompasses several existing examples.  This may
              lead to a greater understanding of results related to Fermat's Last Theorem.
