Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics with Applications in Physical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 16,  2000   
File        : a9704554

Award Number: 9704554
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Levi   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704554  Levi    The first part of the project part deals with the study of
              mathematical   aspects of Josephson junctions. It was discovered recently that
              the junctions   occur naturally in certain crystals where superconducting
              layers interlace   with insulating layers. It is  proposed to derive and to
              study a mathematical   model of such crystals and to develop theory of
              traveling waves in discrete   media.  In the second part of the project it is
              proposed to produce the   qualitative analysis of systems of relaxation
              oscillators of a recently   discovered type. The third part of the project
              deals with various applications   of the investigator's recent observation on
              the role of curvature in high-  frequency averaging. These applications include
              the study of the motion of   rigid bodies (such as particles embedded in fluid)
              or coupled systems of   particles, such as molecules subjected to rapidly
              varying force fields.   Another application includes the behavior of a resonant
              medium subjected   to an electromagnetic pulse.  Finally, the last part of the 
              project deals with   establishing a connection between two classes of systems: 
               the geodesic   motion on a surface on the one hand and the billiard motion
              inside that   surface on the  other.     The first of the four parts of the
              project deals with the study of Josephson   junctions -- superconducting
              devices whose properties offer great potential   for applications. The
              advantages of Josephson junctions lie in their small   size and in low energy
              consumption, which allow for a great reduction of   the circuit size, but the
              disadvantage is the low power output. To overcome   that disadvantage, the
              junctions can be put in arrays. Remarkably, such   arrays occur naturally: some
              crystals were discovered to consist of stacked   Josephson junction layers.
              This recent discovery offers potential new   applications, notably   for use in
              interfaces between ultrafast optical   communication lines and electric
              circuits as well as for generation of high    frequency oscillations for use in
              communications and radio-astronomical   observations. Understanding the
              behavior of such arrays takes on a crucial   importance.  The project proposed
              here aims at such understanding.   The   second part of the project addresses
              relaxation oscillators - these occur in   biological and electronic systems
              whose oscillations consist of slow drifts   punctuated by fast jumps.  A large
              class of such oscillators exhibiting   chaotic behavior was discovered
              recently, and an isolated oscillator   analyzed. Understanding  systems of
              coupled oscillators (the goal of this   project) offers great challenges and is
              of importance in some biological and   electric systems.  In the third part of
              this effort, the dynamical effects of   high-frequency oscillations will be
              explored. Such effects underlie the   operation of the Paul trap (the inventor
              was awarded a Nobel prize) and the   more recent "laser tweezers" which allow
              to move objects inside the cell   without damaging it. This research will
              extend mathematical analysis of   these phenomena with the aim of possible
              applications which include   vibrational control as well as environmental
              applications such as separation   processes (removing particles from the air,
              etc.)   In the fourth part of the   project it is proposed to establish a
              connection between two century-old   geometry problems which were developed in
              parallel but without a direct   connection, by showing that one is a limiting
              case of another.  Both of these   problems played a central role in the
              development of the theory of   dynamical systems, and thus indirectly but
              crucially in  the development of   particle accelerators, in astronomy and in
              optics.
