Title       : Reactive Flows in Porous Media: Applications, Modeling, Simulation, and Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  1999      
File        : a9704567

Award Number: 9704567
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Chadam chadam+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9187,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Chadam  9704567       Reactive flows in porous media may undergo shape 
              instabilities in the reaction (equivalently,  porosity/permeability change)
              front.  Because flow changes are  coupled to these instabilities, it now
              appears to be the case  that this reaction-infiltration mechanism plays an
              important role  in many strategically significant problems (see below).  The 
              investigator models such phenomena as coupled nonlinear  partial-ordinary
              differential equations and as moving free  boundary problems and investigates
              the importance of the role  played by dispersive effects, geomechanical
              effects, boundary and  inertial effects, layered and random media,
              concentration  dependent diffusivity and permeability and surface reactions. 
              Basic existence, uniqueness and regularity of the coupled system  of equations
              are studied as well as the sharp interface limit.  The loss of stability of
              high-symmetry solutions is studied using  bifurcation theory and numerical
              simulation.       These mathematical models of goechemical processes and the 
              results listed above have direct application to many problems in  the
              petroleum, mining and waste management industries.  For  example, in enhanced
              oil recovery, the loss of stability of the  spherical reaction front at the
              injection well often leads to  fingering of the reactants directly to the
              removal site  completely bypassing the oil.  Moreover the dissolution and 
              reprecipitation of the porous media by the reactants can  sometimes lead to
              complete plugging at the injection well  requiring expensive redrilling. 
              Similar processes can explain  observed reductions in the effectiveness of
              bioremediation of  environmental wastes or predict the observed, but previously
               unexpected, rapid encroachment of nuclear and chemical wastes on  sensitive
              environments.  By calculating the shape of redox fronts,  these methods can
              also be used (avoiding expensive drilling) to  locate lens-shaped (roll-front)
              uranium deposits.  Funding for the  project is provided by the progra m of
              Applied Mathematics and the  Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and
              by the  Hydrologic Sciences program in EAR.
