Title       : Algebraic Aspects of Dimension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  2000      
File        : a9704372

Award Number: 9704372
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31623              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jerzy Dydak dydak@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              One of the most intuitive geometric concepts is that of dimension. While it is
              very easy for a non-mathematician to guess the dimension of a particular
              geometric object, it is fairly difficult to define the dimension in a formal,
              rigorous way. The first mathematical definition of dimension arises in linear
              algebra. From that definition one easily understands that the dimensions of the
              line, the plane, and the 3-space are respectively 1,2, and 3. Ever since the
              formation of topology as an offshoot of analysis, mathematicians attempted to
              define dimension in a non-algebraic way.  The most intuitive such definition is
              the so-called small inductive dimension ind(X) of a space X. Essentially,
              ind(X) at most n means that open sets U with boundary of dimension at most
              (n-1) form a basis of X. Extension dimension theory is a general theory of
              dimension in which spaces are not parametrized by natural numbers. Instead,
              they are parametrized by CW complexes. In this theory dim(X) being at most K
              means that K is an absolute extensor of X.  In particular, dim(X) is at most
              the n-dimensional sphere S(n) if and only if the covering dimension of X is at
              most n.  dim(X)=K means that K is minimal with respect to all L such that
              dim(X) is at most L. It turns out that extension dimension encompasses both the
              covering dimension and the cohomological dimension.  It is rich in interplay
              between geometry and algebra which, to the Principal Investigator, is the
              cornerstone of all mathematics. In the case of finite-dimensional compacta one
              has an associated algebraic object called the Bockstein algebra.  There is a
              dual theory to extension dimension which deals with CW complexes and in the
              case of countable CW complexes there is an associated algebraic object called
              the dual Bockstein algebra.  This project involves the study of 'dimension.' 
              The need to study objects of various dimensions is not unique to mathematics
              alone. The perception of the dimension of the basic object we live in, the
              Universe, has undergone signi ficant changes over time. In Newtonian mechanics,
              the Universe is assumed to be 3-dimensional; Einstein added one more dimension
              (time).  Currently theoretical physicists ponder various models of the Universe
              aimed at unifying gravity and quantum mechanics; in some models the Universe is
              of dimension 10 while in others its dimension is 26.
