Title       : Mathematical Models of Nonlinear Wave Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9704724

Award Number: 9704724
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $67029              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Muraki muraki@cims.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704724    Muraki    The theme of proposed work centers on the generation and
              propagation  of nonlinear waves in PDE models which derive from physical
              systems of  current interest:          a)  self-focussing of light in nematic
              liquid crystals,          b)  interfacial pattern formation in chemical
              reactions,           c)  wave behaviors in atmospheric weather systems.    The
              mathematical objective is to quantify relationships between  spatial structure,
              instability, and dynamics as pertains to wave  behavior in nonlinear PDE
              systems.  In all of the proposed projects,  the model equations involve coupled
              PDE systems where the wave  behavior is strongly coupled to other background
              influences.  The  complexity of these models requires the development of new
              methods for  nonlinear waves which combine the techniques of asymptotic
              analysis,  modern dynamical systems theory, and numerical simulation.  These 
              projects focus on the understanding of nonlinear waves through the 
              identification of solutions representing the primary wave modes, along  with
              their dynamics and interaction properties -- while remaining  relevant within
              the underlying physical context.      Change in nature is often mediated by
              waves -- a process in which  spatial features evolve over time.  Familiar
              examples are outward  spreading of ripples in a pond and waves in the form of
              atmospheric  turbulence, which result in the "bumpy" flights experienced by 
              aircraft.  The science of waves (as with science in general) is  becoming
              increasingly quantitative, due to higher-precision  instrumentation and
              larger-scale computing.  The interpretation and  understanding of greater
              amounts of refined data demands an equal  enhancement of our ability to analyze
              increasingly sophisticated  mathematical models of wave generation and
              propagation.  The proposed  research seeks to develop analytical and
              computational techniques to  quantify wave behavior in model equations for
              optical, chemical, and  weather systems and to re-interpret the mathem atical
              implications  within the original scientific context.
