Title       : Phase Transition: Questions in Percolation and Interacting Particle Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  1997      
File        : a9704197

Award Number: 9704197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20323              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas M. Liggett tml@math.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Stacey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704197  Liggett    Alan Stacey proposes to work on problems in percolation,
              interacting particle systems and probabilistic combinatorics.  He proposes to
              work (partly with Tom Liggett) to try to extend work of theirs (and others) on
              contact processes on trees: to prove a conjecture of Liggett which would
              complete a significant characterization of the three phases of the process on a
              homogeneous tree; to understand more fully the behavior in the three phases;
              and to use this detailed knowledge of the behavior to complete work with Robin
              Pemantle in which certain exponentially growing non-homogeneous trees are found
              where the branching random walk and/or the contact process only have one phase
              transition.  Alan Stacey also proposes to extend methods developed by van den
              Berg to show almost sure uniqueness of the Gibbs measure of a two-dimensional
              spin-glass model at parameter values where the Gibbs measure for the
              corresponding Ising model is not unique.  He proposes to work on problems in
              percolation such as trying to prove that percolation occurs in certain models
              where this is not known for any non-trivial value of the parameters, including
              a percolation model with long-range dependencies which arises from a question
              about random walks on a graph; a more ambitious project (in the light of the
              unsuccessful attempts by many distinguished probabilists) is to show that the
              percolation probability at the critical value is zero for standard bond
              percolation in three dimensions.  Stacey also proposes to work on an appealing
              conjecture that the rates of convergence are the same for two different Markov
              chains arising from a card-shuffling situation.    The problems described
              concern mathematical models for important physical and biological processes
              such as the spread of disease and the growth of populations (both human, and
              those consisting of other organisms).  Although the mathematical descriptions
              are abstract and are not typically based on one specific real-world situation,
              a detailed understandi ng of the abstract models helps one to understand and
              predict important physical model; indeed, one or two simply described
              mathematical models can be of relevance to a very large number of physical
              systems.  One key phenomenon common to the abstract models and the empirical
              observations is phase transitions: a system can exhibit two or more quite
              different types of behavior (or phases) under different conditions; a classic
              example is that of a disease which may spread out of control under certain
              conditions and fizzle out under different circumstances.  The change from one
              phase to another is often quite dramatic and can be the result of a very small
              change in the parameters on which the system depends, such as the
              susceptibility of the individuals in a population or (in another classic
              example of phase transition -- that of a substance turning from a solid to a
              liquid) the temperature. The work proposed explores the nature of the phase
              transition and the types of phases that can occur in a number of different
              models.  They include the contact process --  a model for the spread of disease
              --  which can exhibit two phases in certain environments, and three phases in
              others; and spin glasses -- which model magnetism in a substance with
              impurities -- where, in a certain case, it is thought that no phase transition
              exists and the system has similar behavior at all temperatures; but this
              conjecture is not yet proven.
