Title       : Numerical and Analytical Studies of Boundary Value Problems for PDE's. Direct
               and Inverse Problems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1999      
File        : a9704575

Award Number: 9704575
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Vogelius vogelius@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,9166,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9704575  Vogelius    The research funded by this grant will focus on analytical
              and numerical   studies of partial differential equations. There will be an
              emphasis on direct   as well as on inverse problems. As far as direct problems
              are concerned, the   effective boundary layer behavior encountered in
              connection with PDE's   with rapidly oscillating coefficients will be
              investigated. PDE's of this form   are used to model the behavior of composite
              materials. Other   ``homogenization" problems for composite materials, for
              example, certain   problems associated with the relationship between
              microscopic and   macroscopic failure (including debonding of closely spaced
              fibers and   delamination) will be studied. Concerning inverse problems, those
              to be   investigated include 1) inverse "coefficient" problems for linear
              elliptic   equations with spatially varying coefficients and  2) inverse
              "source"   problems for semilinear elliptic equations. The data used for
              identification   in both cases consists of  overdetermined (Dirichlet or
              Neumann) boundary   data. The analytical component of this work concerns such
              questions as   identifiability and continuous dependence. For the inverse
              "coefficient"   problem, the investigation of the identification of cracks,
              inhomogeneities   and corrosion damage will be continued and a study related to
              the   ``imaging" of thin films will be initiated; for the inverse "source
              problem,"   connections with the well known Schiffer (or Pompeiu) conjecture
              will be   investigated with particular emphasis on the relation between the  
              ``smoothness" of the domain and the ability to identify. The numerical work  
              will be devoted to the design of effective reconstruction methods, which to  
              the largest extent possible rely on structural information about the solutions 
               of the underlying PDE.    The research funded by this grant will focus on
              analytical and numerical   problems related to continuum mechanics. The
              research on direct problems   has applications to several impor tant practical
              problems, for instance the   assessment of the strength and potential failure
              of composite materials   (including fracture, debonding of fibers and
              delamination). Special   emphasis is put on the understanding of the
              relationship between   microscopic and macroscopic behavior. The research on
              inverse problems   has immediate applications to 1) medical impedance imaging,
              2)   nondestructive testing of mechanical parts (and sensors) as well as 3) the
                interpretation of magnetic diagnostics for Tokamak (fusion) devices. Part of 
               this research is concerned with determining the sufficiency of the proposed  
              boundary data for the various identifications (proving uniqueness and  
              continuous dependence results). Another part of this research involves the  
              design of effective algorithms, for instance for the detection and location of 
               cracks and inhomogeneities in metal components as well as for the  
              determination of the level of oxidation of thin films (gas sensors) using real 
               experimental data. There will be an active involvement of post-doctoral  
              researchers as well as graduate students and hopefully even some advanced  
              undergraduate students in various aspects of the research.
