Title       : Bayesian Preposterior Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 22,  1999     
File        : a9704934

Award Number: 9704934
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $146326             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Mueller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              DMS-9704934    BAYESIAN PREPOSTERIOR SIMULATION    Peter Mueller  Duke
              Univiversity      We expand the ambit of methods and programs developed for
              posterior   simulation to expected utility maximization.  The main tool is  
              simulation in an augmented probability model. For expected utility  
              maximization the original probability model on parameters and data is  
              augmented to an artificial probability model on decision variables,   model
              parameters and data. The augmented probability model is chosen   such that the
              marginal distribution on the decision parameters is   proportional to expected
              utility, and thus the mode of this marginal   distribution corresponds to the
              optimal design.  We develop novel   Markov chain Monte Carlo techniques
              amenable to simulation from this   auxiliary probability model and investigate
              algorithms for mode   estimation in a possibly high dimensional distribution
              based on a   simulated Monte Carlo sample.    The Bayesian framework provides
              coherent support for decision making   through an iterative cycle of problem
              structuring, uncertainty   modeling, preference modeling, expected utility
              maximization and   sensitivity analysis.  Recent computational developments in
              statistics   (the Gibbs sampler, stochastic substitution sampling) have  
              significantly widened the range of models used for uncertainty   modeling.  We
              study the use of these methods in other parts of the   decision making cycle,
              in particular expected utility maximization and   preference modeling.  The
              investigated methods are simulation based   and highly computational intensive
              and require state of the art   computer simulation, relating to the Federal
              Strategic Area of high   performance computing.  The impact of the research is
              to widen the   class of problems where expected utility maximization, i.e.,
              formal   solution of decision problems, is practically feasible in a way  
              similar to how Gibbs sampling and related techniques have made complex  
              probability models accessible for uncertainty model ing.
