Title       : Estimating Intrinsic Dimensionality
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  1997       
File        : a9704557

Award Number: 9704557
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William B. Smith                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $91479              (Estimated)
Investigator: Guenther Walther Walther@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Walther  9704557    The goal of this research is to detect nonlinear structure
              in multivariate data by estimating the intrinsic dimensionality of a data set. 
              A multivariate data set that, apart from noise, falls into a lower-dimensional
              smooth submanifold is said to have intrinsic dimensionality equal to the
              smallest dimension of such a submanifold.  A knowledge or estimate of the
              intrinsic dimensionality of a data set contributes to the solution of two
              important problems in multivariate statistics and pattern analysis: The problem
              of finding an appropriate number of parameters for representing the data, and
              the problem of deciding whether a two- or three-dimensional representation of
              the data exists, which may then be analyzed visually.  This research develops a
              new way to estimate intrinsic dimensionality that promises be superior to
              existing methods for heuristic reasons, and investigates the statistical
              properties of the new estimator and its competitors.   The new estimator uses a
              method to smooth the shape of a multivariate data set in a nonlinear way which
              is based on tools from the field of mathematical morphology.     The goal of
              this research is to detect certain patterns in data, such as structured parts
              in medical images. Quite complicated and high-dimensional data sets have often
              certain simple, low-dimensional geometric structures in it. To extract
              information from these data in an efficient way it is important to find such
              structures and describe them in ways that are simple and and amenable for the
              processing by computers. This research uses certain geometric tools to develop
              such a processing system in a context where the patterns to be found are
              corrupted by noise, e.g. transmission errors or blurring in images.
