Title       : Symbolic Learning for Natural Language Processing: Integrating Information
               Extraction and Querying
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9704943

Award Number: 9704943
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael E. Lesk                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $339563             (Estimated)
Investigator: Raymond J. Mooney mooney@cs.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Recent research indicates that approaches employing automated learning and
              training are the   most promising methods for developing robust, efficient
              systems for processing natural   language.  The goal of this research project
              is to develop symbolic learning methods to aid the   construction of natural
              language systems.  Learning algorithms are being developed for   constructing
              systems requiring extraction of  information from natural-language documents
              and   subsequent natural-language querying of the resulting database.  A method
              for learning to parse   natural language database questions into a formal query
              language has been developed and is   being extended to automate the acquisition
              of the requisite lexicon of word meanings.    Techniques are also being
              developed for automatically learning rules that locate relevant pieces   of
              data in natural-language documents.  Together, these methods can be used to
              automate the   construction of systems requiring natural-language information
              extraction and querying.    Methods for intelligently selecting informative
              training examples are also being developed in   order to reduce the amount of
              annotated training data required.  The resulting methods are   being applied to
              automate the construction of systems that build a database from messages  
              posted to an electronic newsgroup and then respond to natural language queries,
              resulting in   more natural and effective access to electronic information.    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                               
