Title       : Acquisition of a High Temperature Thermogravimetric/Differential Analyzer
               (TGA/DTA) for Fundamental Materials Synthesis Kinetic Studies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  1997     
File        : a9704070

Award Number: 9704070
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61058              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan W. Weimer Alan.Weimer@Colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704070  Weimer    This award provides partial support for the acquisition of a
              thermogravimetric/  differential analyzer to be used for fundamental materials
              synthesis reaction  kinetic studies of nitrides at high temperatures.  The
              basic kinetic studies  will be on the synthesis of nitrides, carbides, borides,
              and other bulk powders  as well as nitride films deposited on substrates.  The
              system will be capable of  measuring powder, granular and solid materials in
              alumina, graphite, and platinum  crucibles.  Synthesis studies will include
              carbothermal reduction, direct  nitridation, and gas phase reactions.  The
              combination of high temperature  synthesis studies to be carried out on large
              samples to allow for sufficient  sampling of the materials for analysis. This
              capability is important for advancing  our knowledge of nitrides, which have
              higher thermal capacities than silicon based  materials, and have
              optical-photonic importance for communications.  %%%  This equipment award will
              support the research program for the investigation of  the mechanism and
              kinetics for the synthesis of nitride, carbide, boride, and other  non-oxide
              materials using high temperature thermogravimetric/differential analyzer.  The
              instrument will provide a combination of high temperature with large loading 
              capacity which is unique compared with conventional equipment, and will allow 
              fundamental high temperature synthesis studies to be carried out on large
              samples,  allowing for sufficient sampling of the material for analysis.  The
              production of  nitride powders is currently limited.  There is considerable
              technological interest  in producing structures with nitrides, and some recent
              examples of success.  This  capability is important for advancing our knowledge
              of nitrides, which have higher  thermal capacities than silicon based
              materials, and have optical-photonic importance  for communications.  ***
