Title       : Fundamental Theory and Techniques for Nonlinear Signal Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 2,  1999     
File        : a9704262

Award Number: 9704262
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rui J. de Figueiredo rui@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              In telecommunications, video-technology, and multimedia applications, a real 
              challenge is posed by some genuinely nonlinear problems for the solution of 
              which, unlike in the linear case, a final unified theory is not yet available. 
               Such nonlinear problems include cancellation of large nonlinear distortion in 
              very-large-scale electronic circuits and systems (VLSI), nonlinear sharpening
              of  contrast in noisy images, modeling and identification of nonlinear signal
              and  image sources, and content-based nonlinear compression and decompression
              of  signals and images.  The goal of the current project is to develop a
              rigorous and  yet practical framework for the design/synthesis of nonlinear
              analog, digital,  and mixed mode filters for the solution of the above types of
              nonlinear problems.    The approach followed in this project is based on an
              Generalized Fock (GF) space  framework developed by the PI (R.J.P.
              deFigueiredo), T.A. Dwyer, and L.V. Zyla.   A GF space is a reproducing kernel
              Hilbert space of discrete- or continuous-  parameter Volterra functional series
              with a problem-dependent weighted inner  product.  In the context of a given
              application-specific problem, the optimal  nonlinear filter structure is
              obtained by an orthogonal projection of the desired  filter into the subspace
              spanned by the representers of interpolating, smoothing,  and other design
              constraint functionals in an appropriate GF space.  A number of  analysis,
              synthesis, and implementation issues constitute the focus of the 
              investigation.
