Title       : Research on Stochastic Processes and Optimization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1999      
File        : a9704426

Award Number: 9704426
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Keith N. Crank                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $124299             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul G. Dupuis dupuis@cfm.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1263      PROBABILITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              9704426  Dupuis   This project covers three topics: (i) theory and applications
              of the Skorokhod   Problem; (ii) large deviations and risk sensitive control
              and robust control of queueing   networks; and (iii) computational methods for
              deterministic optimal control problems and   related first order nonlinear PDE.
              The solution to the Skorokhod Problem defines what   might be considered the
              input/output map for a number of exact and approximate models   in   queueing,
              communication, economics, and other areas. Except in special cases, little is  
              known about the analytical properties of this mapping. This research will build
              on prior   work of the investigator and H. Ishii which takes a geometric
              approach to obtaining   regularity conditions for the Skorokhod Problem. The
              main thrust of the present work is   the   development and application of
              methods based on convex duality.  The second part of the   project studies
              large deviations for queueing networks. The main topic here is the  
              formulation and analysis of risk sensitive criteria for the control and
              regulation of queueing   networks. In almost all models for networks there are
              errors, approximations, and model   uncertainty, and one would like to design
              control schemes that are insensitive to such   errors. Using the duality
              between exponential integrals and the relative entropy function,   one can (at
              least in the context of diffusions) give a precise quantitative
              characterization of   the  additional robustness properties that are obtained
              when a risk sensitive criteria is used.   The investigator will formulate and
              analyze via large deviation techniques such criteria in a   queueing context.
              The final part of the project considers cmmputational methods for  
              deterministic optimal control problems. The main emphasis here is on the
              development of   practical algorithms with good qualitative properties. This
              will be done for a class of   problems with very similar features that arise in
              large deviation for diffusions, certain   problems fr om computer vision, and
              robust nonlinear control and robust filtering.   Modern communication,
              computer, and queueing systems are very complicated,   and   in fact too
              complicated to analyze in complete detail. As systems become more and more  
              heterogeneous (e.g., different data classes, different quality of service
              requirements, etc.)   the control and regulation of these systems becomes more
              difficult and less intuitive. The   first two parts of this project investigate
              two approaches to dealing with such systems.   When analyzing queueing and
              communication systems one needs (relatively) simple   system   models which
              capture the most important aspects of the true system. Linear systems are  
              unable to capture the system behavior caused by hard constraints
              (non-negativity of queue   lengths, limits on buffer sizes, etc.) and
              discontinuities that occur naturally in well   designed   routing and service
              protocols. Part of this research is to look at alternatives to linear  
              systems. The second part focuses on the study of risk sensitive criteria for
              such systems.   Risk sensitive and robust criteria provide alternatives to
              traditional criteria for the   evaluation of system performance, and it is now
              understood that they are very useful in   situations where model uncertainty
              and robustness against modeling errors are important.   Such robustness
              properties are always important for communication and manufacturing   systems.
              The aim here is to properly formulate and analyze risk-sensitive criteria for  
              random   networks, and to quantify the robustness properties when compared to
              traditional criteria.   The last part of the project is devoted to the
              development of usable and efficient   computational methods for deterministic
              optimal control problems, and in particular to the   class of problems that
              arise in the second part of the proposal.
