Title       : Proof Theory and Set Theories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9704917

Award Number: 9704917
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54700              (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy Carlson carlson@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Carlson proposes to work on a far reaching program centering on the proof theory
              of systems of set theory which includes a semantic approach to proof theory in
              general and a new method for constructing ordinal notation systems for theories
              of sets. The set theories to be studied initially go up to and include
              Zermelo-Frankel set theory with the power set axiom removed but there is some
              likelihood that the methods will extend much farther. The notation systems lay
              bare a fundamental part of the structures for the corresponding set theories.  
              The proposed research is motivated by questions which arise naturally from
              Godel's incompleteness theorems. These theorems imply that no reasonable
              mathematical system is strong enough to provide solutions to all concrete
              mathematical problems, e.g., determining the existence of solutions in the
              natural numbers to polynomial equations or verifying the correctness of
              computer programs. There will always be questions whose solution will hinge on
              the discovery of new axioms- new axioms whose acceptance will be determined by
              intuition. The possible new axioms which have emerged all fall into the class
              of "axioms of infinity" which assert the existence of larger and larger
              nonconcrete mathematical objects. That axioms of this sort are the only new
              axioms amenable to our intuition seems possible, even probable. The ultimate
              goal of the proposed research would be to provide convincing answers to the
              following questions: 1. Can the notion of axiom of infinity be given a precise
              definition? 2. Can all meaningful concrete mathematical problems be resolved by
              axioms of infinity? 3. Which axioms of infinity are necessary for the solution
              of  meaningful concrete mathematical questions? While answers to these
              questions seem unlikely in the near future, especially for the first two, the
              successful completion of the program proposed here would be a significant step
              forward.
