Title       : Theory and Applications of Exponential Asymptotics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9704968

Award Number: 9704968
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35221              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ovidiu Costin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                ABSTRACT    Costin    Costin will work on constructing a theory of analyzable
              functions.   Obtained by taking a closure of analytic functions with respect to
                function operations (algebraic operations, including division,   composition,
              differentiation, integration, etc.) they preserve many   analytic function
              properties, including unique representation by   expansions (formalizability)
              and permanence of relations. In addition  to the intrinsic interest in
              exploring the limits of formalizability,   there is a major practical interest
              in reconstructing actual   solutions from formal expansions for a wide class of
              equations.   A complete theory of analyzable functions is likely to have an  
              impact in many branches of pure and applied analysis.    Costin has carried out
              this construction rigorously for functions   arising as solutions to linear or
              nonlinear differential systems   near generic singularities. Costin will use
              new techniques in the   classification of nonlinear differential systems near
              irregular   singularities, up to analytic equivalence, in providing sharp  
              information on the nature and location of singularities of nonlinear   systems,
              in the study of solvability in closed form of equations,  in solving connection
              problems and in justifying and improving   hyper-asymptotic numerical methods. 
              The technique will also be   extended to cover PDE's and difference equations. 
                Asymptotic analysis is an important method of  investigation in complex
              systems. In many important cases however,   the quantities of interest are
              influenced by parameters too small   to be controlled by classical asymptotics.
              The field of exponential  asymptotics has been introduced as a successful
              theoretical and  computational framework to deal with these situations and
              applied in  problems ranging from number theory to optics and quantum 
              mechanics. The present project is aimed at a rigorous foundation of  the field,
              at applying its techniques to the study of differential or  difference systems,
              as well as  at extending and improving the  computational methods of this new
              theory.
