Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Smooth 4-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  1999  
File        : a9704927

Award Number: 9704927
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronald A. Fintushel ronfint@math.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704927  Fintushel       This project will explore the relationship between the 
              classification of smooth simply connected 4-manifolds and invariants  of knot
              theory, by constructing families of 4-manifolds that are  distinguished by knot
              theoretic invariants.  Already the investigator,  jointly with R. Stern, has
              accomplished this for the Alexander polynomial.  Any symmetric Laurent
              polynomial P(t) with absolute value of P(1)=1 occurs  as the Alexander
              polynomial of some knot in the 3-sphere.  For  example, R. Stern and the
              principal investigator have constructed a  family of distinct 4-manifolds, each
              homeomorphic to the K3-surface,  constructed from knots, and distinguished by
              the fact that their  Seiberg-Witten invariants are the Alexander polynomials of
              the knots.  There are other knot invariants that should correspond to other 
              constructions.  A related issue is the geography problem for simply  connected
              irreducible 4-manifolds.  Each such manifold can be assigned  a lattice point
              in the plane corresponding to its characteristic  numbers.  The problem is to
              study which points are realized.  There  has been notable progress, but much
              work still remains, and the  principal investigator plans to seek new methods
              for constructing  irreducible simply connected 4-manifolds of positive
              signature.  He  and R. Stern also conjecture a replacement for the Noether 
              inequality for certain symplectic 4-manifolds that generalize the  notion of
              `general type'.  The investigator has a promising  technique for its proof,
              which he plans to pursue.       The theory of smooth 4-manifolds gains its
              importance both from  its central location between low and high-dimensional
              topology, and  from its close interaction with high energy physics.  The major 
              problem in this field is the classification of smooth simply connected 
              4-manifolds.  The interaction between topology and physics has  stimulated the
              construction of invariants - at first Donaldson's  invariant, and then the
              invariant of Seiberg and Witten - tha t are  useful in distinguishing the
              (diffeomorphism) types of 4-manifolds.  These have led to major advances in the
              classification problem.  Specifically, researchers who have constructed
              possibly new families  of 4-manifolds can use these invariants to confirm that
              their phenomena  are indeed `new'.  Recent years have given rise to simply
              connected  (irreducible) smooth 4-manifolds that admit no complex structure
              (even  up to homotopy), then to those that admit no symplectic structure. 
              These examples have confused the issue of classification to the point  that we
              are left without even a conjectural classification, but they  have also
              invigorated the theory and reinforced its richness.  ***
