Title       : Combinatorial Differential Topology and Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  1997     
File        : a9704360

Award Number: 9704360
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robin Forman forman@math.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704360  Forman       Robin Forman is investigating the relationship between
              differential  topology and geometry, on the one hand, and combinatorial
              topology and  geometry, on the other.  He has already shown that many of the
              standard  ingredients of differential topology and geometry, such as Morse 
              theory, vector fields and their associated flows, and Ricci curvature  and
              Bochner's method, have combinatorial analogs that can be applied  to very
              general cell complexes.  This has led to new results in  combinatorial topology
              as well as to simplifications of some existing  proofs.  One current goal is to
              develop a combinatorial theory of  vector bundles and connections that is
              suitable for studying both the  classical question of combinatorial formulae
              for characteristic  classes, as well as the new invariants of knots and 3- and
              4-manifolds  defined via the theory of smooth vector bundles and connections.  
                  Combinatorics is the study of finite sets.  As a consequence, many 
              problems in combinatorics lend themselves quite naturally to  investigation via
              a computer.  A typical problem in differential  topology and geometry, on the
              other hand, seems to require an infinite  amount of data.  Forman's research is
              devoted to developing new  methods of reducing such problems to combinatorics. 
              In other words,  he is developing new techniques to solve problems in topology
              and  geometry that require keeping track of only a finite amount of data.  In
              particular, these techniques enable one to investigate these  problems via a
              computer.  Moreover, his work has also proved useful in  the opposite
              direction.  Namely, he has shown that many of the  standard techniques in
              differential topology and geometry can be  adapted to apply to problems in
              combinatorics, an approach that has  already proved useful in solving some of
              them.  ***
