Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Mate Selection in Free-Ranging Japanese Macaques
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9704224

Award Number: 9704224
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5800               (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph M. Soltis   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Soltis  9704224    This award supports a 12 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Joseph M. Soltis
              at Kyoto University, Inuyama, Japan.  Dr.  Soltis will work with Dr. Yukimaru
              Sugiyama, director of the  Primate Research Institute, on a project entitled,
              "Mate  Selection in Free-Ranging Japanese Macaques."    The conflicting mating
              strategies of males and females  interact to produce mating and reproductive
              outcomes.  The  proposed research will investigate the mating strategies of 
              males and females in a wild troop of Japanese macaques  (Macaca fuscata). 
              Japanese macaques live in complex, mixed  social groups, with mating strategies
              dependent upon factors  relating to aggressiveness and subordination.  The
              proposed  research will combine behavioral and genetic data on subject  animals
              to determine the influence of these varied factors  on mating and reproductive
              outcomes.  Previous research has  indicated that the primary determinant in
              mating strategies  is subordinate position among the troop.  The proposed 
              research is designed to generalize these results based on  data obtained from a
              wild, free-ranging troop of Japanese  macaques.  Results from the proposed
              research will provide  insight into the underlying strategies of male-female 
              interaction in Japanese macaques and the mating and  reproductive outcomes in
              complex social groups.  ***
