Title       : SBIR PHASE II: Two Degree-of-Freedom Spherical Pointing Actuator
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9704266

Award Number: 9704266
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sara B. Nerlove                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1997   
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299970             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Kramer cak@amherst.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cesar Bandera  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Amherst Systems Inc
	      30 Wilson Road
	      Buffalo, NY  142217026    716/631-0610

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6840,9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              ***  9704266  Bandera   A key technical challenge to the commercialization of
              active vision for demanding avionics and robotics applications, and
              particularly to the commercialization of foveal machine vision, is the lack of
              a pointing mechanism featuring high speed, high accuracy, fast settling time,
              small size, small power consumption, and light weight.  This Small Business
              Innovation Research Phase II project from Amherst Systems, Inc. will develop a
              low-cost, high performance, miniature two degree-of-freedom (DOF) pan-tilt
              pointing mechanism, called a spherical pointing actuator (SPA), that meets
              mobile robot active vision gazing requirements.  This project will also develop
              a computer interface implementing open-loop and closed-loop control of the SPA.
               Conventional pan-tilt mechanisms couple I-DOF motors, and their kinematics
              chain imposes large weight (several pounds), torque (up to tens of
              foot-pounds), and power (several hundred watts) payload requirements that are
              impractical in small mobile platforms.  The SPA reduces the kinematics chain
              and payload requirements by integrating both degrees of freedom into one rotary
              actuator.  It provides accurate, rapid (1000 degrees/sec), wide, angle
              excursion (90 degrees) pointing of small mass (tens of grains) with little
              power (10 W) and space (on the order of one cubic inch).  The SPA consists of
              four coils (two per DOF) mounted on the sides of a tetrahedral damped magnetic
              circuit that acts upon a gimbaled magnet; the magnet supports a visual sensor
              gazing out the circuit's open base.  This design features wider excursion and
              simpler control (damped dynamics, inherent centering force, no home position
              coil required) than spherical pointing motor designs that do not use magnetic
              circuitry.   The spherical pointing actuator (SPA) permits smaller and more
              reliable active vision systems for autonomous security, automatic target
              recognition, unmanned ground and air vehicles, commercial robots, smart
              weapons, and smart vehicles.  An SPA combined wit h a foveal imager provides
              wide field-of-view to improve search, fast frame rate to improve tracking, and
              high localized acuity to improve recognition.  Low-cost conventional components
              and fabrication procedures assure commercial feasibility.  ***
