Title       : SGER: Experiments on Integrating Speech Recognition and Natural Language
               Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 30,  1996  
File        : a9704358

Award Number: 9704358
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gary W Strong                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1997   
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary P. Harper   (Principal Investigator current)
              Leah H. Jamieson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 9216,9237,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              ***  This project addresses  the integration of speech  recognition and natural
              language processing components in a  speech understanding system.  Most current
              speech  recognizers  use  word-level  hidden  Markov  models  (HMMs)in
              conjunction  with n-gram language models.  Additional flexibility can  be 
              achieved by using phones as  the basic recognition  unit. This  research 
              proposes  a  new  technique  called  a  SOHMM   Stochastic  Observation  Hidden
              Markov Model  -  for  recognizing words  from  phone  candidates.   Most 
              current  spoken  language systems use  probabilistic language models to model
              syntactic  and  semantic  patterns.   This project will integrate  a  SOHMM- 
              based speech  recognizer  with  a Constraint-Dependency  Grammar  (CDG) parser,
               which supports the use of lexical,  prosodic,  syntactic, and semantic
              knowledge sources in a  uniform modular framework, as well  as the use of
              domain-  specific constraints.  This work  will refine  the  model  for the
              SOHMM-CDG spoken language  processing system  and  address  the problem of
              building  and  pruning  word graphs,  which act as the interface between the
              two components. An  experiment will be conducted to demonstrate the 
              effectiveness  of the  integrated system for recognizing and  parsing
              utterances  in the  TIMIT  and  Resource Management  corpora.  Sentence 
              accuracy should be significantly  improved over what is possible using only
              statistical  language  models,  especially  when  domain-specific  constraints
              are used ***.
