Title       : Optimal Control of PDEs, ODEs, and Variational Inequalities and Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1997       
File        : a9704199

Award Number: 9704199
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $57510              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suzanne M. Lenhart lenhart@math.utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,9198,EGCH,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704199  Lenhart    Optimal control of partial differential equations, ordinary
              differential   equations, and variational inequalities will be investigated. 
              The first area of   research is the control of hybrid systems of partial
              differential equations and   ordinary differential equations, with applications
              in bioremediation and   population modeling.  The second area is optimal
              control of the obstacle in   variational inequalities, with elliptic or fourth
              order operators (involving   biharmonic operators). The third area is the
              investigation of optimal   chemotherapy strategies in HIV models.  First, the
              existence of an optimal   control must be shown for the models and objective
              functionals appropriate   to each application area.  Secondly, this optimal
              control must be   characterized through necessary conditions from the
              derivation of an   optimality system, which is the state system coupled with an
              adjoint system.    Due to the variety of systems treated, existence,
              uniqueness, and   characterization of the optimal control requires new and
              different a priori   estimates and convergence arguments.  For some of the
              applications,   numerical simulations will be completed.    This research
              involves theory and applications of optimal control of partial   differential
              equations, ordinary differential equations, and variational   inequalities. 
              The first application area is control of a bioremediation model   for
              encouraging the remediation of contaminants by metabolism of bacteria.    The
              level of the nutrient inputs is controlled to optimally run a bioreactor.   
              The approach will be lab tested on a gas phase bioreactor with pseudomonas  
              putida bacteria degrading paraxylene.  Other population models will be  
              investigated. The second application area is the control of variational  
              inequalities, which model the designing of the shape of the membrane by  
              controlling an obstacle put under the membrane.  These models arise in flow  
              through porous media, hydrodynamic lubrication, elasto-plastic  analysis,  
              continuous casting, and electrochemical machining.  The third application  
              area is the design of optimal chemotherapies for the treatment of HIV  
              infection.  The effect of a "cocktail of various drugs" can be simulated for  
              an immunology model involving CD4+T white blood cells and the HIV   virus. 
              Also a model involving the time elapsed since the cells became   infected with
              HIV will be studied.  Numerical simulations for the optimal   control and
              resulting controlled quantities (like CD4+T cells), will be   completed using
              realistic data.
