Title       : Mathematical Modeling of Sulfide Corrosion of Concrete in Wastewater Collection
               Systems - Analysis, Experimental Validation, Parameter Estimation and Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1997    
File        : a9704935

Award Number: 9704935
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: I.Gary Rosen rosen@optimize1.usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Chunming Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph S. Devinny  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Florian B. Mansfeld  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1037,9263,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              Rosen  9704935       Sulfide corrosion of concrete in wastewater collection 
              systems occurs when microorganisms in anaerobic films below the  water surface
              produce hydrogen sulfide.  The sulfide evaporates  into the atmosphere and
              redissolves in moisture that has  condensed on the portions of the pipe above
              the wastewater.  Microorganisms in this environment convert the sulfide to 
              sulfuric acid.  The acid reacts with calcium hydroxide and  calcium carbonate
              in the cement, producing sulfate minerals and  causing the concrete to corrode.
               The investigators develop a  mathematical model of the corrosion process that
              is tuned,  tested, identified and validated via field data and laboratory 
              experiment.  The effort includes the analysis of the model  equations (which
              take the form of a system of coupled partial  differential equations with
              moving or free boundaries) from the  point of view of well-posedness
              (existence, uniqueness,  regularity of weak, strong, local, global solutions,
              etc.) and  the sensitivity of solutions with respect to parameters.  It also 
              includes the development, analysis and testing of efficient,  convergent and
              robust numerical integration schemes for numerical  simulation, parameter
              estimation and control.  In addition to  using available field data to verify
              the model, a laboratory  test-bed to provide additional data for model
              verification and  parameter estimation is designed and fabricated. 
              Electrochemical  techniques applied to instrumented concrete samples are used
              to  (i) characterize the concrete structures using electrochemical  impedance
              spectroscopy (EIS), and (ii) sense the diffusion  profiles of corrosive
              species.  Correlation of the results of  these two studies allows investigation
              of relationships between  concrete microstructure and diffusion processes. 
              Computational  schemes are developed to use the field and laboratory data to 
              identify unmeasurable parameters that appear in the model, and to  test
              corrosion slowing control schemes based upon the model.        Sulfide
              corrosion causes millions of dollars in damage in  the U.S. each year. 
              Attempts have been made to control sulfide  corrosion in sewers.  Most try to
              prevent the release of hydrogen  sulfide into the pipe atmosphere.  Strong base
              has been used to  kill the biofilm, and cleaning has been used to remove it. 
              The  addition of trace metals precipitates the sulfide, preventing its  release
              to the atmosphere.  However, the biofilms are tenacious,  and grow back
              rapidly, requiring additional treatment.  Any  anti-biofilm treatment is
              constrained because it must not damage  the similar microorganisms that are the
              basis of the wastewater  treatment system.  Chemical precipitation requires
              continuous  treatment.  Any effort involving chemical addition must contend 
              with the very large volumes of water flowing through wastewater  collection
              systems: no matter how cheap the chemical, the  colossal amounts that must be
              purchased and fed into the system  are expensive.  Thus an effort to first
              understand and to then  interrupt (i.e. control) the corrosion process is
              needed, and may  provide the only possible remedy for some cases.  The results
              of  the study should yield a deeper understanding of the corrosion  process,
              and provide a powerful tool for engineers to use in the  design of concrete
              wastewater systems and in the formulation,  testing, tuning and evaluation of
              corrosion abatement procedures.  The model and results should  guide
              improvements in protection  techniques where sulfide corrosion is a problem,
              and provide  insight into the corrosion processes of other concrete structures 
              and the substantial damage caused.  They could also potentially  reduce
              maintenance costs.  The modeling ideas developed as a part  of this project
              should be transferable to other corrosion  problems, and the analytical and
              computational techniques that  result should be of use in the area of moving
              boundary problems,  their analysis, numerical solution, identification and
              control.
