Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Hormonal Control of Seed Germination in
               Arabidopsis Thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1997      
File        : a9704233

Award Number: 9704233
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Camille M. Steber   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0521400   Plant Productivity                      
Program Ref : 0000,5956,5977,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704233  Steber      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twelve-month
              postdoctoral research  visit by Dr. Camille M. Steber to work with Dr. Peter D.
               McCourt at the University of Toronto in Toronto, Ontario.    Dr. Steber will
              investigate the role of the plant hormone  gibberellic acid (GA) in the control
              of seed dormancy and  germination.  To ensure that plant embryos survive the 
              interval between release from the mother plant and  germination, seeds
              accumulate nutrient reserves and become  dormant and desiccation tolerant. 
              There are mechanisms that  ensure that seeds germinate only under "dormancy
              breaking"  conditions that provide a beneficial environment for growth  of the
              seedling.  In studying the Arabidopsis thaliana, the  plant hormone abscisic
              acid (ABA) is needed to establish  dormancy while the GA is needed to end
              dormancy and induce  seed germination.  Little is known about the mechanisms by
               which GA induces germination.  This project will focus on  understanding those
              mechanisms governing GA receptivity in  the seed using two genetic approaches:
              the first will  identify GA-insensitive mutations using a screen for 
              suppressors of an ABA-insensitive mutation; the second will  identify genes
              which when overexpressed, suppress the  inability of the GA auxotroph gal-3 to
              germinate in the  absence of exogenous GA.  Gaining this understanding of GA 
              response will have important applications in the area of  agriculture.       
              Dr. McCourt is one of relatively few North American  researchers who has
              investigated the role of both ABA and GA  in the control of seed dormancy and
              germination.  His  laboratory at the University of Toronto will provide an 
              opportunity for interaction with a wide- range of experts in  plant biology
              including plant physiology, biochemistry, and  development.        ***
