Title       : Theoretical Chemistry, Dynamical Systems, and the Geometry of Global Phase Space
               Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 28,  2000    
File        : a9704759

Award Number: 9704759
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $195000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen R. Wiggins wiggins@cds.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704759  Wiggins    This research project is concerned with developing
              analytical and   computational tools for studying the global dynamics of
              semiclassical   models of molecules. The emphasis will be on molecular models
              with three   or more degrees-of-freedom and the analytical approach is that of
              the   geometric theory of nonlinear dynamical systems. In particular, we will  
              investigate how geometrical structures in phase space are manifested in  
              experimental spectra, the local to normal mode transition in molecules with  
              three or more degrees-of-freedom, energy transport and the role of invariant  
              manifolds in determining this, and the dynamics of rotational-vibrational  
              interaction in molecules with three or more degrees-of-freedom. In addition,  
              we will investigate mechanism for global instabilities in  Hamiltonian  
              systems with three or more degrees of freedom; in particular, the Arnold  
              mechanism.    The research is concerned with the development of techniques to
              study   classical and semiclassical dynamics of molecules with three or more  
              degrees-of-freedom, as well as a fundamental study of mechanisms for  
              instability in Hamiltonian systems with three or more degrees-of-freedom.  
              Over the past 10 years experimental techniques have been  developed in  
              chemistry to the point where real time dynamical data related to molecular 
              interactions and dynamics can be obtained, which has resulted in the area of  
              research known as  "femtochemistry". In some ways the experimental   situation
              in chemistry today bears a strong resemblance to the experimental   situation
              in fluid mechanics in the late 1970`s. At that time new laser based  
              experimental techniques were developed that resulted in global, real time  
              dynamical data from fluid flows. Such data played a key role in the   dynamical
              systems analyses of fluid flows. In fact, one could make the case   that these
              experimental advances were the reason that fluid mechanics   became (probably)
              the main application area for dynamical sy stems theory   throughout the
              1980`s. Today we are in an analogous situation for   theoretical chemistry vis-
              -vis the relation of  experimental advances in   fluid mechanics and dynamical
              systems theory in the late 1970`s.   Consequently, a focused, interdisciplinary
              research effort in dynamical   systems and theoretical chemistry could play an
              important role in the   interpretation of this new experimental data, as well
              as the further   development of the field of theoretical chemistry.  This award
              will be   supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences, the Division of  
              Chemistry, and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate  
              for Mathematical and Physical Sciences.
