Title       : Acquisition of In-Situ Heating and Ambient Controlled X-Ray Deffraction Tool:
               For Remote Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1997    
File        : a9704269

Award Number: 9704269
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry L. Alford alford@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1725      NAT'L FACILITIES & INSTRUMNTAT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1750,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704269  Alford    This award provides partial support by The Division of 
              Materials Research, The Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities, and the
              Arizona State University for an X-Ray  Diffractometer (XRD) configured with a
              High Temperature  Sample Stage Assembly for materials research.  This 
              diffractometer will serve as a remote analytical tool that  can be accessed by
              students and researchers in the class  room and at other locations.    Students
              and faculty at Arizona State University (ASU) will  use the diffractometer to
              create new fundamental knowledge  in the science and engineering of
              interconnect materials  systems and processes for future (< 0.18 m) integrated 
              circuit technologies. Silver metallization is the technology  driver for future
              microelectronics interconnect systems.  This investigation concentrates on the
              in-situ study of  metal conductor materials (silver and its alloys) during 
              thermal processing in controlled ambients. This effort will  extend upon
              preliminary advances in both i) Ag and Cu  metallization materials science and
              processing and ii) x-ray  diffraction (XRD) analysis of thin film SiGeC alloys.
               %%%  In collaboration with the ASU Office of Youth Preparation,  ASU
              undergraduates and graduate students from the Materials  Research Society (MRS)
              and the National Society of Black  Engineers (NSBE) will be organized and
              sponsored to present  science exhibitions to Elementary and High Schools in 
              Phoenix. Students from MRS and NSBE will conduct XRD  demonstrations at the
              local schools and will be able to  control the tool remotely via a Internet
              connection.    A x-ray characterization course is being planned and will be 
              offered at ASU in collaboration with Maricopa Community  College District. 
              This course is on modern XRD analysis  techniques for specimen analysis and it
              will be delivered to  ASU students, Community College students, and local 
              industry.    This unique analysis tool will complement characterization 
              facilities provided by the ASU Center for Solid  State  Science as well as the
              High Resolution X-ray Facility.  This  organizational structure leverages
              facilities and integrates  a number of research and education programs at ASU, 
              including the Alliance for Minority Programs at ASU, the NSF-  funded
              curriculum development grant in the Synthesis and  Processing of Materials, and
              the NSF/University/State Center  for Low Power Electronics.  ***
