Title       : Statistical Problems in Quality Control, Stochastic Systems and Genetic Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1999     
File        : a9704324

Award Number: 9704324
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $255000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tze L. Lai lait@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David O. Siegmund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,9183,9218,BIOT,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Lai and Siegmund  9704324    The investigators develop  a sequential method of
              change-point detection involving algorithms that are  not too demanding in
              computational and memory requirements for on-line implementation and yet are 
              nearly optimal from a statistical viewpoint.  Powerful techniques to tackle
              this problem are derived from recent advances in sequential testing theory and
              boundary crossing problems in random fields.  A closely  related direction of
              research is fixed sample change-point problems and their applications to signal
               detection and gene mapping.  Related fundamental problems in boundary crossing
              probabilities of random  processes and random fields are also investigated and
              lead to definitive solutions of some long-standing  questions concerning the
              distribution of generalized likelihood ratio statistics in change-point models.
               A  third related area of research is estimation and control of time series
              models and stochastic dynamical  systems whose parameters may change with time.
               Although in practice abrupt parameter changes  typically occur very
              infrequently, the unknown times of their occurrence have led to prohibitive 
              complexity of the Bayes estimators and controllers in the literature.  By using
              parallel recursive  algorithms and combining some new ideas in sequential
              change-point detection with empirical Bayes  methodology, these difficulties
              are resolved to obtain asymptotically efficient estimation and control  schemes
              of manageable complexity.      One important objective of this research is the
              development of a powerful statistical methodology for quality control of modern
              industrial processes and for automated fault detection in complex manufacturing
               systems.  Another objective development of  statistical methods appropriate
              for analysis of genetic linkage  data related to disease susceptibility and
              other traits in humans, animals and plants and for extraction of   relevant
              information from these data that may ultimately lead to better diagnostic tests
              and tr eatments of  the disease.  Applications involve the strategic areas of
              manufacturing and biotechnology.
