Title       : Index Theory and K-Theory for Operator Algebras
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  2000     
File        : a9704001

Award Number: 9704001
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Benjamin M. Mann                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1998       
Expires     : April 30,  2001      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $105000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Baum baum@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                    9704001  Baum       This research project centers on a conjecture
              formulated by P.  Baum and A. Connes.  If true, this conjecture gives an answer
              to the  problem of understanding and calculating the K-theory of group 
              C*-algebras.  Validity of the conjecture implies validity for the  Novikov
              conjecture (homotopy invariance of higher signatures), the  stable
              Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg conjecture (necessary and sufficient  conditions for a
              closed Spin manifold to admit a Riemannian metric of  positive scalar
              curvature), and the Kadison-Kaplansky conjecture  (non-existence of idempotents
              in the reduced C*-algebra of a  torsion-free discrete group).  When applied to
              Lie groups, the  conjecture makes precise the Mackey-Wigner analogy between the
               tempered representation theory of a semi-simple Lie group G and the 
              representation theory of the semi-direct product Lie group that  Mackey and
              Wigner associate to G.  Thus the conjecture is unusual in  that it cuts across
              several different areas of mathematics and unifies  a number of problems and
              issues that previously appeared to be  unrelated.       A theme in nineteenth
              and twentieth century mathematics has been  that certain features of
              mathematical systems that at first glance  seem to be analytical (i.e., based
              on methods of calculus such as  differentiation and integration) in fact are
              topological (i.e., depend  only on elementary continuous geometry).  This
              research project  develops this theme within the new context of non-commutative
               geometry.  A conjecture (formulated by P. Baum and A. Connes) will be  studied
              that relates analytic and topological invariants of locally  compact groups. 
              If true, the conjecture will be an underlying  principle revealing an
              unexpected unity in a number of mathematical  problems and issues.  ***
