Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Properties of Quantum Invariants in 3-Dimensional
               Topology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1997     
File        : a9704893

Award Number: 9704893
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65331              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lev Rozansky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704893  Rozansky       An important development in 3d topology of the last
              decade was a  discovery of "quantum invariants," most notably, the Jones
              polynomial  of links and the Reshetikhin-Turaev (RT) invariant of 3-manifolds. 
              Although these invariants are quite effective in classifying knots and 
              3-manifolds, their topological nature remains mostly obscure.  The  purpose of
              this research is to study the topological origin of quantum  invariants by
              decomposing them into simpler pieces, called "finite  type invariants," and
              trying to explain the nature of these pieces  individually.  This might be
              accomplished by using the tools of  quantum field theory, in particular, the
              asymptotic expansion of path  integrals through Feynman diagrams.  E. Witten
              has identified the  Jones polynomial and RT invariant as certain path integrals
              taken over  the classes of SU(2) connections on a 3-manifold.  This approach
              has  already led to a discovery of the Alexander polynomial and Milnor  linking
              numbers inside the Jones polynomial.  The simplest "pieces" of  the RT
              invariant were identified (at least, as a conjecture) with the  Chern-Simons
              invariant of flat connections, Reidemeister torsion and  SU(2) Casson
              invariant.  One hopes that more complicated topological  invariants, such as
              the Casson invariant of other Lie groups, will be  found among other pieces of
              the RT invariant.       A classification of knots is an open topological
              problem.  A knot  in topology is a closed rope (i.e., a circle) which is
              knotted.  Can a  particular knot be untangled by continuously deforming the
              rope  without cutting it?  How can one determine this just by looking at a 
              picture of the knot?  This problem may be solved if one finds enough  knot
              invariants.  A knot invariant is a number that can be calculated  by examining
              a picture of a knot.  The number should not change when a  knot is continuously
              deformed.  Thus if a knot invariant takes  different values on two knots, then
              these knots are different, because  they cannot  be deformed into one another. 
              For a long time the only  effective knot invariant was the Alexander
              polynomial.  A lot of new  invariants, such as the Jones polynomial, were
              discovered during the  last decade.  These invariants are quite effective in
              distinguishing  knots, but their origin is still a mystery, because their
              topological  interpretation is mostly missing.  The purpose of this project is
              to  try to fill this gap by using the tools of quantum field theory, such  as
              path integral and Feynman diagrams.  The relevance of quantum field  theory to
              low dimensional topology was discovered by E. Witten.  He  demonstrated that
              the Jones polynomial comes from a particle theory in  which knots appear as
              space-time trajectories of hypothetical  elementary particles.  The particles
              interact with each other in ways  that resemble the "real life" particles. 
              This approach has yielded  numerous mathematical conjectures that may lead to a
              better  understanding of the topological nature of the Jones polynomial and 
              ultimately to the classification of knots.  ***
