Title       : International Research Fellow Awards: Population and Community Structure of
               Grassland Birds on Wintering Grounds in Northern Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 14,  1997  
File        : a9704253

Award Number: 9704253
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50945              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Desmond   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510602   Ecosystem Dynamics                      
Program Ref : 0000,5922,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704253  Desmond      The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables 
              U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty  four months of
              research abroad. The program's awards provide  opportunities for joint
              research, and the use of unique or  complementary facilities, expertise and
              experimental  conditions abroad.    This award will support a twenty-four-month
              postdoctoral  research visit by Dr. Martha J. Desmond to work with  Professor
              Alberto Lafon Terrazas at the Universidad Autonoma  de Chihuahua in Chihuahua,
              Mexico.  The U.S.-Mexico Program  will provide 50% of the funding for this
              project.    Desmond proposes to examine populations and community  assemblages
              of grassland birds on wintering ground in  Northern Mexico.  She will look at
              data on life-history  characteristics which are unknown for many grassland
              birds  in winter habitats.  This is essential to understand how  these migrants
              are adapted to use habitats.  She will test  hypotheses related to differential
              migration due to  morphological size variation between sexes and inter-sexual 
              and age class competition for resources.  Many of these  species are showing
              significant population declines.  This  research will specifically examine the
              influence grazing by  domestic and native herbivores on habitat use by
              grassland-  adapted birds and test hypotheses related to habitat use and 
              community structure.  Information on the basic life history  characteristics on
              winter grounds is essential for  understanding community dynamics and
              evaluating potential  threats to these populations.    ***
