Title       : Phase Transformations in Rare-Earth Metals and Alloys Subjected to Ultra High
               Pressures and Synthetic Diamond Anvils
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  2001  
File        : a9704428

Award Number: 9704428
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : December 31,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $355015             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yogesh K. Vohra ykvohra@uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1771,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704428  Vohra    The research investigates phase transformations in rare- 
              earth metals and alloys subjected to megabar pressures and  develops the
              scientific base necessary to fabricate gem  quality diamond anvils by chemical
              vapor deposition  techniques  (CVD).  The experimental investigations are 
              carried out at the High Pressure and CVD Laboratory at the  University of
              Alabama at Birmingham (UAB) and the National  High Pressure beamlines at CHESS,
              Cornell University and  NSLS, at Brookhaven National Laboratory.  The focus of
              this  study is to establish phase diagrams for selected prototype  rare-earth
              metals and alloys in the megabar regime (100-400  Gpa).  The focus is on heavy
              rare-earth metals, lutetium and  ytterbium, where phase transitions and
              dramatic changes in  electronic structure and valence are expected at ultra
              high  pressures.  Pressure also causes delocalization of the f-  shell giving
              rise to "collapsed - low symmetry crystal  structures." A high resolution image
              plate x-ray diffraction  technique is employed in conjunction with a
              synchrotron  source to investigate low symmetry crystal structures as  well as
              the phenomenon of crystal grain growth discovered  recently in rare-earth
              metals. Also examined is a  related  transition metal, yttrium, which is
              expected to simulate  rare-earth behavior at high pressures, and recently has
              been  predicted to transform to the bcc structure at 280 Gpa.  The  measured
              phase boundaries and pressure-volume (P-V)  relationships provide stringent
              tests for various models of  f-delocalization under pressure.  A second
              direction in the  research is on fundamental studies on CVD diamond growth for 
              fabrication of synthetic diamonds with low levels of  nitrogen impurity for
              applications in diamond anvil cell  devices,  In addition, high pressure
              materials research  facilities supported by this grant are employed in research
               experiences for undergraduates (REU) projects during the  summer and for
              undergraduates in the Alabama Alliance for  Minori ty Participation (AMP)
              Program at UAB.  %%%  This research has the potential for making significant 
              contributions to the understanding of the structural and  electronic properties
              of rare-earth materials.  The research  on diamond has broad technological
              applications if  successful.  ***
