Title       : Computer-intensive Methods for the Statistical Analysis of Dependent Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1997      
File        : a9704487

Award Number: 9704487
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William B. Smith                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $88154              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph P. Romano romano@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9148,9197,9218,EGCH,HPCC,MANU,
Abstract    :
                Romano  9704487       This project involves the on-going development of
              resampling and subsampling as they apply to dependent data, i.e., time series,
              random fields, and (marked) point processes. The investigator's efforts are
              directed towards: (a) relaxing the conditions for asymptotic validity of
              computer-intensive methods for  dependent data (e.g., allow for 
              nonstationarity, slow mixing rate, etc.); (b) rendering  subsampling more
              `automatic' by devising a built-in procedure for estimation of the rate of
              convergence of the statistic in  question; (c) improving the accuracy of
              distribution estimation by techniques such as Richardson  extrapolation, and by
              optimal choice of block size; (d) developing appropriate resampling/subsampling
               methods in the case of alternative data-collection scenarios (e.g. in the case
              of measurements at irregularly spaced locations, i.e., data from a marked point
              process; and (e) exploring the idea of `local' resampling    for time series.  
               This project involves the development of computer-intensive methods of
              statistical inference for the  analysis of  dependent data without having to
              rely on unrealistic or unverifiable model assumptions.  The  statistical
              analysis of dependent data is vital in many diverse scientific disciplines;
              thus this research has potentially many practical applications. For example,
              consider the problem of stochastic computer  simulation of complex
              Manufacturing Systems that is an important issue in Industrial Engineering; the
              methodology of subsampling for `almost' stationary time series is most helpful
              in order to assess  convergence and accuracy of the simulation. For another
              example, suppose that X(t) denotes  an  environmental measurement, e.g.  rain
              precipitation or ozone concentration  as measured at location t.   Typically,
              the t-points where X(t)  is measured are irregularly scattered in space or on
              the earth's surface.   The development of a general methodology for statistical
              inference involving data of this type is a  signif icant contribution in
              spatial statistics and, in particular, studies involving environmental data.
