Title       : Topics in Discrete Geometry: Packing and Covering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 27,  1999   
File        : a9704319

Award Number: 9704319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : October 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35084              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wlodzimierz Kuperberg kuperwl@math.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andras Bezdek  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The two investigators propose to continue their study of packing and covering of
              space with congruent replicas of a convex body, including the analytical and
              the combinatorial aspects of the topics. In their previous work, they obtained
              many results in dimension 2, and some in dimension 3 and higher. The proposed
              research concentrates on the covering problems in dimensions 3 and, whenever
              feasible, in higher dimensions. The common thread linking the various problems
              is the sphere covering conjecture in 3 dimensions. The following topics are the
              main subjects of the proposed investigation:  covering space with parallel
              strings of spheres; covering space with congruent circular cylinders of
              infinite length; circle covering (of the plane) with a margin; stability
              properties of sphere coverings.  The topics mentioned above belong to the area
              of discrete geometry, and some of them, especially those dealing with lattice
              arrangements, are related to the geometry of numbers. The problems addressed by
              the investigators have an intuitive flavor and a natural motivation. For
              instance, the sphere covering problem can be interpreted as searching for the
              most economical distribution of transmission stations whose ranges are
              spherical and of equal sizes to cover the whole space, i.e. so that every point
              is within reach of at least one of the stations. Whenever it is discovered that
              a certain optimality condition (e.g. minimum density, as in the example of
              transmission stations distribution) of an arrangement of figures or solids
              implies some regularity of the arrangement, a powerful tool is provided for
              computational geometry. Results of this type give a theoretical foundation for
              finding efficient computational algorithms. The investigators propose to
              increase their contributions to this important and difficult area of research.
