Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Instabilities and Bifurcations in Non-Newtonian Shear
               Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 30,  1997      
File        : a9704622

Award Number: 9704622
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Olagunju Olagunju@math.udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              PI: David O. Olagunju   Proposal DMS-9704622       INSTABILITIES AND
              BIFURCATIONS IN NON-NEWTONIAN SHEAR FLOWS           ABSTRACT    In this project
              we shall undertake the analysis of instabilities and  bifurcations in flows of
              non-Newtonian (or viscoelastic)  fluids.  Particular emphasis will be paid to
              three dimensional shear flows.  Among the issues that will be investigated are:
               (a) the mechanism(s)  that cause instabilities in viscoelastic flows (b) what
              rheological and  hydrodynamical factors are responsible for the instabilities
              and (c)  the nature of bifurcations that occur once instability has set in. Of 
              great interest will be to asses the role of rheological factors such  as  first
              and second normal stress differences,  and shear thinning in  the onset and
              development of instabilities. The importance of  hydrodynamical and geometrical
              factors like inertia, surface tension  and aspect ratios will also be
              investigated.  To this end we shall  consider shear flows in different
              geometries and will employ a number  of different constitutive models such as 
              the Oldroyd--B, Phan--Thien  Tanner, Johnson Segalman and the Giesekus models.
              The results of our  analysis will be compared with available experimental
              results. In  addition to providing qualitative as well as quantitative results
              on  instabilities and bifurcations our results will also provide valuable 
              information on how well different constitutive models describe not only  simple
              shear flows but complex flows as well.    Non--Newtonian (or viscoelastic)
              fluids which are the subject of this  project include materials used in a wide
              ranging number of industrial  and scientific applications.  Examples are
              polymers (used in the  plastic industry), paints, industrial inks, suspensions,
              emulsions and  biological fluids.  The nature and behavior of these fluids can
              be  radically different from ordinary fluids such as water (Newtonian  fluids)
              with which we are much more familiar. During industrial  processing and
              scientific experiments thes e fluids are subjected to  shearing motions. For
              example in order to determine the properties of  new materials they are placed
              in instruments called rheometers and  sheared. Data obtained from the
              subsequent motion are then used in  determining the relevant material
              properties. It is known from  applications and experiments that when
              viscoelastic fluids undergo  shearing the nature of the flow may change
              drastically in ways that may  lead to unpredictable results. These drastic
              changes are termed  instabilities. Because these instabilities can have
              undesirable as well  as unexpected consequences during industrial processing
              with great  economic implications,  it is important for us to understand the 
              factors that cause and sustain them.  Such an understanding will  provide a
              means  of predicting when such instabilities will occur and  what the effect
              will be on the flow when they occur. This will enable  us to set parameters
              during experiments and industrial processing so  that instabilities can be
              prevented. In this project we will try to  provide answers to these and other
              related issues by studying and  analyzing mathematical equations that describe
              the flow of viscoelastic  fluids.  This work will be an important contribution
              to the Federal  Government's strategic initiatives in the areas of materials
              and  manufacturing.
