Title       : Research on Applied Nonlinear Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1997      
File        : a9704325

Award Number: 9704325
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Victor Roytburd roytbv@rpi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rensselaer Polytech Inst
	      110 8th Street
	      Troy, NY  121803522    518/276-6000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704325  Roytburd    The proposed investigations address two areas of applied
              mathematics that   are both related  to nonlinear wave propagation. One topic
              concerns the   study of a class of free boundary (free interface) problems
              which arise   naturally as simplified conceptual models of gasless combustion
              and fast   solidification. These free boundary problems demonstrate an amazing 
               variety of dynamical patterns that are essentially low-dimensional. The  
              qualitative behavior of these model problems will be investigated both   
              analytically and numerically. The principal focus will be on propagation in  
              two spatial dimensions. Another topic is drawn from the field of nonlinear  
              optics. It concerns the model laser dynamics which is described by the  
              Maxwell-Bloch system of partial differential equations. The main thrust of  
              the proposed research will be at establishing well-posedness for the  
              Maxwell-Bloch equations with detuning and broadening, evaluation of the  
              attractor dimension, and the rigorous study of the homoclinic chaos. A  
              numerical investigation of laser turbulence is also planned.    The proposed
              research is motivated by technological applications. One   immediately related
              technological process is the self-propagating high   temperature synthesis
              (SHS). The SHS process is currently being   investigated as a new method of
              manufacturing certain ceramic and metallic   alloys. The idea of the process is
              to combine the powdered ingredients and   bake them into the desired product by
              sending a flame wave through the   sample. The SHS process has a number of
              advantages over the traditional   manufacturing methods in which the mixture is
              baked in a furnace: more   uniform and pure products, shorter synthesis times,
              use of simpler and   cheaper equipment etc. The source of the second proposed
              research topic   lies in laser optics, namely basic dynamics of gaseous lasers
              that find a wide   variety of applications. The goal of the proposed
              mathematical    investigations is twofold.  On one hand, through the study of
              special extreme   regimes which are undesirable in technological applications,
              we propose to   develop simplified diagnostic tools that will allow to predict
              and avoid these   undesirable (chaotic) regimes. On the other hand, the study
              of the extreme   regimes will further the better understanding of  basic
              mechanisms that   govern the technological regimes and therefore will promote
              their better   control and utilization. The research will be conducted through
              a   combination of analytical methods and computer simulations. The analysis  
              will help to delineate crucial regimes and their logical structure, while the  
              simulations will uncover details which are not amenable to analytical   methods
              and, in their own turn, can lead to important mathematical   developments.
