Title       : Applications and Theory of Controlling Symbol Dynamics: Communicating with Chaos
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9704639

Award Number: 9704639
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49230              (Estimated)
Investigator: Erik M. Bollt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : US Military Academy
	      
	      West Point, NY  10996    914/938-4041

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9704639  Bollt    This project addresses problems in controlling chaos and
              controlling symbol   dynamics with small perturbations.  Recent work has
              demonstrated the   utilization of symbolic dynamics representation of
              controlled chaotic orbits   for communications with chaotic signal generators.
              The evolution of   trajectories of a chaotic dynamical system is  equivalent to
              symbolic   dynamics in an appropriate symbol space.  The recent advent of
              controlling   chaos using the OGY (Ott, Grebogi, and Yorke) technique and a
              variety of   targeting algorithms, with physical applications, has demonstrated
              that   chaos can be mastered, and inherent instabilities can be used as an  
              advantage in allowing small deliberate perturbations to cause large signal  
              variations. Coupling control of chaos through small perturbations with  
              learning the grammar of the corresponding symbol dynamics means that the  
              control perturbations are actually a coding scheme on the original dynamics.   
              Controlling symbol dynamics using a map based description of the   dynamics 
              requires resolution of the following issues: learning the response   of map
              iterates to variations in the control parameters, learning the semi- 
              conjugacy, or coding function, between the dynamics of the map on the  
              attractor and the grammar of the corresponding symbol dynamics, and   finding
              the minimal grammar which is dependent on the appropriate choice   of  the
              partition in phase space. In particular, extensions include on-going   work on
              communicating in higher dimensional dynamical systems.     Investigations
              include issues of practical noisy environment control versus   bandwidth
              trade-off and issues of ergodicity,  learning system response to   controls,
              and symbol dynamics of a chaotic dynamical system which is   known only by
              time-series embedding of experimental data, and the further   development of
              practical grammar learning algorithms.    This new field of nonlinear
              communication theory promises to develop into   a  new paradigm offe ring a 
              general information transmission technique,   useful to both electronic and
              optical media, which should find wide   applications in civil and military 
              communications infrastructures.  A great   deal of recent research in applied
              and theoretical dynamical systems has   been focused on taking advantage of the
              fact that a chaotic dynamical   system can be controlled.  The sensitive
              dependence characteristic of chaos   is actually advantageous to building a
              highly agile control system in which   a small  deliberate system variations
              can cause a large response; the so   called ``butterfly effect" allows us to
              steer the system responses with   extremely small powered controls.  Ergodic
              theory tells us that a chaotic   system can be considered as an unlimited
              information source; and control of   chaos allows us to manipulate this
              information flow with extremely  low-powered controls.   An example application
              is  a high-powered signal   generator (e.g. an electronic circuit), which
              operates intentionally in the   chaotic regime, so that a small-scaled
              piggy-back controller circuit,  on the   micro-chip scale, has the ability to
              accurately manipulate high-powered   message bearing signals. This method is in
              contrast to standard linear   communication techniques, in which a high powered
              electronic circuit   requires an equally large-scaled switching device to
              affect the large power   variations required to transmit a high powered
              message.  Not only is   communicating through control of chaos applicable to
              one-dimensional   dynamics, as previously demonstrated, but also applies to the
              more widely   typical class of higher dimensional chaotic dynamics found in
              nature.    Communicating by control of chaos promises numerous practical  
              applications including the engineering of new and simple electronic  
              communications devices, and new and simple optical communications   devices, as
              well as the modeling of phenomenon in biology, chemistry, and   cognitive
              science.
