Title       : Neutron and X-Ray Scattering Studies of Quantum Magnets, With and Without
               Disorder
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1999        
File        : a9704532

Award Number: 9704532
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Birgeneau robertjb@MIT.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9704532  Birgeneau    In   this   project,  we  will  carry  out  a 
              comprehensive  experimental study of three classes of materials (a) one and 
              two-dimensional quantum magnets, (b) Sr- and excess - Oxygen  doped  La2CuO4
              high temperature superconductors,  (c)  model  crystalline   insulating  
              magnets   which   are   extremely  disordered at the microscopic level. 
              Problems (a)  and  (b)  have  evolved  into distinct, but closely related 
              areas  of  research.  For the copper oxides our understanding  of  both  the 
              normal  and  superconducting states is still  far  from  complete.   Research 
              in the copper oxides  has  produced  a  renaissance  in  studies of
              low-dimensional quantum  magnets  revealing  subleties which were barely
              suspected  until  the  recent past.  For the diordered magnets new issues
              connected  with   history  dependence  and  irreproducibility  of   the 
              properties arise which require an extension of our  existing  understanding of
              equilibrium properties of materials.  These  systems  will  be  studied  using 
              both  neutron  and  x-ray  scattering techniques.  %%%  There  is a remarkable
              variety of materials in Nature  which  exhibit properties as varied as
              magnetism, superconductivity  and  semiconducting  electronic  behavior.   Some
               of  these  materials such as the semiconductors Si or Ga As as well  as 
              simple  metals such as Al or Cu are by now well  understood.  There   are,  
              however,  many  materials  such  as   ceramic  superconductors   or  magnetic 
              alloys  which   are   barely  understood  at all.  In this research program, 
              our  general  strategy  is to look at these materials at the atomic  level 
              using  specialized  techniques known as  neutron  and  x-ray  scattering and to
              see how the properties evolve as one  goes  from the microscopic to the
              macroscopic level.  Our goal  is  thereby to elucidate the fundamental physics
              which underlies  these materials.  ***
