Title       : Conformal Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1997     
File        : a9704368

Award Number: 9704368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory Swiatek swiatek@math.psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Summary:  The project concentrates on two problems, one in real conformal
              dynamics and one in complex.  The real part is about poly-modal mappings of the
              interval, i.e., smooth maps of the interval with finitely many turning points;
              a map with only one turning point is a  unimodal transformation.  Here the goal
              of the proposal can be very simply summarized:  what can be carried ovep from
              the unimodal theory, so successful in the last five years, to the poly-modal
              case?  The complex problem is about Siegel disks.  Siegel disks are sub-domains
              of a complex dynamical system, usually a rational map, where the dynamics can
              be brought to a linear rotation by a holomorphic change of coordinates.  A lot
              of mystery has surrounded the boundaries of Siegel disks.  First insights were
              gained only in the mid-eighties with the work of M. Herman.  The project
              proposes to refine some of the analytic tools used in his work to get more
              information.  Finally, some research is proposed in areas that do not belong to
              conformal dynamics, namely induced hyperbolicity in two-dimensional systems and
              combinatorial optimization viewed as an applied  problem in a very
              high-dimensional setting.  Unlike the rather conservative goals set in the
              first two problems, these should be termed exploratory research.     The
              proposal is concerned mostly with one-dimensional dynamical systems.  Such
              systems generally come from models which describe time changes of an observable
              parameter.  Year-to-year changes in a single animal population lead to this
              type of system, provided one assumes that the population in the next year is
              determined by the current-year count and no other factors.  Some examples that
              will be studied, notably the logistic family, grew from models of interest in 
              diverse areas including physics, ecmnomics and ecology.  The questions that the
              proposal addresses, when translated back to these models, are related to the
              long-term behavior and stability of such systems.  For example: will the
              population tend to a long-t erm equilibrium?  The proposal is also concerned
              with the problem of combinatorial optimization.  Practical problems such as the
              "traveling salesman" problem are believed by many experts to be intractable if
              one insists on the exact solution.  The proposal will examine a new approach
              based on the ideas of thermodynamics with the goal of getting high-performance
              approximate solutions.
