Title       : Issues in the Foundations of Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1997      
File        : a9704918

Award Number: 9704918
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alvin I. Thaler                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harvey M. Friedman friedman@math.ohio-state.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1268      FOUNDATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Friedman proposes to continue his work establishing the independence from the
              usual axioms of mathematics (i.e., Zermelo-Frankel set theory with the axiom of
              choice) of some simple and basic finite combinatorial statements.  Recent work
              of the PI discusses versions that assert that in every collection of finite
              functions satisfying a certain coherence condition, some element has a very
              strong combinatorial property related to Ramsey theory.  He proposes to relate
              these examples to the fast growing numerical functions associated with the
              relevant large cardinal axioms.  In addition, he has discovered a family of
              transfer principles which establish a  new kind of formal relationship between
              finite set theory and transfinite set theory. In particular, he has shown that
              certain large cardinal axioms are equivalent to transfer principles asserting
              that any statement of a simple kind that is true about the functions on the
              natural numbers is true about the functions on the ordinals. The PI proposes to
              extend this work to stronger large cardinal axioms, and also to formulate and
              investigate related transfer principles from the hereditarily finite sets to
              arbitrary sets.  An independent statement is a mathematical assertion which
              cannot be proved true or false within the usual axioms for mathematics. The
              previously known independent statements have certain unsatisfactory features
              which make them very  atypical of normal everyday mathematical assertions.
              Friedman has discovered some examples which are much closer to normal
              mathematics in terms of both concreteness and naturality and proposes to
              continue the search for more concrete and natural examples. His examples also
              have the positive feature that the assertions can be proved using certain well
              studied new axioms for mathematics (so called large cardinal axioms), but not
              otherwise. The PI also has established an entirely new way in which these new
              axioms arise - they can be thought of as the natural extension of known facts
              in the context of the inte gers. He proposes to extend this new way of looking
              at these new axioms for mathematics to yet stronger new axioms for mathematics.
