Title       : Non-Stationary Models for Spatial Statistics and Bayesian Image Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1999      
File        : a9704425

Award Number: 9704425
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Higdon   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,9189,9197,BIOT,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              NSF DMS-9704425    Non-Stationary Models for Spatial Statistics and Bayesian
              Image   Analysis.    David Higdon  Duke University              Abstract:  This
              research develops anisotropic spatial  models for fully Bayesian inference with
              applications   to data which are correlated over space and time.  Two  
              distinct directions are taken.  First, in continuation of   previous research,
              Markov random field priors for lattices   are considered for modeling processes
              with occasional large   shifts in level.  Second, using a constructive
              convolution   approach, continuous models are developed that allow  
              non-stationarity and correlation structure that can vary over   space (and/or
              time).  Using such models for inference requires   that one account for
              uncertainty about just how flexible or  varying such models are.  A key part of
              the research is  developing methods which incorporate this source of
              uncertainty  in the statistical analysis.    Statistical modeling of phenomena
              that evolve over space and  possibly time is critical in areas such as medical
              imaging,  environmental monitoring, and detecting changes over time in  global
              climate.  Most spatial models in statistics assume that  over a given area, the
              underlying properties of a spatial (and  possibly temporal as well) pattern
              remain unchanged over the  region.  Though this is a useful simplification over
              limited  regions, on a larger scale such an assumption often results   in an
              unsatisfactory model.  This research will develop  statistical models that
              account for abrupt changes in the  nature of the spatial phenomenon.  Also,
              models will be   developed that allow properties of the spatial process to 
              evolve over spatial location.  This research will lead to  more realistic
              models for large scale spatial and spatio-temporal   phenomena.  Fitting these
              models to large datasets will require a   substantial computing effort and will
              likely rely high performance   computing resources.  Applications in global
              ocean climate change,   agriculture,  genetics, and medical imaging will be
              considered.
