Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Equivariant Bordism and Formal Group Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1997    
File        : a9704437

Award Number: 9704437
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1997     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $38000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry Sadofsky sadofsky@math.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704437  Sadofsky       Recall Quillen's theorem that the formal group law over
              the ring  of complex cobordism classes of manifolds induced by the 
              multiplication on infinite complex projective space is isomorphic in a  natural
              way to the Lazard's universal formal group law.  Complex  cobordism occupies a
              central place in stable homotopy theory, in part  due to the Nilpotence and
              Periodicity theorems of Hopkins, Devinatz  and Smith.  Quillen's theorem is of
              fundamental use, as it allows one  to use techniques from the study of formal
              groups to produce, and  calculate with, various cohomology theories based on
              complex  cobordism.  A problem of longstanding importance in equivariant theory
               is to understand complex cobordism classes of G-manifolds (where G is  some
              Lie group).  This research will explore this question from the  point of view
              of formal group laws.  The goal is to use the methods  from Quillen's paper in
              the Advances to get a handle on equivariant  complex cobordism, and to link
              this with the notion of equivariant  formal group laws, preliminaries of which
              are set forth in Mike Cole's  University of Chicago thesis.       When is the
              set of positions of some mechanical system the  boundary of the set of
              positions of some other mechanical system?  As  a simple example, think of the
              circle around some point in the plane  as being the set of positions of a
              pendulum.  This is the boundary of  the set of positions of a pendulum of the
              same length, but with a  joint halfway along the rod joining the bob to the
              center (said joint  able to bend from 0 to 180 degrees).  This set of positions
              describes  a disk.  This question has a very beautiful and elegant answer in 
              terms of the algebraic topology of the manifold, given by the Fields  medal
              winning work of Rene Thom in the 1950s.  In certain cases, the  answer to this
              question turns out to be related to "formal group  laws," a class of algebraic
              rules for adding two quantities, with  properties similar to, but not
              identicial to ordinary add ition.  This  research is directed at answering our
              original question when, in  addition, it is required that the set of positions
              of the mechanical  system be the boundary of the set of positions of some other
               mechanical system in a way that respects some symmetries of the  original
              system.  Some of this is already known in principle in simple  cases, but
              formal group laws with additional symmetries will provide a  framework for the
              answer and may allow extensions beyond special  cases.  ***
