Title       : Nonlinear Waves and Stability in Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a9704924

Award Number: 9704924
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Henry A. Warchall                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $120054             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert L. Pego rpego@Glue.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704924    Pego    Nonlinearity helps to create wave phenomena in a variety of
              important  systems of partial differential equations that arise in science and 
              engineering. The focus of the proposed research is on developing and  improving
              methods for analyzing the stability of waves in several  systems of physical
              interest. These include 1) Solitary waves in  nonlinear dispersive media,
              including lattice dynamics and water waves;  2) A recently discovered class of
              localized nonradial solutions of  nonlinear Schrodinger equations in 2+1
              dimensions; and 3) Internal waves  in fluids near the liquid-vapor critical
              point.  The methods under  development involve improving the use of: a) Evans
              functions to analyze  eigenvalue problems in two dimensions with symmetries; b)
              singular  perturbation theory for resolvent operators, to study how stability 
              results for integrable systems persist in nonintegrable systems for  lattice
              dynamics and water waves; c) infinite-dimensional center  manifold theory in
              ill-posed systems, to study the existence of  traveling water waves in three
              dimensions; d) zero-Mach-number  asymptotic analysis of low-velocity flows, to
              study hydrodynamic  phenomena near the critical point, specifically: damping
              rates of  internal waves about a strongly stratified equilibrium, and possible 
              capillary effects in one-phase flows of near-critical fluids.    The general
              goal of the first part of this research is to understand how  "robust" are
              nonlinear wave phenomena. Nonlinear waves in rare,  so-called "integrable"
              systems can be very well understood due to what  seems miraculous -- they can
              be solved in closed form. But most  realistic systems are not integrable, so
              one needs to know what  phenomena depend on integrability and what do not. An
              important  infrastructural technology where nonlinear waves are important and
              are  not completely understood is long-distance communication via optical 
              fiber. The second part of the work was motivated by physics experiments 
              carried out on the spa ce shuttle; also, the use of supercritical fluids  in
              materials processing is extensive and growing. The behavior of flows  of such
              fluids near the critical point is unusual and little understood,  and this has
              led to costly failures in experimental design in the past.  Fundamental
              investigations are needed to build the knowledge base about  such flows that
              can serve as the foundation for the development of  applications.
