Title       : SBIR PHASE II: A Global Multi-Grid General Minimal Residual(GMRES) Scheme for an
               Adaptive Cartesian/Prism Flow Solver on Distributed Memory Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9704186

Award Number: 9704186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: G. Patrick Johnson                      
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Z.J. Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CFD Research Corporation
	      215 Wynn Drive, 5th Floor
	      Huntsville, AL  35805    205/536-6576

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 1266,9139,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a
              Parallel Computing System (PCS) for an adaptive Cartesian/prism generalized
              minimal residual (GMRES)/multi-grid flow solver.  The system will include the
              following modules: Performance Monitor, Domain Decompositioner, GMRES/MultiGrid
              Flow Solver, Dynamic Load Balancer, and Parallel Flow Visualizer.  The
              Performance Monitor can display the convergence of the flow simulation and
              loads on each processor and if necessary launch the Dynamic Load Balancer.  The
              Domain Decompositioner and Parallel Flow Solver will be generalized and
              extended to three-dimensions in Phase II.  For a cluster of workstations with
              constantly changing computational loads on each computer, a Dynamic Load
              Balancer will be developed to balance the loads on all computers in user
              defined time intervals. The company's commercial flow visualizer, CFD-VIEW,
              will be adapted for distributed memory machines to post-process the massive
              simulation data produced by the parallel flow solver.  A Message Passing
              Interface (MPI) will be utilized to provide data communications between
              different modules and flow solvers.  The PCS will run on both parallel
              computers and a cluster of workstations.  The overall system will integrate
              grid generation/domain decomposition, flow simulation, load balancing and flow
              visualization into a single user-friendly parallel computing environment to
              achieve automation, accuracy and efficiency for flow simulation.  Through this
              technology, significant cost reduction in CFD simulation will be possible.  A
              successful Phase II should yield a product which will be very competitive in
              the current CFD software market because of its automation, efficiency and
              parallel computation capability.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
