Title       : Charge Transport, Injection and Degradation in Electroluminescent Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1997     
File        : a9704177

Award Number: 9704177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: LaVerne D. Hess                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  1997        
Expires     : April 30,  2000      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue A. Carter sacarter@cats.ucsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Cruz
	      1156 High Street
	      Santa Cruz, CA  950641077    408/429-0111

NSF Program : 1715      METALS, CERAMICS, & ELEC MATRS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1775,9165,AMPP,
Abstract    :
               9704177 Carter This GOALI proposal addresses basic materials science issues in
              a collaborative program between the University of California at Santa Cruz/UCSC
              and IBM/Almaden to understand basic phenomena associated with charge transport,
              injection and degradation in electroluminescent polymer devices. Research at
              UCSC will involve polymer LED fabrication, characterization of the electronic
              and optical properties of the electrodes and polymeric materials, measuring
              changes in the E-field dependent and T-dependent transport and luminance, and
              visualization of changes in device interfaces during operation via confocal
              microscopy, scanning probe microscopies, and XAFS. Active participation by the
              PI and her students at IBM will involve synthesizing polymer materials, making
              diodes, I-V, luminance characterization, lifetime testing and interface studies
              using AFM, ESCA, Auger, FTIR, SEM and RBS. The proposed research emphasizes
              understanding of fundamental mechanisms and processes along with practical
              aspects of electronic/photonic materials technology. The project is supported
              by the DMR/EM and the ECS/PFET programs, and by the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA). %%% The project addresses materials science
              and engineering research issues in a topical area of materials science having
              high technological relevance.  The research will contribute basic materials
              science knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of
              electronic/photonic devices.  Additionally, the fundamental knowledge and
              understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute to improving
              the performance of advanced photonic devices by providing a fundamental
              understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials.  An
              important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
              through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
              significant area. ***
