Title       : Applied Mathematics, Modeling, and Experimental and Computational Analysis of
               Liquid Crystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 14,  2000      
File        : a9704714

Award Number: 9704714
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria-Carme Calderer   (Principal Investigator current)
              Wenwu Cao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Simon J. Tavener  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Calderer  9704714  This project being jointly funded by the Office of
              Multidisciplinary  Activities and by the Division of Mathematical Sciences of
              the Directorate  for Mathematical & Physical Sciences and also by the Division
              of Civil  and Mechanical Systems of the Directorate for Engineering.  The
              proposed research addresses and combines mathematical and computational  
              issues in the study of  "liquid crystals" and "ferroic materials", both   
              solids and  fluids, within the context of industrial applications.    One
              underlying theme of this proposal is to develop an understanding of static  
              and flow patterns observed in liquid crystals and ferroic materials in the  
              presence of external fields. (For instance, in dealing with ferroic solids, a  
              goal is to achieve lower critical values of  coercive fields in order to curb  
              dissipation;  in ferroelectric liquid crystals one also seeks to increase  
              device switching speed.) While the occurrence   of "texture" and "defects"
              tends to hinder the outcome of  structural manufacturing processes,  it may
              also bring out desirable  features in optic applications, such as improvement
              of the accuracy   and display memory of the devices. Within this framework, one
              can   formulate a relevant common problem in terms of the control of  texture
              and defects in solid and liquid crystal systems, with either   the intent to
              enhance such structures or to eliminate them. It is the   goal of this research
              team to contribute towards the understanding  of such questions by exploring a
              broad spectrum of methods and   techniques:  modeling, mathematical,
              computational and   experimental in liquid crystal and ferroic systems as a
              whole.   It is planned to revise and, perhaps, unify some of the available
              descriptions   so that the ferroelectric nature can be understood in a more
              universal  manner. Such a study could  ultimately suggest  a way of designing
              new and   better ferroelectric materials (solids and/or liquid crystals) with  
              "large polarization" and  "small coerci ve fields".  This  proposal also
              addresses  aspects of (non-Newtonian) liquid crystal   flow such as defects and
              instabilities of various regimes.  Special   attention will be devoted to the
              analysis of processing flows  of thin films as well as to the study of 
              free-boundary problems.  Results from singularity and bifurcation theory, and
              an appreciation   of the role played by symmetry, have been integrated within
              the   finite-element technique to establish the fundamental instability  
              mechanisms of a number of classical Newtonian flows.    These numerical
              techniques are now mature enough to apply to the study   of more
              technologically important flows with more complex physics and   multiple
              parameters.    The proposed research deals with mathematical and computational 
              modeling of "liquid crystals" and "ferroic materials" (both, solids  and
              liquids), within the context of their industrial applications.  In  dealing
              with liquid crystals we intend to construct and analyze  mathematical models of
              "smart display devices", involving  ferroelectric systems as well as
              composites. The main goal is to  preserve good optical resolution with
              increasing display sizes, and  achieve low switching values of electricor
              magnetic fields. As part of  our research plan, we intend to draw already
              existing  mathematical  and physical information from the field of ferroic
              solids, in order to   help us in the studies of ferroelectric liquid crystals.
              In turn, the ordering   properties and larger degrees of freedom of liquid
              molecules may  provide good feedback for improving the modeling and design of 
              ferroelectric "sensors" and "transducers", with the special aim  towards
              miniaturization of such devices. One of the main issues of   our research is to
              study how to use  polymeric liquid crystal  materials to design typically solid
              devices. (The former materials are  often cheaper to manufacture and to
              activate). From a different point  of view,  mathematical problems in flow
              modeling  of ferroelectric liquids  arise  in the manufacturing processes of
              such  materials, and bring a whole new class of mathematical questions that 
              relate to those that traditionally arise in  studies of Newtonian  fluid flow.
              Overall, we intend to bring together independent fields of  research and carry
              out a transfer of mathematical and   computational methods among them based on 
              exploiting physical and   phenomenological analogies.
