Title       : Minimal Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1997     
File        : a9704558

Award Number: 9704558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerard A. Venema                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 15,  1997      
Expires     : May 31,  2000        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71379              (Estimated)
Investigator: Krystyna M. Kuperberg kuperkm@auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 1265      GEOMETRIC ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                Abstract:  The P.I. intends to continue her previous work that resulted in a
              real analytic counterexample to the Seifert Conjecture. The flexibility of the
              constructions introduced by the P.I. and further developed in a joint work with
              Greg Kuperberg allows the expansion of the already large list of smooth
              aperiodic flows on the 3-dimensional sphere. The P.I. plans to investigate
              various properties of dynamical systems without compact leaves in dimension 3
              and higher as well as higher-dimensional foliations, and the minimal sets of
              such foliations. Is is still not known whether or not there is a flow on the
              3-dimensional sphere with every orbit dense, although there are partial
              results.  The assertion that there is no such flow is known as the Gottschalk
              Conjecture. The P.I. expects to answer some of the questions concerning the
              existence of minimal flows on the 3-sphere.     "According to the hairy ball
              theorem, it is impossible to smooth down all the hairs on a hairy ball.  ... 
              This theorem explains why, for example, at any instant somewhere on Earth the
              horizontal wind speed is zero.  Although the hairy ball theorem was proved long
              ago, its higher dimensional cousins have resisted attack. The most notorious is
              the Seifert Conjecture, a question asked in 1950 by Herbert Seifert of the
              University of Heidelberg.   ...  The surprising answer, just announced by
              Krystyna Kuperberg of Auburn University  ...  destined to change the face of
              higher-dimensional dynamics."  Hairy Balls in Higher Dimensions, by Ian
              Stewart, New Scientist, 23 November 1993, page 18.  Seifert proved that under
              certain conditions a non-singular vector field on the 3-dimensional sphere has
              a periodic orbit. The statement that there are no aperiodic vector fields on
              the 3-sphere, the Seifert Conjecture, remained unsolved until a 1974
              counterexample of P.A.Schweitzer (class C-1, improved to C-2 by J.Harrison). 
              The vector field constructed by the P.I. to answer Seifert's question is much
              smoother than the previous examples-  C-infinity, and even real analytic.  As
              usual, new methods raise more questions and more possibilities for theoretical
              investigations, and in this case also computerized simulations.
