Title       : SBIR Phase II: Photochemical Process for Transformation of Ozone-Depleting
               Substances into Environmentally Benign and Commercially Valuable Products
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9704053

Award Number: 9704053
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl F. Albus                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1998     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Moshe Lavid mlenergia@worldnet.att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : M.L. Energia, Inc
	      PO Box 470
	      Princeton, NJ  085420470    609/799-7970

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1309,1401,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                    This SBIR Phase II project will lead to a full-scale commercialization of
              a novel technology capable of transforming existing stockpiles of
              ozone-depleting substances (chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and Halons) into
              environmentally acceptable and commercially valuable products. The proposed
              Photo-Hydro-Dehalogenation (PHD) technology exploits a synergistic effect
              obtained by combining ultraviolet (UV) radiation with a reducing atmosphere. 
              UV fight promotes chain initiation by carbon-halogen bond cleavage.  Long-chain
              radical reactions lead to formation of desirable products.  Phase I research
              has already proven feasibility.  Experimental results with three representative
              chlorofluorocarbons have convincingly and unambiguously demonstrated that the
              PHD process can achieve selective and high conversion at a cost of less than $
              1/lb of CFC converted, which is lower than any current destruction technology. 
              The primary objective of Phase II is to design, construct and employ a
              pilot-scale prototype for a field demonstration.  To meet this objective, a
              three-task work plan has been developed.  It includes: (a) bench-scale studies
              of CFCs and extension to Halons, supplemented by chemical kinetic modeling, (b)
              design and construction of a pilot-scale prototype, and (c) field demonstration
              and performance evaluation.  Successful completion of Phase II will ultimately
              lead to Phase III commercialization.        This process should  lead to a
              `green` technology for environmentally safe transformation of ozone-depleting
              substances into commercially valuable products.  The current stockpile of
              estimated 4.5 billion pounds of CFCs, which poses a serious disposal problem,
              will become a vital feedstock to produce high value products.  Based on
              preliminary cost estimates, the existing stockpile which represents a huge
              environmental liability can be turned with the process into about 4 billion
              dollars of salable products.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
