Title       : Physical Science Ph.D Careers and Training (A Qualitative - Quantitative Study)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  2001 
File        : a9704011

Award Number: 9704011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247282             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Smith sjs@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Liane G. Pedersen-Gallegos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 8815      RESEARCH ON SCIENCE & TECHNLGY
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1092,9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The federal government provides a significant amount of support for graduate
              education in science, and responsible stewardship of this investment should
              help to assure that scientists are able to make use of their graduate training
              in their careers. Constrained federal budgets, the end of the cold war and
              global economic changes are altering employment patterns and work environments
              for many professions, including Ph.D. scientists. Much current information on
              Ph.D. careers is in the form of broad, national statistics or anecdotal
              information. Combining new research with present data, this in-depth study of
              the careers and work activities of recent physical science Ph.D. graduates will
              use qualitative and quantitative techniques to provide information that is
              needed to evaluate and `reshape` graduate education and to help graduates
              prepare for a range of possible careers. In order to assure its relevance to
              the scientific community, a broad-based and expert advisory committee will
              oversee and advise throughout the project. The study will focus on two issues:
              the relationship between graduate education and work activities, and career
              transitions. Better information on scientific careers is needed to evaluate the
              prevalence of `alternative` careers, to determine what skills, experience, and
              knowledge graduates should take away from their training, and to develop
              strategies to facilitate a successful transition to a non-academic job. In
              order to focus on current conditions, the study cohort will be scientists about
              4-8 years after receipt of their Ph.D. - the point at which they are seeking,
              or have found, more permanent employment. The project will use a combination of
              ethnographic and survey techniques. Ethnographic interviews will be used to
              develop and frame the questions for the subsequent survey. Analysis of the
              interviews will allow difficult issues such as temporary positions and work
              activities to be accurately translated into specific questions. The project
              will examine the careers of the study cohort at a level of detail that is not
              possible in nationwide studies. The cohort will include the entire graduating
              class, for the specified years, of physical scientists from 6-7 research
              universities. The target universities will be representative of both the large
              institutions that produce most Ph.D. scientists and the medium institutions
              whose programs and graduates may differ from those at the large institutions. A
              complete sample of recent graduates will be surveyed to obtain a quantitative
              picture of their careers and work activities. A substantial effort will be made
              to obtain a high response rate, particularly for graduates with non-traditional
              career paths. The project will finish with a second level of ethnographic
              inquiry, to explore questions raised in the previous stages of the project.
              Results will be reported at appropriate meetings and in both the academic
              literature and general-interest scientific publications. Techniques will be
              documented in order to assist departments in evaluating their graduate
              programs.  This activity is partially supported by the MPS Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                          
