Title       : Japan JSPS Program: Force Regulation and Contour following in the Presence of
               Unknown Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1997      
File        : a9704003

Award Number: 9704003
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Weber                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1997       
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Hemanshu M. Lakhani herman@mes.titech.ac.jp  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fellowships
	      
	      Arlington, VA  22230    /   -

NSF Program : 5978      EAST ASIA AND PACIFIC PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
              Lakhani  9704003  This award supports a 24 month Japan Society for the 
              Promotion of Science (JSPS) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr.  Hemanshu Lakhani
              at the Tokyo Institute of Technology,  Tokyo, Japan.  Dr. Lakhani will work
              with Dr.Yoshiaki  Ohkami, Professor, Department of Mechanical Engineering 
              Science, on a research project entitled, "Force Regulation  and Contour
              Following in the Presence of Unknown  Constraints."    The proposed research
              will focus on the design of high-  performance force control systems geared
              specifically toward  industrial contour following applications.  While several 
              force control approaches have been identified in the past,  there is a dearth
              of experimental evidence to validate and  compare the various approaches.  In
              addition, much of the  hardware proposed up until now appear incompatible with 
              several strict industrial constraints, such as the need for  large-reach and
              maximum use of already existing factory  hardware.  The proposed research will
              take the approach of  designing a small, high-performance, lightweight force 
              control system that can be conveniently and effectively  affixed to a factory
              robot.  As part of the project, a 2-  link, high-speed force control system,
              appropriate  controllers, and other hardware will also be constructed.  The
              proposed research will specifically examine the design  of force controllers in
              the presence of unknown contour  variations, examples being factory
              environments.  The  primary goal of the proposed research is to demonstrate 
              through on-site experiments that the proposed force control  methods and
              hardware can be used to adequately perform  factory contour following tests
              with precision, speed, and  reliability.  Results would be easily applicable to
              a number  of important tasks, including the construction of sheet  plastic,
              plate glass, and other materials of this nature.  ***
