Title       : Fast Non-Linear Transforms for Coding and Detection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  1998       
File        : a9704094

Award Number: 9704094
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Paul Werbos                             
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $176389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Todd K. Leen tleen@cse.ogi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon Grad Inst of S&
	      20000 NW Walker Road
	      Beaverton, OR  970068921    503/645-1121

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0108000   Software Development                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will develop local linear and network models for application to
              detection problems, and to transform coding.  The focus is on the development
              and adaptation of nonlinear extensions of principal component analysis (PCA) to
              these domains.  Our previous work on nonlinear PCA (1,2,3) showed that local
              linear models are faster to compute, and provide more accurate encodings that
              neural network-based nonlinear PCA.  A major thrust of this work is adapting
              and applying our models to detection problems, and to fast optimal transform
              coding.    The work is fault detection builds in part on the recent use of
              three-layer autoassociative neural networks in this realm (4,5).  In  work, 
              networks are used to provide a model of data corresponding to normal system
              behavior.  Abnormal behavior (faults) are the indicated by the failure to
              accurately model the new data.  However three-layer autoassociateve networks
              provide a very crude model of data, essentially a PCA subspace model.  Real
              data can be more accurately  represented by generally curved manifolds, as
              provided by nonlinear PCA will apply models based on nonlinear PCA to detection
              problems form benchmark datasets.  This project will also apply nonlinear PCA
              to transform coding.  This a natural extension of  the work on nonlinear, and
              local linear transforms.  As in the detection paradigms discussed above, the
              use of PCA for transform coding is suboptimal because real data is not 
              adequately modeled by second order statistics, or by subspace geometric models.
              Nonlinear PCA  is able to detect and reduce higher-order redundancies between
              data components, thus providing more compact representations.  Adaptation of
              nonlinear PCA algorithms for transform coding (e.g. of images) will provide
              rate distortion curves superior to those obtained form DCT or PCA transform
              codes.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                        
