Title       : Mechanical Engineering Senior Design Projects for the Disabled
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2001      
File        : a9704215

Award Number: 9704215
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107311             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan W. Eberhardt aeberhar@eng.uab.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Birmingham
	      AB 1170
	      Birmingham, AL  352940111    205/934-5266

NSF Program : 5342      RESEARCH TO AID THE DISABLED
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704215  Eberhardt  This grant will support senior design projects to aid 
              persons with disabilities, for Mechanical Engineering (ME)  students, at the
              University of Alabama at Birmingham (UAB).  Projects are geared toward
              providing alternative, low cost,  custom designed devices and software that
              will directly aid  specific disabled individuals or groups of individuals. 
              They include devices to assist in environmental control,  communication
              augmentation, motorized devices for lifting or  grabbing and alarm systems
              which combine visual and auditory  warnings, just to name a few.  Project ideas
              have been  provided by United Cerebral Palsy (UCP) of Birmingham and  the
              Alabama Department of Rehabilitation Services (ADRS).  In addition, a
              cross-UAB-campus collaboration has been  established including Occupational
              Therapy, Spain  Rehabilitation, Orthopedic Surgery and the Injury Control  and
              Research Center, who have provided project ideas which  combine depth in both
              engineering and life sciences.    A three-member advisement committee will
              ensure adequate  student supervision and quality development of the project 
              device.  This committee will include the PI, one ME faculty  with expertise in
              the project area, and a collaborating  investieator from UCP, ADRS or UAB.  The
              fact that the  designs will be constructed, tested and used by the disabled 
              individuals will provide meaningful design experience for  the engineering
              student while serving the disabled  community.  This form of highly visible,
              funded senior  design projects will serve as an exceptional recruiting tool  to
              attract better students to the UAB School of Engineering.  It will further
              strengthen the collaborative link between  Engineering and the UAB Hospital and
              promote a planned  industrial track in Rehabilitation Engineering through the 
              UAB Department of Biomedical Engineering.  Links with local  industry will
              improve regional visibility of UAB, will  increase cooperation with the local
              community to the benefit  of both, and will  increase employment opportunities
              for  graduating ME seniors.  These same links will serve to  leverage funding
              at greater levels from industry, government  agencies and foundations to
              support this worthwhile effort.  ***
