Title       : A Fast Numerical Method for Imaging Small Abnormalities in Diffusion Tomography
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1997  
File        : a9704923

Award Number: 9704923
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Klibanov mklibanv@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Lucas  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9216,9263,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Klibanov  9704923       A fundamental challenge in inverse problems is the 
              determination of the composition of an unknown medium given the  boundary
              measurements of radiation by an outside source into the  medium.  The
              investigator and his collaborator make a theoretical  and numerical study of
              this problem from situations modeled by  the parabolic/diffusion equation using
              a novel approach -- the  Elliptic Systems Method (ESM).  The ESM involves the
              derivation  and solution of a system of coupled elliptic partial differential 
              equations with boundary conditions developed from a normalized  form of the
              temporal data.  The diffusion and absorption  coefficients of the medium are
              then reconstructed from the above  normalized solution, yielding the
              composition.  This project  involves a number of explorations, extensions,
              improvements and  testing of this new method applied to a variety of
              situations.  It  provides a fast and accurate new approach to the important 
              problem of reconstructing images from scattered data.       In a recently
              published report by the National Research  Council (Mathematics and Physics of
              Emerging Biomedical Imaging),  a call is made for the development of new
              effective medical  imaging algorithms.  An example is the early imaging of
              small  cancerous breast tumors using optical (near infrared laser)  methods. 
              Cancerous tumors are more light-absorbing than the bulk  of breast tissue,
              leading to an increased interest in developing  early detection methods by
              "optical" mammography.  The difficulty  is that unlike x-rays, which travel in
              essentially straight  lines, light is highly scattered, making reconstruction 
              difficult.  The investigators develop their new approach to this  problem,
              which uses the methods of numerical solutions of partial  differential
              equations to achieve rapid and accurate  reconstructions.  This approach, among
              other applications, has a  very good potential to lead to an optical
              alternative to x-ray  mammography exams or to a decrease in the number  of
              biopsies  resulting from false positives.
