Title       : Statistical Integration and Approximation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1999      
File        : a9704495

Award Number: 9704495
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James L. Rosenberger                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2000       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Art B. Owen owen@stat.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1269      STATISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                Owen  9704495    This research investigates the use of statistical sampling
              ideas in high dimensional numerical problems, particularly numerical
              integration and approximation.  Statistical thinking enters the picture because
              in  high dimensional problems one can get at most a sparse sample of the input
              space.  Surprising benefits  can accrue: for example it is known that
              randomizing a low discrepancy sequence can increase it's  accuracy.   For the
              case of numerical integration, this project looks at adaptive importance
              sampling  techniques in which the function values themselves are used to adapt
              the sampling towards the most  relevant region of the input space, while
              maintaining a data based estimate of integral accuracy.  In the  case of
              numerical approximation, this project will apply recent progress in hybrid
              numerical integration  methods to finding ways of building sample based
              approximations of functions with data determined error  estimates.    Numerical
              integration is a fundamental computational task with applications in physics,
              chemistry,  finance, statistics, and numerical approximation.  Numerical
              approximation is also fundamental, and the  advent of powerful and flexible
              computer simulators of scientific and engineering phenomena can only  increase
              the demand for computer experiment techniques based on approximation.  At
              present these computer models are widely used in the design of computer chips,
              automobile parts, airplanes, and in  global climate modeling.  These functions
              may take hours or even days of computer time and so finding  fast
              approximations (and estimating their accuracy) is important.  Better
              exploration of these functions,  call it function mining, can lead to faster
              introduction and greater reliability for new products.  It can also  be used to
              thoroughly explore the predictions of models for environmental change and
              storage of nuclear  wastes.
