Title       : Matrix Inequalities in Engineering and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1997      
File        : a9704534

Award Number: 9704534
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John C. Strikwerda                      
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $117000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chi-Kwong Li ckli@math.wm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy Mathias  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of William & Mary
	      Grants & Research Admin.
	      Williamsburg, VA  231878795    757/221-3967

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9251,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
                Matrix Inequalities in Engineering and Sciences (DMS 9704534)    Chi-Kwong Li
              and Roy Mathias    The theory of matrix inequalities has applications in many
              fields including   electrical engineering, statistics, economics, psychology,
              graph theory,   differential equations, operations research and optimization,
              operator theory,   quantum physics, numerical analysis and control theory.
              However, many   researchers in these areas are not able to use the existing
              results and proof   techniques in matrix theory to develop their theory
              effectively because their   expertise is not in matrix theory and there is a
              lack of communication between   them and researchers on matrix theory. The
              principal investigators have   considerable experience in matrix inequalities
              and have developed from   scratch, adapted, or borrowed many techniques to
              study the subject. In this   project, they plan to develop and apply the theory
              of matrix inequalities to   different problems that arise from applications. 
              In particular, the emphasis   will be on proving matrix inequalities by
              conceptual rather than computational   techniques, and putting them in more
              general and accessible settings, so that   the results can be readily used by
              non-specialists.     It is worth mentioning that this project has strong
              connections with a number   of areas of Federal strategic interest.  For
              example, in high-performance   computing, one needs to be able to do
              computation efficiently and accurately.    In many situations, computations are
              very sensitive to round-off error   introduced by the machine itself. The
              design of fast convergent methods in   these cases is greatly facilitated by
              the theory of matrix inequalities.  As   mentioned in the first paragraph,
              matrix inequalities are important tools in   control theory, a regime that is
              crucial to the design of manufacturing   plants, aircraft, automobiles, etc. 
              Applications of matrix inequalities in   other subjects, including quantum
              physics and semi-definite programming are   proposed , and problems arising in
              economics, statistics and psychology will   also be considered.
