Title       : Instabilities, Modes, and Bifurcations of Orbits in Stellar Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 3,  1999      
File        : a9704615

Award Number: 9704615
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Deborah Lockhart                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1997       
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127217             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher Hunter hunter@math.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323063067    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9704615  Hunter    The principal investigator is proposing to investigate two
              classes of   phenomena that are relevant to the dynamics of galaxies. One is
              that of   instabilities and modes, and the other is that of bifurcations of
              orbits. The   work is analytical and is based on the approximation that
              galaxies are   collisionless stellar systems. That approximation is based on
              the belief that   most of the mass of galaxies is in the form of stars and dark
              matter, which   move, without mutual collisions, on orbits whose form is
              determined by the   total gravity field of the galaxy. N-body simulations of
              galaxies have shown   that both instabilities and large-scale modes of
              oscillation do occur, and that   their occurrence depends on the orbital 
              population of the galaxy. Modes   occur when all the orbits pulsate in a
              coherent manner, while instability   occurs when the collective response of the
              orbital population to a   disturbance is to reinforce it and make it grow. The
              principal investigator   will seek detailed descriptions of these possibilities
              to help explain the   underlying dynamics.  He has developed a new technique
              for the accurate   location and tracking of modes and instabilities. The
              bifurcations to be   investigated are those at which the form and stability of
              orbits change. The   nature of the orbits is crucial to the structure of a
              galaxy. Though the two   classes of phenomena are to be investigated
              separately, they are likely    interrelated.    Galaxies are of interest
              because they are the fundamental building blocks of   the Universe. A typical
              galaxy is composed of hundreds of billions of stars,   each of which moves on
              its own individual orbit according to well-known   physical laws of dynamics.
              The primary interest of the principal investigator   is in the stability of
              such systems, and a secondary interest is in the nature of   the orbits and the
              ways in which they can change. One determines whether   or not a system is
              stable by studying how it responds when it is pertur bed.   The response may be
              a mode in which all the orbits manage to pulsate   regularly in unison.
              Alternatively, disturbances dissipate and decay when   there is stability, or
              reinforce and grow when there is instability. Each type   of behavior has been
              observed in computer experiments. What this work   seeks is theoretical
              understanding of underlying causes. It will be carried   out using mathematical
              models, which are of necessity statistical because of   the large number of
              stars to be represented, and a combination of   mathematical analysis and
              computation. Galaxies are known to have existed   over a large fraction of the
              age of the Universe, and hence should be free of   all but the mildest
              instabilities. Hence any findings concerning the   requirements for stability
              is in principle testable against observations of the   present day dynamical
              structure of galaxies.
