Title       : Computer Data Acquisition Systems for a Research-Based Comparative Physiology
               Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9651383

Award Number: 9651383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $70082              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrea Tilden tilden@macalstr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project is establishing a research-based comparative physiology program
              with a focus on environmental and metabolic physiology. The goal of this
              project is to maintain a hands-on live-animal approach to studying physiology
              while introducing students to research-quality equipment and techniques. Newly
              purchased equipment is improving the technological scope of the affected
              courses and allowing students to conduct original or semioriginal directed
              research projects in an intermediate-level comparative physiology course. The
              new equipment includes a computerized, small-animal physiological data
              acquisition system that monitors metabolism, temperature, and other standard
              biosignals for extended periods of time; a clinical biochemistry analyzer which
              measures several blood/hemolymph metabolites; and a freezing point osmometer to
              determine accumulated blood/hemolymph antifreeze production.   Students in this
              program are studying behavioral and physiological thermoregulation in animals
              in response to environmental and internal factors such as acclimation
              photoperiod and temperature and endogenous or exogenous fever-inducing
              pyrogens; physiological responses of animals to cold, i.e., production of
              antifreezes, cryoprotectants, and ice-nucleators; and metabolic rates of
              animals in response to a wide variety of factors such as activity, temperature,
              diet, hormones, circadian rhythms, and acclimatization conditions. Many of the
              students are continuing with the advanced-level Research in Physiology course
              in which they work in pairs on original research questions of their own design.
              These projects typically result in student presentations at local or national
              meetings, and they form components of a manuscript to be submitted to a
              refereed journal. Finally, students may opt to continue a study as an
              independent project or honors thesis.
