Title       : Ultrafast Laser Laboratory for Photonics Undergraduates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9651324

Award Number: 9651324
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34360              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dean Richardson deanr@sunyit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Tech Utica-Rome
	      PO Box 3050
	      Utica, NY  135043050    315/792-3301

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The project incorporates an Ultrafast Laser Laboratory (ULL) into the existing
              Photonics B.S. degree program. The ULL adds a strong ultrafast laser component
              to the program's Laser Physics and Applications core course and allows the
              establishment of an elective entitled Advanced Photonics Lab Techniques,
              providing undergraduate photonics technologists with the experience necessary
              to help them confidently design, construct, operate, maintain, and characterize
              ultrafast solid-state laser systems.   Within the past 5 years, lasers have
              been developed based on titanium-doped sapphire crystals that allow the
              generation of extremely short pulses of light; these pulses can in turn be used
              to study the time evolution of microscopic processes, including chemical
              reaction kinetics and charge-carrier propagation in semiconductor quantum well
              materials. The ability to create and detect light pulses as short as a few
              femtoseconds (femto = one-quadrillionth) is rapidly transforming scientific
              understanding of the microscopic world. Accordingly, photonics technologists
              and engineers who understand ultrafast laser systems and can assist in their
              implementation are needed by the research and academic communities. This
              Photonics program aims to prepare its graduates to fill that need.   Until now,
              the school has lacked the state-of-the-art resources necessary to provide
              critical experimental learning experiences with ultrafast laser systems to its
              students. Now, rather than purchase an expensive commercial ultrafast laser for
              students to operate, faculty can teach students how to construct one themselves
              from off-the-shelf components. In the laboratory, students can also build a
              crucial characterization tool (an `autocorrelator`) needed to measure the
              duration of the pulses output by the laser they've set up and aligned. The
              experience gained in developing this laboratory and its accompanying
              documentation can assist other universities seeking to strengthen their
              undergraduate physics and optics programs.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
