Title       : Multidisciplinary Laboratory Investigations In Neurobiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  1996       
File        : a9651138

Award Number: 9651138
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $21680              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. King mking@stetson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stetson Univ
	      421 North Boulevard
	      Deland, FL  32720    904/734-4121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project focuses on the implementation of an innovative laboratory for
              undergraduate students in Neurobiology, with laboratory exercises designed to
              acquaint students with the multidisciplinary nature of Neurobiology but at the
              same time permit them to focus on a particular experimental topic throughout
              the semester. Specifically, at the beginning of the semester, students choose
              one of three experimental subjects (slug, frog, or rat) and one of several
              suggested topics to investigate in semester-long projects. The students
              themselves develop some of the details of the experiments, such as which brain
              areas, neurotransmitters, or behavioral tasks to investigate. The exercises are
              structured, but open-ended, providing students with enough guidance so that
              their efforts are fruitful and enough latitude to follow their own interests.
              The proposed laboratory approach teaches Neurobiology, and science in general,
              from a practitioner's perspective.   The laboratory is physically arranged in
              three centers--anatomy, physiology, and behavior--where different aspects of
              Neurobiology are being explored. The same general topic, such as the mechanisms
              of learning, is investigated during 4-week rotations in each of these centers,
              where students employ different techniques to study different aspects of their
              topic. For example, learning can be induced and observed in the behavior
              center, and the morphological and electrophysiological properties of the
              neurons involved in this learning studied in the anatomy and physiology
              centers, respectively. By the end of the semester, students have a broad and
              comprehensive understanding of their topic. They can gain an appreciation for
              the breadth of Neurobiology, the usefulness of the three different approaches
              to studying Neurobiology, and the excitement and meticulousness of scientific
              discovery.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                     
