Title       : Enhancement of Instruction and Research in Microbiology and Molecular Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  1996      
File        : a9651196

Award Number: 9651196
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Katherine J. Denniston                  
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45364              (Estimated)
Investigator: Barbara J. Taller bjtaller@cc.memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James W. Davenport  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Biology students do not receive sufficient hands-on experience in modern
              experimental techniques or in the interpretation of data derived from these
              techniques. The equipment used in this project, along with other equipment
              recently acquired, provides meaningful laboratory experiences utilizing current
              technologies for students planning careers as scientists or technicians.   The
              use of computers is simplifying and enhancing data analysis and manipulation,
              providing students with a rapid visual representation of the results. This
              project facilitates the incorporation of current and powerful techniques such
              as polymerase chain reaction, nucleic acid hybridization, monoclonal
              antibodies, and fluorescent probes into instructional laboratories and
              undergraduate research. The project can improve research opportunities and
              outcomes for minority students at the university and at minority institutions
              in Memphis that have cooperative research programs with the university. The new
              equipment can also be used for undergraduate research and the training of area
              high school teachers, talented high school students, and undergraduates from
              other institutions in the Mid-South.   The impact of the project can be
              evaluated by monitoring the number of students, particularly women, minorities,
              and persons with disabilities, who major in the division, choose to enter
              graduate school or B.S.-level employment in science-related areas, apply for
              and receive research awards, or participate in undergraduate research.
              Dissemination of results can occur through publications in journals concerned
              with science education, through the educational divisions of professional
              societies, and through undergraduate research presentations at professional
              meetings.                                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
