Title       : Enhancing Undergraduate Analytical Lab Skills Using the Technique of Nuclear
               Magnetic Resonance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9651061

Award Number: 9651061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37737              (Estimated)
Investigator: Venkat Chebolu VENKAT CHEBOLU@CCMGATE.SUNYJEFFERSON.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jefferson Cmty Col
	      Outer Coffeen Street
	      Watertown, NY  13601    315/782-5250

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) is a major technique for elucidation of the
              structure of organic compounds. Until now, students in the undergraduate
              organic classes were not able to get more than a glimpse of this methodology
              because of the lack of an NMR instrument of reasonable capability. The project
              involves purchase of an NMR instrument capable of proton decoupling, with a
              variable temperature probe. A spiral teaching approach introduces students to
              NMR techniques early in the semester and then uses the methodology throughout
              the year. Understanding the structure of the organic compounds is central to a
              good understanding of the reactivities and properties of the molecules. The
              curriculum provides a strong correlation between the structural features
              discussed in the classroom and the methodology that enables one to see it
              experimentally, and it enables students to learn by discovery. Students gather
              data on problems, then think them through to reach meaningful conclusions. This
              pedagogy rivets student interest in lab activities and helps them develop
              higher-order thinking skills, as well as analytical skills. Relating spin-spin
              splitting parameters to the structure of organic molecules and studying
              temperature and concentration effects on NMR spectra of compounds are primarily
              used. Open-ended lab projects assess the skills developed by the students.  
              This project, with its use of NMR as a foundation for discovery-based learning,
              serves as a model for other undergraduate organic programs, providing a
              curriculum that balances creativity and structure in discovery-type labs.
              Projects and examples that work well in such a format can be fine-tuned.
              Specific discovery-based learning methods can be developed for dissemination in
              publications such as the Journal of Chemical Education and at educational
              conferences sponsored by the American Chemical Society.                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
