Title       : Development of a Digital Cartography/Remote Sensing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9651207

Award Number: 9651207
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey C. Patton pattonj@durkheim.uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy S. Stine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project expands and develops the Cartography and Remote Sensing Laboratory.
              The increased number of computers, advanced software, and peripheral equipment
              allows for more hands-on experience for undergraduate students enrolled in
              remote sensing, cartography, and geographic information systems (GIS) courses
              in the analysis of satellite imagery, creation of spatial databases, mapping,
              and the use of GIS. Rapid advances in both software and hardware have provided
              students and faculty with powerful new tools to address environmental issues,
              urban and regional planning problems, and the modeling of the Earth's physical
              systems, as well as enabling students to work in innovative areas such as
              animation and interactive mapping and to develop their knowledge of the nature
              of spatial data and its presentation. Sophisticated software in remote sensing
              and GIS gives students exciting tools for creating and analyzing spatial data,
              for the analysis of radar imagery, for the creation of three-dimensional
              models, and for the use of statistical algorithms for image classification and
              enhancement.    The enlargement and modernization of the laboratory not only
              results in the improvement of the laboratory experience, but also enables more
              students to be included in the existing courses, improves the content of the
              courses, and expands the current course offerings in these areas. The impact of
              the laboratory improvements on student performance, as well as satisfaction
              with the program, curricular offerings, and enrollment are being carefully
              monitored. Results can be presented at professional conferences and then
              submitted as an article to a professional journal. The article can detail the
              impact of the new equipment and software on the program and can include
              suggestions for the development of similar laboratory facilities.
