Title       : Non-Destructive Testing and Instrumentation in a Concrete Lab
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9651215

Award Number: 9651215
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13390              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir Mirmiran   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Central Florida
	      Office of Research
	      Orlando, FL  328263252    407/823-5278

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
                 The focus of this project is to improve the quality of undergraduate concrete
              education by enhancing the concrete laboratory to include new modules for
              Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) and Instrumentation.  Concrete is the material of
              choice for most construction projects in Florida, and students too, often
              choose concrete courses over similar steel design courses.  However, without a
              complete laboratory and field experience, students can not fully appreciate
              various aspects of design and construction with a heterogeneous material such
              as concrete.  With the growing state of deterioration of the nation's
              infrastructure, the necessity for including NDT techniques and field
              instrumentation in civil engineering curriculum has become more apparent than
              ever before.  The undergraduate program at UCF includes two 3-credit concrete
              courses; Reinf. Concr. Struct., and Concr. Design, with the second course
              emphasizing on an actual design project.  A two-semester laboratory is
              developed to parallel the lectures within these courses.  The laboratory
              experiments will include pull-out tests, rebound methods, probe techniques,
              bond strength mapping reinforcement topology in concrete, measurement of
              corrosion activity in reinforcement, detection of various forms of flaws in
              concrete, resonant frequency method, impulse radar technique, ultrasonic
              methods, maturity functions, acoustic emission, and instrumentation of concrete
              members.  It is believed that the new laboratory will significantly increase
              student's interest in, and learning from, the concrete coursework. 
              Approximately, 100 students per year will have the opportunity to learn
              state-of-the-art NDT and instrumentation techniques for concrete in a hands-on
              laboratory and field experience.  UCF has a track record on research in NDT,
              and the proposed improvements will allow the transfer of knowledge to
              undergraduate students.  UCF is committed to provide:  (1) 100% matching funds
              for acquiring the equipment, (2) continued support for upgrading and mainta
              ining equipment on a regular basis, and (3) assigning specialized technician to
              take care of acquired equipment.
