Title       : Improvement of Undergraduate Molecular Biology Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 17,  1996     
File        : a9651311

Award Number: 9651311
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20579              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ulf M. Sorhannus usorhannus@edinboro.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dale Tshudy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Craig T. VanBell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Edinboro Univ of Penn
	      
	      Edinboro, PA  16444    814/732-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The primary objective of the Molecular Phylogeny project is to introduce a
              unifying concept into several courses in the curriculum.  It is inculcating a
              thorough understanding of evolutionary concepts by complementing traditional
              teaching styles, concepts, and materials with modern approaches, including
              discovery-based learning, modern phylogenetic approaches, and the materials and
              methods used by scientists in the field.   Instruction in molecular evolution
              and phylogenetic analysis begins in the freshman course with a discovery-based
              exercise on the classification and evolution of organisms.  Students are given
              the 5S rRNA sequences of several invertebrates, asked to make pairwise
              comparisons between species, and asked to construct plausible evolutionary
              trees.  Discordance between morphological- and molecular-based phylogenies are
              discussed.  In this exercise, students develop an intuitive grasp of the
              principles of molecular phylogeny that will be studied in detail in later
              courses.  As a follow-up to this exercise and a prerequisite to subsequent
              studies, students are given an introduction to molecular biology databases and
              software on the Internet.  Specifically, they are directed to the NIH and EMBL,
              the Ribosomal Database Project, and the CLUSTALW and PHYLIP programs.  Homework
              assignments involve searching and aligning selected 5.8S rRNA and short
              polypeptide sequences.   In Botany, students explore the relationships among
              nonvascular and vascular plants using small and large subunit rRNAs and rbcL
              sequences.  They obtain sequences from the GenBank, align them using CLUSTALW,
              then construct phylogenetic trees using PHYLIP.  The students are guided
              extensively through this exercise as they test a model of plant evolution.  In
              Zoology, students re-explore the relationships among phyla begun in the
              freshman class, as they look in more detail at specific issues in animal
              evolution.  In advanced courses, the principal investigators work with the
              instructors to identify discipline-specific p roblems for student exploration. 
              Students are encouraged to develop problems using models from the literature.  
              Directed research projects are becoming possible through the acquisition of DNA
              sequencing equipment.  Specific projects enable undergraduate students to
              investigate problems in diatom, ciliate, and crustacean evolution under the
              direction of experts in these areas.   Results from the project can be
              disseminated through the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania University Biologists,
              on-line bulletin boards, and traditional education journals. Other universities
              that still have a traditional organismic bias to their freshman and sophomore
              curricula can make the transition to a concept-based curriculum more smoothly
              if they proceed as this project.
