Title       : Improvement of the Chemistry Curriculum with NMR
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9651312

Award Number: 9651312
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 15,  1996 
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89570              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Almy almy@chem.csustan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James E. Byrd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Koni K. Stone  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Evan M. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Perona  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Stanislaus
	      801 W Monte Vista
	      Turlock, CA  953820256    209/667-3122

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Without a functioning nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer, students
              do not have the opportunity to obtain physical evidence of those compounds that
              they prepare in the laboratory and are discussed in the lecture.   This project
              introduces modern experimental NMR spectrometry into the curriculum in order to
              reinforce important concepts. Extensive use of structure determination based on
              NMR improves student development of scientific reasoning skills. Finally,
              students gain the skills in operating the NMR first in its basic mode, then in
              its more advanced applications and techniques.   NMR theory and data
              interpretation are introduced first in Organic Chemistry and follow an
              organized program throughout the upper-division curriculum. Beginning with very
              simple explanations and spectra, increasingly more complex NMR methods are then
              applied to problems in Biochemistry, Physical Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis,
              and Advanced Laboratory. Laboratory experiments make use of NMR data to
              actualize complex concepts presented in the lectures. Hands-on student
              operation begins after the introductory Organic Chemistry course.   Two
              community colleges are being included in the project, and two annual workshops
              are being presented in collaboration with their faculty. A range of NMR methods
              can be introduced to Organic Chemistry students from these colleges.   For
              dissemination of this program, information on NMR spectra and techniques in
              spectral interpretation can be placed on the World Wide Web using the
              university's homepage. This complements currently available lecture material
              and tutorials. The university can also publish and present innovative teaching
              methods and student research related to the project.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                           
