Title       : Bringing DNA Sequencing Technology to Undergraduate Laboratories
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9651117

Award Number: 9651117
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28225              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susannah Gal sgal@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Using molecular approaches, scientists have recently isolated disease-linked
              genes, mapped complicated traits in plants, and identified homologous genes in
              numerous species. Much of the information generated now comes from massive DNA
              sequencing projects taking place around the world. The newest technology for
              DNA sequencing employs fluorescent dyes to detect the sequencing products, an
              important advance that will be used for many years to come. However, the
              equipment needed for the separation and detection of the fluorescently labeled
              products is prohibitively expensive. Therefore, this project arranges for the
              purchase of two DNA sequencers for use in an advanced molecular biology
              laboratory class, enabling undergraduate students to train in this new
              technology.   This equipment permits students to sequence unique DNA fragments,
              compare these results to known sequences, and submit the cloned DNA to central
              collection sites, making this information available for research. This addition
              to the undergraduate laboratory is a logical next step in the current molecular
              biology course, making it possible for students to make an important
              contribution to the scientific community, which would undoubtedly increase
              their interest in the future of biological endeavors.   This equipment can also
              be used in undergraduate research in a number of laboratories in the
              department. Initial steps are being taken to offer use of this equipment for
              undergraduate teaching by other colleges in the area, as well as in
              demonstrations for high school students and teachers. This project is likely to
              affect at least 200 undergraduate students, college educators, precollege
              students, and teachers during the 2 years of funding.                          
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
