Title       : Integrating Group Laboratory Activities Across the Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  1996      
File        : a9651050

Award Number: 9651050
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36316              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alfred T. D'Agostino ADAgostino@ndm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Maria K. Kirk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tami Isaacs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shirish K. Shah  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cynthia McDaniel Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Notre Dame
	      4701 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212102404    410/435-0100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              An initiative entitled Integrating Group Laboratory Activities Across the
              Chemistry Curriculum is working to solve a serious problem in chemistry
              education. Nonscience and science majors enrolled in introductory courses are
              not involved in cooperative group laboratory exercises relevant to the
              environment, advanced materials, and biotechnology because of the lack of
              versatile, state-of-the-art instrumentation.     As a group project in
              Instrumental Analysis, chemistry majors are developing and testing protocols
              involving CE, IC, infrared, and VIS spectroscopies. These experiments are being
              exported to introductory chemistry lab courses and executed by combined groups
              of science and nonscience majors. Chemistry majors, acting as peer-instructors,
              guide students in executing experiments that reinforce chemical concepts. The
              project supports three major objectives in a revised introductory chemistry
              curriculum:  cooperative laboratory interaction between students in General
              Chemistry, The Chemical World Around Us, and Instrumental Analysis; rigorous
              demonstration of quantitative chemical principles in relevant contexts to
              modern chemical perspectives; and a challenging project-oriented laboratory
              experience that facilitates peer-directed group learning. The audience for this
              project includes women of traditional college age who are enrolled in
              introductory chemistry courses, as well as junior and senior chemistry majors. 
              About 45% of the students in the Chemical World course are preservice teachers.
                 The project affects more than 300 students. The impact of this project is
              that it increases interaction between students in the upper- and lower-division
              courses; introduces women to technology-centered experiments; introduces
              preservice teachers to pedagogy that will be important to them in their future
              classrooms; introduces sophisticated concepts in the context of modern chemical
              experiments using instrumentation; and creates peer-directed learning
              opportunities for science and nonscience majors.
