Title       : High Throughput Instrumentation in Introductory Analytical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9651270

Award Number: 9651270
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Endres endres@bgnet.bgsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Instrumentation is essential to modern laboratory work, but is frequently too
              expensive for introductory courses in which many students require simultaneous
              access. This situation often results in very limited access to instruments and,
              often, to the use of low-cost, low-performance instruments. If appropriate
              instruments were selected and utilized, with careful thought to high throughput
              and off-line data handling, many of the time and funding bottlenecks would be
              greatly reduced.   This project is utilizing three such instruments to upgrade
              the introductory courses in quantitative chemical analysis dramatically at the
              freshman and sophomore levels. Atomic Absorption/Atomic Emission spectroscopy
              is a proven technique that is being used to process many individual student
              samples rapidly. Newly developed miniature spectrometers can be used as
              low-cost, rapid instruments for a variety of spectroscopic and
              spectrophotometric measurements. The basic technology is proven, but
              considerable development work is required to convert this into a routine
              teaching instrument. Gas chromatographs are being modified with multibore
              capillary columns to provide high resolution in less than 5 minutes per sample,
              with no need for time-consuming temperature programming.   One of the goals of
              this project is to develop, critically evaluate, and distribute instructional
              applications for these newer technologies. The department also expects to
              provide much more realistic and modern analytical experiences for introductory
              chemistry students. This objective requires the use of updated technology, but
              can be facilitated by a major restructuring of the way that student
              laboratories are organized and operated. The project is directly affecting
              approximately 100 students per year, especially those majoring in chemistry,
              biology, geology, medical technology, and environmental sciences.              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
