Title       : Development of GIS Lab to Promote Interdisciplinary Student Environmental
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1996       
File        : a9651165

Award Number: 9651165
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Anderson jga@ecology.coa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Atlantic
	      Eden Street
	      Bar Harbor, ME  04609    207/288-5015

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports major improvements in the geographic information systems
              (GIS) laboratory. GIS has proven to be an effective and versatile learning and
              research tool enhancing student research, independent study, and senior
              (honors) projects in environmental science and human ecology.   The project
              addresses the need to replace obsolete and less efficient equipment in order to
              strengthen and revise current courses and to develop the capacity to design
              more advanced curricula. Faculty and students from each academic resource area
              have the opportunity to engage in advanced research and pursue digital
              environmental modeling projects, applying the most powerful version of ArcInfo
              software. Six Pentium-class PCs running X-terminal emulation software,
              networked to a SPARCstation 10, replace six older PC computers. The new system
              provides courses with access to data and software managed by the SPARCstation
              server. Current courses are enhanced as new technical features are introduced
              through the lab, including modeling and analytical tools for working with
              physiographic data and satellite imagery and tools to create graphic user
              interfaces and customized programs for specific applications.   Measurable
              outcomes from the project include substantially enhanced courses along with
              increased numbers of students doing independent study and research; new and
              advanced projects undertaken; and dissemination of distinctive applications of
              GIS technology in an interdisciplinary science-oriented program.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                  
