Title       : Geographic Information Systems Laboratory for Undergraduate Instruction and
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9651355

Award Number: 9651355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16812              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey M. Matthews jmatthew@lcsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Heins  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scott R. Linneman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lewis Clark State College
	      8th Avenue & 6th Street
	      Lewiston, ID  83501    208/746-2341

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project is improving the education of undergraduate students by adding a
              fully functional geographic information systems (GIS) laboratory facility. The
              improvements are being made by purchasing computer hardware and software and
              placing them under the administration of a GIS professional. These facilities
              integrate and complement the already well-developed technological
              infrastructure of the college.   This college is charged by the state of Idaho
              to provide education and training that is relevant to the economic situation of
              North Idaho and that is accessible to nontraditional students. These students
              include Native Americans, single parents, displaced workers, first-generation
              college students, and people who can only attend school at places or times not
              served by other institutions.   The economy of North Idaho relies on
              natural-resource industries including agriculture, forest products, and
              minerals, and the government agencies that oversee them. All of these employers
              rely heavily on spatial data in their decision-making. All natural-science
              students currently receive technology-based, field-oriented instruction.
              Formalizing the manipulation and analysis of spatial data in the context of GIS
              is a logical complement to this educational philosophy. The GIS lab enables the
              college to offer formal courses in GIS, to use GIS in other courses across many
              disciplines, to incorporate GIS into student research projects, and to engage
              students in professional GIS activities. All of these benefits are available
              not only to students on campus, but also to the place- and time-bound students
              served by the college's distance education projects. The GIS facility itself
              will add data-serving capacity to the college's existing network
              infrastructure. Education incorporating GIS is inherently interdisciplinary,
              exposes students to real-world problems, actively involves them in learning,
              and exposes them to technology that is used by the major employers of the
              region.                                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
