Title       : Implementation of a Model Course for Non-Science Majors Incorporating Modern
               Molecular Biology Techniques, Molecular Modeling and Instrumental Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 14,  1996      
File        : a9651177

Award Number: 9651177
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14510              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emeric Schultz eschultz@bloomu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher P. Hallen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bloomsburg U of Pennsylvan
	      400 East Second Street
	      Bloomsburg, PA  17815    570/389-4129

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Chemistry is implementing a model laboratory-based science
              experience for non-science-majors. This enhancement includes the purchase of
              the molecular biology components needed for the newly developed laboratory. The
              initial audience for this course is made up of incoming students in the
              university's Honors and Scholars program. These high-aptitude students
              represent an ideal audience for ascertaining whether topical, highly
              interesting coverage, usually reserved for upper-level science courses, can be
              presented at the introductory level.   The structure of the course highlights
              the laboratory experience. This approach is novel and perhaps radical in that
              it approaches the curriculum, in the area of molecular science, from the top
              down. The assumption that computer modeling can support this approach is being
              tested. Students take part in a cloning project in which the gene for
              bioluminescence is transferred from one bacterium to another. They learn the
              concept of `molecular fingerprinting` by comparing the molecular
              characteristics of two micro-organisms. This fingerprinting idea is then
              applied to the analysis of self-selected samples using modern instrumental
              analysis. It is expected that the student not only develop an appreciation for,
              but also an understanding of, the nature of science, especially the excitement
              that accompanies discovery. The order of laboratory exercises specifically
              addresses issues related to the development of abstract concepts from concrete
              experiences.   The success of this project may serve as a model for the
              development of similar laboratory focused courses for non-science-majors. Such
              courses may have a major impact on addressing the issue of science literacy.   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
