Title       : A Modern Electric Power Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9651326

Award Number: 9651326
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Satish M. Mahajan smahajan@tntech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Joseph O. Ojo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              A. Chandrasekaran  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tennessee Technological U
	      Dixie Avenue
	      Cookeville, TN  38505    931/372-3374

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The major objective of this project is to develop a modern electrical energy
              systems laboratory for undergraduate electrical engineering students. The
              laboratory provides students with both hands-on experience and a deeper
              understanding of theoretical concepts in the state-of-the-art power engineering
              technology. The experience should prepare them to meet the challenges of the
              industry by creating in them an awareness of various practical issues
              confronting an engineer.   The innovative aspect of this project is the
              integration of the principles of modern power conversion devices (e.g.,
              d.c./d.c. converters, solar generation) and practical applications (e.g.,
              electric vehicles) in a laboratory environment. A single laboratory facility
              can provide the students with practical knowledge in areas significant to
              electrical power systems, such as power quality, power electronic conversion,
              associated electromagnetic fields, control and dynamics of motors, solar power
              conversion, and operation of electric vehicles at high efficiencies. The
              opportunity to work with recent high-technology equipment in these allied areas
              will attract more students to work in the laboratory.   The laboratory
              experiments progress from fundamental concepts to basic applications and lead
              to advanced applications. The facility also provides opportunities for senior
              students to undertake purposeful capstone design projects in power engineering
              that are relevant in today's workplace. This project sets a new trend in
              educating the 21st century electrical power engineer and forms a model for
              other engineering schools in this context.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
