Title       : Improving the Undergraduate Chemistry Experience Using FT-IRSpectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  1996       
File        : a9651015

Award Number: 9651015
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8405               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce M. Branan bbranan@mhc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mars Hill College
	      
	      Mars Hill, NC  28754    704/689-1111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The chemistry department has been using an aged single-beam dispersive infrared
              (IR) spectrometer for routine analyses of organic compounds encountered in the
              undergraduate laboratories, specifically in the organic chemistry course. The
              instrument requires large sample sizes and inordinate amounts of time for
              spectra acquisition; it is becoming difficult to furnish with parts and
              supplies. To modernize the analytical holdings in the department, this project
              provides a Fourier-transform-infrared (FTIR) spectrometer. Such features as
              computer control, saving of spectra into memory, spectra subtraction, the
              availability of spectral library software, and solid-analysis capabilities were
              not possible with the previous IR, but can be performed with this new
              instrument.   This spectrometer is being used primarily in the organic
              chemistry laboratory for routine analysis, yet may also find use in inorganic,
              physical, analytical, and biochemistry. A joint instrumentation course is also
              being implemented for the departments of chemistry and biology and is
              introducing the junior and senior science majors to some of the major
              instrumental methods of both fields. The students served in the sciences would
              benefit directly by the improved abilities, but also from the new experiments
              planned, which include the study of various types of polymers, analysis of
              low-level concentrations in raw materials, and the monitoring of a reaction's
              progress using FTIR.   Ultimately, the desired impact on the students is their
              improved preparation for entry into the scientific workforce, having had
              adequate hands-on training using modern instrumental techniques and computers.
              The time saved on routine operations could be spent exploiting the instrument's
              numerous capabilities. The lessons learned may be shared with others at local
              scientific meetings in order to determine the best methods by which to
              incorporate the machine into the science curriculum.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                
