Title       : A Modular Approach to Honors General Chemistry Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  1996       
File        : a9651406

Award Number: 9651406
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14430              (Estimated)
Investigator: Amir H. Hoveyda amir.hoveyda@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert S. Umans  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lynne A. O'Connell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               An honors-level track in Chemistry is being offered and is directed to
              approximately 40 students (out of approximately 600 enrollees in General
              Chemistry) who exhibit exceptional aptitude and strong preparation in
              chemistry. It is designed for prospective chemistry, biochemistry, and biology
              majors, and in addition to teaching chemical principles, it discusses exciting
              modern applications of chemistry in areas such as human health care, drug
              design, and the development of new materials. In the first semester of their
              studies, these students enroll in both a lecture course, entitled Principles of
              Modern Chemistry, and a laboratory course, entitled Modern Chemistry
              Laboratory.   Modern Chemistry Laboratory is intended to communicate the
              excitement of modern chemical research while providing the students with a firm
              grounding in the basic procedures of chemical experimentation. Toward these
              ends, the laboratory is designed and organized around three principles:   (1)
              The students are introduced to the major fields of chemistry through use of a
              modular organization that clusters experiments into the areas of physical,
              organic, inorganic, and biological chemistry. Analytical chemistry can be
              incorporated into each of these units through the use of a variety of
              instrumental and analytical techniques.   (2) As instrumentation plays a major
              role in all areas of chemical research, the students are introduced to the use
              of instrumentation early in the course and instrumental techniques play a major
              role in the experiments. The techniques of ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy and
              Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy play a particularly important role in
              several of the experiments, reflecting their wide use across many areas of
              chemistry.   (3) All of the students complete the semester by undertaking a
              short synthetic or analytical project that involves collaborative work with one
              of the research laboratories in the Chemistry Department. They may, for
              example, undertake a relatively simple preparation of a compound which will be
              used by an organic or inorganic research group in synthetic work. Or they may
              perform kinetic measurements on an enzyme currently under study by a
              biochemical research group. In connection with this project, the students visit
              the research lab that has originated the project and speak with the researchers
              involved. This project serves the dual purpose of giving the students an
              opportunity to apply the techniques they have learned during the semester and
              engaging their interest through the knowledge that the material they are
              preparing or the measurements they are conducting will not be `thrown away,`
              but will become part of an ongoing research project.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                       
