Title       : Solid State Device Animation Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  1996       
File        : a9651416

Award Number: 9651416
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51181              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohamed A. Osman osman@eecs.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy Rada  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Flynn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the creation of a Solid State Device Animation laboratory
              (SSDAL) that will make it possible to accomplish a number of pedagogical goals
              by improving instruction and providing a rich context for student learning and
              practice. With simulations tools available, the facility is able to accommodate
              a large number of students in concrete and relevant activities. Students are
              then better able to visualize abstract concepts and engage in more productive
              collaborative learning. Additionally, students are exposed to a variety of
              hands-on learning opportunities through multiple educational media, which
              enables students of varying learning styles or with special needs to take
              better advantage of the programs. Also, the facility allows students to record
              and disseminate their projects, which in turn helps the faculty develop and
              improve the overall curriculum. Dissemination of projects also gives students
              practical experience presenting findings in classrooms, at conferences, and
              over the World Wide Web (WWW), all of which increase a sense of professional
              self-efficacy among prospective graduates.   The SSDAL is based on
              Hewlett-Packard workstations, Macintosh-based animation and video capture, and
              device and process simulation software to augment required junior- and
              senior-level courses in the form of interactive animated tutorials that can be
              accessed at SSDAL or on the WWW. SSDAL also supports senior projects and
              classes, allowing combining simulations and animations as investigative tools
              and where computer science and electrical engineering students can work in team
              projects. To accomplish this objective, the laboratory uses device and process
              simulation software developed by Silvaco, along with two- and three-dimensional
              graphics interface, and Macintosh-based animation and visualization tools for
              generating animated tutorials and projects. The software includes Atlas II,
              which is a framework for device simulation that includes PISCES, BLAZE, TFT,
              LUMINOS, and GIGA, and the Athena framework, with one- and two-dimensional
              process simulation capability.                                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                   
