Title       : Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy Across the Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  1996      
File        : a9651027

Award Number: 9651027
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19345              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta M. Bustin bustin@shire.lyon.arknet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lyon College
	      P O BOX 2317
	      Batesville, AR  725032317    501/793-9813

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               A recently established goal of this chemistry program is to incorporate
              open-ended discovery-based project laboratories throughout the chemistry
              curriculum from the freshman- to senior-year. In these labs, students can
              choose an area to investigate, pose a problem, and carry out experiments to
              address the problem. Students not only learn a lot of experimental techniques
              during these multiweek labs, but they are also required to learn concepts
              needed to understand the topic they choose to investigate.   The primary
              objective of this project is to reach this goal of having project labs in every
              course beyond the first semester of the freshman year by providing an
              instrument that could be used in several such courses. The department is making
              use of an Atomic Absorption (AA) Spectrophotometer with both a conventional
              burner and a Heated Graphite Furnace. Instrumentation is already available for
              students to undertake project-based labs in Organic and Physical Chemistry. An
              AA is the one additional instrument needed to open up many areas of
              investigation for Introduction to Analytical Chemistry, Instrumental Analysis,
              and Environmental Chemistry. The AA is a useful tool for freshmen because it is
              easy to operate and to understand; whereas instruments such as the
              Fourier-transform-nuclear magnetic resonance, Fourier-transform infrared, and
              gas chromatography/mass spectrometers are usually reserved for students who
              have had or are taking Organic Chemistry.    There are many open-ended
              experiments that can be carried out with the use of an AA. The AA can also be
              used in undergraduate research and with special groups such as the Math/Science
              Upward Bound students. The addition of an AA enhances the courses offered and
              makes it possible to do project-based labs across the curricula.               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
