Title       : Bioprocess Equipment for Undergraduate Chemical Engineering Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9651409

Award Number: 9651409
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74983              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nam S. Wang nsw@eng.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan V. Sengers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Weigand  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William E. Bentley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard V. Calabrese  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Biotechnology is one of the fastest emerging technical fields, and bioprocess
              engineering in particular is becoming increasingly critical in determining our
              country's ability to compete effectively in the world market. Over the last
              nine years, the Chemical Engineering Department at the University of Maryland
              at College Park has developed an undergraduate laboratory course in biochemical
              engineering through an iterative process incorporating feedback from students.
              Experiments are carefully selected and designed to integrate classical chemical
              engineering principles with modern biotechnology techniques. They cover most of
              the basic and commonly used laboratory techniques in enzyme and microbial
              technology. A series of urease related bioprocesses currently form the heart of
              the major experiments ranging from initial culture isolation to final
              bioproduct recovery: 1) strain isolation or genetic engineering, 2) oxygen mass
              transfer, 3) fermentation kinetics, 4) enzyme purification, 5) enzyme kinetics,
              and 6) enzyme immobilization. As urease hydrolyzes urea to ammonia and carbon
              dioxide, changes in the pH allow the enzyme to be easily, safely, and
              inexpensively detected. With pH indicators, the enzyme reaction can be
              visualized, thus, providing great pedagogical value. The impact of the project
              reaches far beyond bioprocess engineering, as most of the experiments are also
              highly suitable for the unit operations laboratory, a core chemical engineering
              course, and are easily portable to other schools. Plans for multiple
              dissemination activities exist. Most of these biochemical engineering
              experiments have already been designed, tested, and proven with equipment
              borrowed from graduate research. However, lack of dedicated equipment causes
              many problems. The objective of the project is to procure the most fundamental
              bioprocess equipment for the undergraduate chemical engineering laboratory.
