Title       : Improving the Hands-On Classroom Experience in Computer Science at West Virginia
               Wesleyan College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  1996   
File        : a9651348

Award Number: 9651348
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane C. Prey                            
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5474               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gretchen H. Lynn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald H. Klausewitz  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : WV Wesleyan College
	      College Avenue
	      Buckhannon, WV  26201    304/473-7011

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               To support incoming freshmen majoring in computer science, this college
              supplies each student with a computer at well below one-half of wholesale cost.
              Students can soon get portables at the same price. If these computers are
              networked together, a hands-on method of teaching can be employed. Students can
              do their work at their seats and then send the results to the instructor,
              receive exercises and program segments, and display their problems using
              big-screen projection units already installed in the classrooms. This approach
              facilitates the demonstration and reinforcement of new concepts by having each
              student send his or her application of the concept to the instructor;
              instructor generated handouts and student generated submission of exercises and
              quizzes; interactive student and instructor solutions to problems and bugs in
              student programs; and problem solving by problem division and modular software
              engineering techniques. Students can be provided with transceivers to plug into
              their portables. The instructor works at a base transceiver that also connects
              to the campus-wide network. The ability to display any of the students' screens
              and the instructor's screen can be used to make concepts clear. The experience
              of providing this teaching tool at a small, independent, liberal arts college
              should be of interest at similar institutions.                                 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                           
