Title       : The Introduction of Time-of-Flight and Coincidence Techniques into the
               Undergraduate Physics Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  1996       
File        : a9651386

Award Number: 9651386
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19401              (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Johnston mejohnston@stthomas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of St. Thomas
	      2115 Summit Avenue
	      St. Paul, MN  551051096    651/962-6720

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project strengthens the upper-division physics laboratory program by
              introducing fast-timing techniques and their applications using
              state-of-the-art equipment. Event timing is central to a wide range of
              experiments in atomic, optical, nuclear, and surface physics. Because of this,
              it is important to incorporate these techniques, and the instrumentation they
              require, into the undergraduate physics curriculum.    To accomplish this goal,
              the department is introducing two new labs:  High Resolution, Low Energy
              Electron Scattering Cross Section Measurements Using Time-of-Flight Techniques
              and r-r Coincidence Angular Correlation Studies of 22Na. Both of the
              experiments require complex timing instrumentation that illustrates the basics
              of fast-timing techniques with standard equipment used in research and
              industry. Students are exposed to a variety of technologies: high vacuum, NIM
              modules, multichannel analyzers, pulse height and time-delay discrimination,
              charged particle optics, and y-ray detection. A modular approach to the
              instrumentation allows for the performance of a variety of experiments. By
              simulating research and industrial environments, this approach gives students
              useful and practical experience to draw on when they begin their careers.   
              Project dissemination efforts include the American Journal of Physics and
              American Association of Physics Teachers meetings. Details of experimental
              procedures will be placed on the Department's World Wide Web homepage. To
              assess long-term impact, graduates will be surveyed annually for 5 years, with
              an emphasis on usefulness of skills and techniques acquired in upper-division
              laboratory experiments.
