Title       : Developing Mobile and Industrial Electrohydraulic and Electropneumatic Technical
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1996    
File        : a9651347

Award Number: 9651347
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $71454              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert W. Vogt   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence P. Biddle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Competencies in the areas of fluid power, electrical, and electronic systems and
              controls are essential for technicians' understanding of manufacturing
              processes and other dynamic industries including transportation, construction,
              agriculture, power generation, and petrochemical. The artificial separation of
              electrical/electronic and fluid power systems curricula does not adequately
              prepare students to design, troubleshoot, repair, and service electrohydraulic
              and electropneumatic systems. This project integrates the
              electrical/electronics and fluid power technical curricula to foster synthesis
              of the knowledge and produce graduates with necessary skills and competencies.
              The goal of this project is to develop mobile and industrial electrohydraulic
              and electropneumatic technical education to produce more broadly-trained and
              competent technicians, as well as increase the knowledge of the incumbent
              workforce and technology teachers with an emphasis on experiential learning
              using state-of-the-art technology.    The curricula will be redesigned to
              integrate these disciplines into four courses with a team teaching approach for
              students majoring in electrical and electronics technology, heavy equipment and
              vehicles, air conditioning and refrigeration technology, engineering graphics
              technology, and manufacturing technology at OSU-Okmulgee. The key to teaching
              this interdisciplinary technical curriculum is a unique hydraulic and
              electronic trainer which permits experiential learning opportunities in
              laboratory exercises. This project will serve many non-traditional students: 
              the campus' average student age is 26.9 years and the racial distribution is
              more diverse than the state population. Curriculum developed for this project
              will be produced on multi-media and packaged for distance learning applications
              for the incumbent workforce. Results of this project will be disseminated to
              academic and fluid power professional associations, through the Internet, and
              on an electronic bulletin board.
