Title       : A Computer-Based Undergraduate Curriculum - II
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1996     
File        : a9651143

Award Number: 9651143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44619              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ralph J. Charkins   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mayo Toruno  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carolyn Rodriguez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Douglas Chamberlain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Economics Department was awarded a grant from the National Science
              Foundation in 1989 to put together a PC lab for the students. The purpose was
              to assist students to understand basic economic concepts and relationships;
              develop their modeling skills; and retrieve, evaluate, and use current and
              historical economic data in their courses. The lab has been extremely
              successful in achieving the first two goals but less so in the third. In
              addition, it has done little in teaching students to present the results of
              their investigations in an interesting, coherent, and professional manner.  
              New hardware and software makes achievement of all four goals much easier. In
              order to prepare students for graduate school and employment, the department is
              implementing a 30-station computer lab that runs the current software. The
              Windows 95 current version of Quattro Pro makes mastery of spreadsheets easier,
              freeing students to explore the meaning of economic models more quickly and in
              more depth. Access to the Internet, which the current equipment cannot provide
              in a practical manner, enables students to retrieve data quickly and easily
              from many different sources, making their use of this data much more practical.
              Power Point helps students to present their arguments easily and persuasively.
              This is particularly important in the Economics in the Classroom course, a
              course for future teachers.   Using current hardware and software, the project
              can build upon its success in the past and provide the students with skills
              that it has previously been unable to provide. The Economics Department has
              demonstrated its ability to use the latest technology to prepare students for
              life after college and continues to do so.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                       
