Title       : Undergraduate ASIC Computer-Aided Design Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9651029

Award Number: 9651029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet C. Rutledge                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28228              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark J. Paulik   (Principal Investigator current)
              Nizar Al-Holou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Detroit
	      4001 West McNichols Road
	      Detroit, MI  482190900    313/927-1000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The aim of this project is to facilitate the establishment of an Undergraduate
              ASIC Computer-Aided Design Laboratory in the Department of Electrical
              Engineering and Physics at the University of Detroit Mercy that will result in
              a significant enhancement in the manner in which digital system design is
              taught.  The area of digital design is one in which the teaching of theory is
              intertwined with, and as important as, the teaching of practice. The
              availability of the proposed laboratory would make it possible to formulate
              realistic design projects, that would be comprehensive in scope and enable the
              complete design cycle to be exercised, from initial specifications to final
              product. The students will have the opportunity to see the conceived model as
              working hardware.  While the proposed laboratory will strengthen junior and
              senior level offerings in the EE program in general the availability of
              state-of-the-alt digital design automation tools will have special impact on
              the Digital Logic I, Microprocessors, Advanced Microprocessors, and Digital
              Logic II: VHDL courses. In all cases, a well planned sequence of laboratory
              assignments and projects involving analysis, design, and simulation will
              provide students with strong hands-on experience.  In this proposal we are
              requesting four modern workstations, license fees for software, and FPGA
              interface and programming hardware. The justification for requesting each of
              these items is outlined in the proposal. Given the number and diversity of the
              students who will utilize this laboratory, we are confident that the impact of
              this laboratory improvement will be significant.
