Title       : Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GCD) for Improved Undergraduate
               Instruction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  1996      
File        : a9651079

Award Number: 9651079
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26374              (Estimated)
Investigator: Anthony F. Sky sky@ltu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence Technolog Univ
	      21000 Ten Mile Road
	      Southfield, MI  480751051    313/356-0200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Natural Sciences is enhancing the undergraduate chemistry
              laboratory curriculum by offering all freshman engineering, science, and
              chemistry students, at all levels, experimental work in the area of gas
              chromatography/mass spectrometry (GCD). Two hundred freshmen in the freshman
              chemistry laboratory, each year, are able to use this instrument in relevant
              experiments.   Acquisition of GCD equipment strengthens each of the laboratory
              courses currently offered. It is important that students progressing through
              the chemistry curriculum have the opportunity to use this modern instrumental
              technique; therefore, training of chemistry majors on modern instrumentation is
              being insured.   The relevance of GCD in isotope analysis and environmental
              studies of air pollutants such as freons is being introduced in University
              Chemistry and is continued through Organic Chemistry and Advanced Synthesis,
              where reaction product structure determination and identification is enhanced
              by the use of this instrument. In Physical Chemistry, students use GCD for the
              calculation of thermodynamic properties and Arrhenius reaction rate parameters.
              In Instrumental Analysis, additional experiments in quantitative measurement of
              trace contaminants in air, soil, and water are offered.   Laboratory
              instruction is being supported by the use of computers and software already
              available in mass spectra interpretation. Students in the new environmental
              chemistry program also benefit from the use of the instrument for environmental
              studies.   Use of GCD equipment in University Chemistry Lab, a key component of
              the introductory course, encourages strong student interest and leads to
              improved recruitment, retention, and training of motivated and qualified
              chemistry majors.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
