Title       : X-Ray Diffraction: A Common Interdisciplinary Experience forGeology, Chemistry,
               and Physics Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9651385

Award Number: 9651385
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11269              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karl R. Wirth wirth@macalstr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James R. Doyle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas D. Varberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Macalester College
	      1600 Grand Avenue
	      Saint Paul, MN  551051801    612/696-6000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The purpose of this project is to establish a laboratory capable of supporting
              an undergraduate program in Computational Science. A large number of students
              in the natural and social sciences complete their undergraduate career without
              experience in the application of advanced computational tools and techniques to
              the problems of their respective disciplines. The objective of this project is
              to create an interdisciplinary program within the Mathematics Department that
              gives these students the needed background and experience. It expands and
              articulates existing courses in numerical methods, large-scale data analysis,
              and visualization techniques as it creates a program specifically designed for
              these students. This program can create a group of mathematically sophisticated
              students who can apply their knowledge of visualization and computation
              techniques to problems in the natural and social sciences, especially geology,
              biology, chemistry, physics, economics, geography, and psychology. All students
              in this program are required to complete a major computational project in their
              area of interest. These projects can be made publicly available. Faculty
              members can also share what they have learned about implementing such a program
              with other colleges and universities, especially with those similar
              institutions in the Associated Colleges of the Midwest and the Great Lakes
              Colleges Association with which the college has a record of close cooperation. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
