Title       : Graphical and Qualitative Investigations In Multivariable Calculus, Linear
               Algebra, and Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  1996      
File        : a9651374

Award Number: 9651374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35898              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Arnold darnold@northcoast.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin Yokoyama  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Donald Hicketheir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of the Redwoods
	      7351 Tompkins Hill Road
	      Eureka, CA  955019302    707/443-8411

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The purpose of this project is to change the mode of instruction in
              multivariable calculus, linear algebra, and differential equations. Currently,
              these courses are taught using the traditional lecture format. Although
              applications are often cited, students have very little hands-on experience
              with real-world applications. By using only traditional pencil and paper
              methods to solve equations, students experience minimal insight into the
              graphical and qualitative nature of solutions.   Changes in technology over the
              past 10 years have opened new and exciting doors in the field of mathematics
              education. New graphing technology allows huge amounts of information to be
              assimilated in a matter of seconds by examining the graph of a solution. The
              graphs of solutions provide compelling visual evidence of theoretical
              deductions as well as an understanding of the qualitative properties of
              solutions.   The hardware and software utilized in this project support the
              development and implementation of classroom demonstrations and interactive
              lesson plans that encourage students to take a more active role in their
              education. Laboratory activities make use of the Matlab software package.
              Experiments using the Calculator Based Laboratory units from Texas Instruments
              enable students to observe how physical systems are modeled by differential
              equations. All developed materials are shared with colleagues as they develop
              by posting them on the college's home page on the World Wide Web.   This
              project is significant because it can dramatically change the way college-level
              mathematics courses are taught. The new curriculum can generate both enthusiasm
              and a better understanding of these subjects, resulting in increased retention
              and enrollment.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                     
