Title       : Development of Hands-On Learning in Modern and Traditional Optics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 7,  1996        
File        : a9651149

Award Number: 9651149
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Natthi L. Sharma phy sharma@emuvax.emich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ernest R. Behringer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Michigan Univ
	      Office of Research Development
	      Ypsilanti, MI  48197    734/487-3090

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               In view of the growing evidence that passive listening is an inefficient way to
              learn physics, this project is developing new hands-on learning experiences in
              modern and traditional optics. Both of these closely related topics are of
              increasing technological importance and can play a significant, positive role
              in the training of public school teachers. In particular, this project involves
              two major developments:  a self-contained laboratory course in modern optics
              and a concomitant design change of the traditional optics lecture and
              laboratory courses, aimed at prospective teachers, which will emphasize
              interactive learning and conceptual understanding. The Physics and Astronomy
              Department is particularly well positioned for this project since it houses the
              teacher certification program of general science majors. This project also is
              developing collaborations with high school teachers, resulting in an integrated
              and enhanced program in optics consisting of two theory courses, two laboratory
              courses, and a facility for undergraduate research projects.   The new modern
              optics laboratory course includes seven regular experiments and three
              undergraduate research projects emphasizing concepts, related theory,
              measurements, and technological applications. The lab is being equipped with
              lasers, optical components, and optical and electronic instruments. This course
              provides a glimpse into the richness of laser physics beyond its visual
              aesthetics.   The experience gained through the lab course can prepare students
              for directed undergraduate research projects and for employment in
              optics-related industries. This course also exposes in-service and preservice
              teachers to important concepts in modern optics and helps diffuse these
              concepts to students in public schools. The significance of this course cannot
              be overemphasized at a time when the optical fiber is in the information
              network, optical computers are on the horizon, and electronics is giving way to
              photonics.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                               
