Title       : A Social Science Information Systems (SSIS) Laboratory for Undergraduate
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  1996      
File        : a9651363

Award Number: 9651363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sue Marie Wright swright@mail.ewu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Eastern Washington Univ
	      
	      Cheney, WA  990042444    509/458-6200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The computer equipment requested in this proposal will form the core of an
              undergraduate Social Science Information Systems (SSIS) laboratory. This lab
              will make possible the continuation of the newly established computer-based
              education (CBE) in the Sociology Department, including the current
              Computer-Assisted Data Analysis course, the development of a qualitative
              research course using computers, and the updating of current courses with
              appropriate computer applications. As conceived, social science research in a
              SSIS lab environment will allow undergraduates the opportunity to become
              computer literate through selecting and using computer programs, evaluating the
              validity of computer-produced output, and learning to communicate about and
              through computers. In addition to becoming computer literate, training in an
              advanced workstation environment will further opportunities for student
              internships and other cooperative work with the surrounding community, offer
              students a highly marketable skill, and prepare them for graduate programs in
              the social sciences. The SSIS lab will allow for the management of data that
              students can use to carry out their own research. Students will become
              competent in quantitative and/or qualitative analysis, training with some of
              the best industry software (e.g., SPSS and Ethnograph). The SSIS lab will also
              give students the opportunity to present professional quality reports through
              compatible graphics and word processing software. Finally, familiarity with
              appropriate Internet resources through the SSIS lab will allow students to
              expand their research base and community.
