Title       : Computerized Data Acquisition, Computer Simulations, and theWorld Wide Web in a
               Unique Undergraduate Laboratory in Physiology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9651280

Award Number: 9651280
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18626              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald B. Hoagland d hoagland@owl.wsc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David A. Doe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Songdahi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westfield State College
	      Western Avenue
	      Westfield, MA  010852502    413/568-3311

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This small, liberal arts institution serves approximately 5,000 undergraduate
              students. Each year approximately 300 students conduct physiology laboratory
              experiments in one of five separate biology courses. Six to seven percent of
              these students come from traditionally underrepresented groups in the sciences.
              In these courses, students learn physiological concepts and techniques through
              an inquiries-based approach and through cooperative and collaborative learning.
              While the laboratory methods for collecting and recording data pertaining to
              physiological events have progressed rapidly, the equipment available to
              students has not kept pace. A series of experiments based upon those already
              being performed is being developed to give students the opportunity to collect
              and analyze data with state-of-the-art transducers and instrumentation and a
              computerized acquisition system. Additionally, computer simulations of other
              physiological events are used, allowing for practical lab experience, realistic
              experimental design, and data analysis in a short period of time and at a low
              cost. The inclusion of additional laboratory exercises designed to investigate
              human physiology makes the lab experience more relative to a wider variety of
              students and helps recruit more underrepresented students into biology.
              Finally, all new laboratory exercises and student-collected data can be made
              available through the World Wide Web. Posting the data enables students
              conducting the same experiments throughout the world to share their data,
              refine the laboratory exercises, and establish networks that can serve them
              throughout their careers.                                                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                            
