Title       : Laboratory Enhancement of the Undergraduate Learning Experience in Biological
               Anthropology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9651303

Award Number: 9651303
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31697              (Estimated)
Investigator: Susan M. Ford sford@siu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Ill U Carbondale
	      
	      Carbondale, IL  62901    618/453-2121

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Most undergraduate courses in biological anthropology remain primarily lecture
              because of the lack of scheduled laboratory sessions and the scarcity of
              available materials. This department has added a new laboratory section to the
              most heavily attended introductory class. However, previously resources have
              allowed for only an adequate laboratory course, not a truly outstanding,
              innovative opportunity for students to gain hands-on experience with
              state-of-the-art materials and instrumentation including computer simulations
              and databases. Through this project, the department is building on existing
              materials to develop a series of truly involving and challenging laboratory
              experiences designed for both students in the introductory class and to enhance
              the interactive learning components of other classes in the bioanthropology
              curriculum.   The new equipment, computers, software, measuring devices,
              recording materials, casts, and magnification equipment, makes possible a
              series of specific laboratory exercises in the introductory class which
              enhances students' problem-solving and cooperative learning skills, encouraging
              collaboration, interchange, and deeper levels of understanding of the material.
              Because of the special nature of the university's student body, the project has
              the opportunity to reach many students who come from backgrounds often marked
              by poor exposure to science, from the under-funded school systems of inner city
              Chicago and the rural areas of Illinois, Missouri, and Kentucky. These students
              include first generation college students, minorities, economically and
              socially disadvantaged students, and physically challenged and learning
              disabled students.   Results can be disseminated through presentations at
              professional meetings, publications in journals, and the compilation of a lab
              manual which can be made available to other schools.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                        
