Title       : Ceratopteris - A Simple Model System for Teaching and Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  1996     
File        : a9651045

Award Number: 9651045
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gordon E. Uno                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $279178             (Estimated)
Investigator: Leslie G. Hickok lhickok@utk.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas R. Warne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
                              The plant Ceratopteris has a number of unique features that have
              made it a useful system for experimental research applications. As an offshoot
              of the development of this model system, we have recognized its potential
              usefulness for educational purposes in inquiry-based student teaching and
              research settings. Ceratopteris has a rapid and easily manipulated life cycle
              as well as other features specifically associated with homosporous ferns that
              make it unique and complementary to other widely used flowering plant systems.
              The ability to culture and manipulate large numbers of plants in small dishes,
              to visualize fertilization of eggs by motile sperm, combined with the simple
              genetics and availability of a wide range of interesting mutant lines make it
              an attractive, inexpensive and compelling organism to use for undergraduate
              education. Initial efforts to develop and disseminate teaching and plant
              materials have met with demonstrable success and we propose large scale
              development and promotion of this system at the undergraduate level. We will
              design laboratory modules that incorporate student inquiry-based and
              independent research approaches to teaching several basic aspects of biology.
              Specific strains will be developed incorporating single and multiple mutant
              alleles to enhance the number of available genotypes. To accompany the written
              materials we will produce video recordings of specific aspects of the life
              cycle and of various manipulation techniques. All of these materials, in
              addition to planned commercial distribution, will be disseminated by means of
              publications and presentations at national and regional scientific and
              educational meetings.
