Title       : A Robot-based Laboratory for Teaching Artificial Intelligence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 10,  1996      
File        : a9651472

Award Number: 9651472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28879              (Estimated)
Investigator: Lisa A. Meeden meeden@cs.swarthmore.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deepak Kumar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Swarthmore College
	      500 College Avenue
	      Swarthmore, PA  19081    610/328-8000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               There is a growing consensus among computer science faculty that it is quite
              difficult to teach the introductory course on Artificial Intelligence (AI)
              well. This is because AI lacks a unified methodology, overlaps with many other
              disciplines, and involves a wide range of skills from very applied to quite
              formal. This project addresses these problems by (1) offering a unifying theme
              that draws together the disparate topics of AI; (2) focusing the course
              syllabus on the role AI plays in the core computer science curriculum; and (3)
              motivating the students to learn by using concrete, hands-on laboratory
              exercises. The main theme is to conceive of each topic in AI (such as search,
              planning, learning, vision) as a robotics task and then to have the students
              build their own robots and program them to accomplish the tasks. By
              constructing a physical entity in conjunction with the code to control it, the
              students have a unique opportunity to tackle many central issues of computer
              science directly including the interaction between hardware and software, space
              complexity in terms of the memory limitations of the robot's controller, and
              time complexity in terms of the speed of the robot's action decisions. More
              importantly, the robot theme provides a strong incentive toward learning
              because students want to see their inventions succeed.   The goal of this
              project is to equip two identical robotics laboratories for teaching AI. Each
              laboratory contains a collection of robot building stations as well as one
              sophisticated off-the-shelf robot to demonstrate more advanced topics to the
              students. The deliverable for this project is a laboratory manual that is
              closely integrated with a semester-long AI course syllabus. The manual is being
              developed collaboratively and tested separately at the participating
              institutions. The overall effectiveness of this project will be determined by
              student feedback and performance. The project results can be disseminated
              through a variety of channels:  a SIGART column on AI Education, special
              conference tracks on AI Education, summer training workshops for AI educators,
              and World Wide Web repositories on AI. This project offers a remedy for the
              difficulties facing AI educators by offering a cohesive framework for the
              presentation of the material that emphasizes AI's relationship with computer
              science and motivates the students to learn.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                             
