Title       : Curricular Enhancement Through the Integrated Use of Microcomputers in
               Introductory Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9651461

Award Number: 9651461
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22381              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maria C. Di Stefano sc06%nemomus@academic.nemostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Truman State University
	      McClain Hall 203
	      Kirksville, MO  63501    816/785-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project seeks to take advantage of the many ways in which computers can
              enhance student learning in introductory physics courses, both algebra- and
              calculus-based. Computers can do much more than act as fancy calculators; they
              have been utilized as powerful tools in the design of teaching methodologies
              based on the findings of research in physics education. The department is
              implementing microcomputers and microcomputer-based laboratory tools that make
              possible an array of approaches to be integrated into existing physics courses.
                 The objective is to empower students to use concrete experiences to revise
              preconceptions, construct new understanding, and connect it with mathematical
              frameworks. Students engage in modeling activities using spreadsheets, and in
              some cases digitized videos, that reflect a realistic manner of physics
              research. They explore experimental situations utilizing sensors or probes
              connected to the computer, which facilitates the analysis by providing
              instantaneous calculations and real-time graphics, clearly shown to improve
              student conceptual understanding. They explore some topics through
              activity-based investigations which help them acquire transferable skills of
              scientific inquiry.     The department is developing some new exercises, but is
              also adapting many that are already available (mostly from Workshop Physics and
              Tools for Scientific Thinking) to the specific environment, a midsize
              undergraduate institution, with some flexibility for individual faculty
              variations (instructional methods become more effective when they fit faculty
              styles and when faculty have developed some sense of ownership). The project's
              efforts will be useful to other institutions with similar characteristics.
              Students' attitudes toward physics and self-perceptions regarding how their
              learning abilities are affected by the integrated use of computers are also
              being assessed.
