Title       : Workshop Interdisciplinary Mathematics and Science Course
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 9,  1997    
File        : a9651294

Award Number: 9651294
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26663              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gifford C. Brown brown@charm.evansville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean C. Beckman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ruth Chesnut  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Troy D. VanAken  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karen J. Ott  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Evansville
	      P O BOX 329
	      Evansville, IN  477020329    812/477-6241

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Many students in the general education science and mathematics courses
              understand little about how science is done or about the major themes and
              concepts of science and mathematics. This project addresses these problems by
              developing a hands-on, laboratory-based, integrated mathematics and science
              general education course. The course is designed for all students who are not
              majoring in science or mathematics and is especially appropriate for preservice
              teachers.      The course is a team-taught 2-semester sequence that meets 5
              hours per week in a workshop format that combines lecture, hands-on activities
              and exercises, and laboratory. Each semester is 4 credit hours. The objectives
              of the course are to emphasize relationships among the scientific disciplines,
              to coordinate mathematics with science, to promote science literacy, and to
              enhance the understanding of science by teaching it as it is practiced. The
              course is truly interdisciplinary in nature, examining both unifying themes in
              the sciences and the contributions of mathematics to our understanding of the
              natural world. The course also examines science from historical, philosophical,
              and contemporary social perspectives.    Toward these goals, the course engages
              students as active participants in learning through open-ended investigative
              laboratory experiences, group projects both in the laboratory and the library,
              and the presentation of ideas in oral and written form.    Students completing
              the course are expected to have improved their critical thinking skills and be
              better able to navigate in the scientific and technological world. The course
              is also expected to prepare the preservice teachers in its audience to convey
              the nature and content of science and mathematics better in their own
              classrooms.
