Title       : Integrated Computer and Product Testing Laboratory (CAPT Lab)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 29,  1996      
File        : a9651282

Award Number: 9651282
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61644              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheryl A. Farr cafarr@okstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donna H. Branson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lona Robertson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The goal of this project is to provide interior and apparel design and
              merchandising undergraduate students, predominantly women, with a
              technologically superior, science-based education. To accomplish this goal, the
              Department of Design, Housing, and Merchandising (DHM) has redesigned the
              curriculum. For the science-based curriculum, new laboratory facilities are
              being used to teach science principles and to integrate textile testing of
              interiors and apparel products with coursework in product design, prototype
              production, and product testing and evaluation. A Computer Aided Product
              Testing Laboratory (CAPT Lab) has been developed to teach science concepts and
              to apply those concepts to major specific subject matter. Non-science-majors
              are increasing their intellectual science base and applying science-based
              critical thinking and problem solving to professional decision making.   The
              project is significant because of its innovative use of an intellectual science
              underpinning and advanced technology to integrate product design with
              undergraduate laboratory research to explain product performance and product
              failure. Other universities have developed computer facilities or textile
              testing classes, but have not designed a curriculum that integrates computer
              design, prototype production, and product testing into the total educational
              experience.   Major instruments include computer systems, textile product
              testing equipment, and industrial sewn product production equipment. Computer
              and mathematical applications include the statistical analysis of test results.
              Test results are linked to science-based explanations used to predict product
              performance. Product testing applications include testing tensile strength, dye
              stability, compression, resiliency, flammability, and soil resistance.         
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                              
