Title       : Integration of Novel Laser-Spectroscopy Experiments into the Undergraduate
               Physical Chemistry Laboratory Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1996       
File        : a9651101

Award Number: 9651101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank A. Settle                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22453              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gabriela C. Weaver   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project supports the use of a versatile, laser-based spectroscopy system
              in the undergraduate physical chemistry laboratory. The use of lasers in
              graduate, postdoctoral, and professional research makes it imperative that
              students be proficient in this area. The department has recently obtained a
              small Helium-Neon (HeNe) laser in order to carry out introductory laser
              experiments in the undergraduate laboratory. However, to ensure that this is
              not the only level of instruction that any of the students receive with lasers,
              this project outfits the undergraduate physical chemistry laboratory with the
              necessary equipment to teach more advanced laser-based experimentation.    The
              acquisition of the Nitrogen-laser-pumped dye laser (N2-dye) system allows for
              the introduction of an integrated laser-based curriculum into this
              undergraduate laboratory course and of related techniques for the Instrumental
              Analysis and Biochemistry laboratories. The laser-based experiments complement
              and enhance experiments already performed in these courses. The laser system is
              being used for Raman and fluorescence spectroscopy and has the potential to be
              used for time-resolved experiments in the future. An original experiment
              utilizing surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is currently being
              developed and introduced into the laboratory curriculum.    The impact of the
              new experiments can be evaluated by comparing student course questionnaires
              with those of past semesters when no laser-based experiments were used and when
              many students explicitly requested more up-to-date equipment. Original
              experiments for the undergraduate physical chemistry laboratory can be
              submitted to the Journal of Chemical Education and discussed at meetings of the
              American Chemical Society(ACS). The SERS experiment currently under development
              may be presented at the ACS Biennial Conference of Chemical Education in
              Clemson, South Carolina, in August 1996. A lab manual is being compiled with
              the new experiments and may be made available over the Internet as well as in
              printed form.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                  
