Title       : Interdisciplinary Automated Manufacturing Laboratory for theElectro-Mechanical
               Engineering Technology Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1996      
File        : a9651001

Award Number: 9651001
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Margaret D. Weeks                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50318              (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Rehg   (Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce A. Muller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sohail Anwar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Eric R. Granlund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              58        Engineering-Engineering Technology      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               There is a need in industry for technology graduates who can use a combination
              of electrical and mechanical concepts in the design, installation, and
              servicing of products and production systems. Preparing Associate Degree
              graduates for this role is difficult because 4 semesters is too short for
              extensive education in both disciplines. The Engineering Technology Department
              has addressed this problem by modifying three courses offered at the Associate
              Degree level to include basic concepts that bridge the two technologies and
              introducing a new 4-year degree program, Bachelor of Science in
              Electro-Mechanical Engineering Technology.   The solution to the training
              problem created two major pedagogical problems. The first problem was the
              method used to deliver the content in the three courses. While the courses
              covered both product design and production system design and had a mix of
              electrical and mechanical concepts, there was no effort to use the same product
              examples in the courses. The second problem had two components:  (1) the
              department did not have an automated manufacturing system on which students
              could learn to solve the electromechanical integration problems associated with
              these systems and (2) if a system was built for training, it would be difficult
              to teach standard 16-student laboratory sections with single production
              machines and one-of-a-kind manufacturing systems.   This project includes two
              initiatives that overcome the instructional delivery problems associated with
              cross training in electromechanical concepts and the use of large automated
              manufacturing systems in traditional laboratory sections. The project focuses
              on the integration of a product design problem into manufacturing courses and
              the development of a laboratory system that permits standard laboratory class
              sizes of 16 students to effectively use single production machines and a
              one-of-a-kind manufacturing system. The second problem is significant because
              many colleges add manufacturing systems to laboratories, but few address the
              training issues associated with the one-of-a-kind hardware in standard
              laboratory sections.                                                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                       
