Title       : Introduction of Microwave Decomposition into the Undergraduate Analytical
               Chemistry Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 25,  1996     
File        : a9651463

Award Number: 9651463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1996       
Expires     : April 30,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9408               (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. McCurdy sc34@nemomus.bitnet  (Principal Investigator current)
              R. Griffith Freeman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Truman State University
	      McClain Hall 203
	      Kirksville, MO  63501    816/785-4000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project brings microwave sample preparation into the undergraduate
              chemistry curriculum. While there is widespread use of microwave sample
              preparation in industrial settings, there is limited evidence in the literature
              describing its application to undergraduate education. The introduction of
              microwave sample preparation to the analytical laboratory is giving students
              training on a widely used instrument and expanding the types of laboratory
              activities that may be reasonably conducted.   For example, in Quantitative
              Analysis classes, new and modified experiments are introducing the basics of
              microwave sample preparation, using everyday samples to provide a greater
              "real-world" feel. In the Instrumental Analysis class, a 4-week advanced lab
              component is being added, where the time limitations of sample preparation have
              limited the challenge of previous student projects. In the Advanced Analytical
              Chemistry class, microwave sample preparation is being added as part of a
              laboratory comparing new and traditional sample preparation methods. Students
              participating in an interdisciplinary study-abroad environmental science class,
              and in the growing undergraduate research program at the university also are
              employing this equipment.   The equipment is allowing the use of microwave
              sample preparation in all analytical chemistry classes and improving
              undergraduate research opportunities, which is better preparing students for
              industry and graduate school. Because the project is modifying traditional
              experiments and developing new ones, it serves other educators, by providing
              approaches for the adoption of microwave digestion techniques in their classes.
