Title       : Enhancing Student Chemistry Learning by Changing Instructionand Assessment
               Practices: A Proposal for a Computer Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1996      
File        : a9651124

Award Number: 9651124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan H. Hixson                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40831              (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig W. Bowen cbowen@wave.st.usm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Howard P. Williams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              J. Emory Howell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stella D. Elakovich  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern Mississippi
	      Box 5116
	      Hattiesburg, MS  394065116    601/266-5116

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 7348,9177,9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              A computer laboratory is being developed for interactive pre- and post-chemistry
              laboratory assessment and instruction of students in general and organic
              chemistry, and to provide computer laboratory teaching experiences for
              preservice high school chemistry teachers. The computer laboratory enables
              teachers to reinforce learning by showing students how "wet" laboratory
              experiences can be integrated with lecture ideas in terms of concepts being
              covered and laboratory skills being practiced. Quicktime movies allow
              presentation of, and questioning about, reactions that are too dangerous to
              have students do in the laboratory. Students view, and are quizzed on,
              Quicktime video clips on safe use of laboratory equipment. For prelaboratory
              instruction, the computer environment provides an opportunity for students to
              take part in interactive questioning to determine whether they have the
              knowledge needed to complete the laboratory successfully.    The "wet"
              laboratory environment is an important part of chemistry that is not to be
              replaced by computer facilities. Students are using calculator interfaced
              laboratory methods of acquiring and analyzing data from "wet" lab experiments
              as a part of this project. The postlaboratory computer lab can be a place for
              students to be assessed on their learning of the laboratory material, to extend
              their learning, and to be guided by further work if deficiencies are revealed.
              The facility also provides preservice teachers an avenue for developing and
              using instructional and assessment materials to facilitate chemistry learning.
              The 2-year implementation period includes both formative and summative
              evaluations that enhance instruction and quizzing practices used in the
              project.  Materials from the project are being made available to others through
              computers (World Wide Web), workshops, and print.
