Title       : Computer Laboratory for Undergraduate Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  1996       
File        : a9651365

Award Number: 9651365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth Teles                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26160              (Estimated)
Investigator: Randolph J. Schilling rjschilling@ualr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan M. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jackie B. Garner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David Schonert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel B. McCallum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Little Rock
	      2801 South University
	      Little Rock, AR  72204    501/569-3000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project is using undergraduate independent study and research projects to
              train students to use mathematics as a tool for exploration and to view
              mathematics as an experimental science.  The pedagogical idea is to use student
              research projects which require computer skills, written reports, and other
              skills from mathematics as well as social sciences and physical sciences to
              integrate exploration into the undergraduate mathematics curriculum. The
              institution plan for both the BA and BS programs in mathematics requires that
              mathematics majors complete a project for graduation. To strengthen the central
              interdisciplinary role of mathematics in both the social and physical sciences,
              the lab is open to non-mathematics students with math intensive projects. The
              program seeks to support recruitment, retention and graduation of minority
              students through projects and one-on-one interaction between student and
              mentor.  The project also (a) provides a classroom/demo-room for math courses
              such as matrix analysis, differential equations, optimization, statistics and
              modeling; (b) expands the computer-based Calculus program; and (c) provides
              evening and Summer Workshops for in-service teachers as well as programs in
              mathematics education for pre-service teachers.
