Title       : Capstone Courses and Projects in Applied Mathematics and Statistics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  1996      
File        : a9651404

Award Number: 9651404
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lee L. Zia                              
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28724              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daljit S. Ahluwalia daahlu@m.njit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Bonnie K. Ray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bruce G. Bukiet  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Foundation @ NJIT
	      323 Martin Luther King Blvd.
	      Newark, NJ  071021824    973/596-3430

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project addresses the establishment of an undergraduate computational
              laboratory, which also contains facilities for performing simple physical
              experiments, in the mathematics department. The laboratory is used in the
              development and implementation of capstone courses and projects for
              undergraduate applied mathematics and statistics majors. These courses and
              projects help students learn to combine experimental methods, mathematical and
              statistical modeling techniques, mathematical analysis, and computational
              skills to study physical problems and processes. The project provides students
              the experience of integrating different areas of their education in order to
              develop the technological and critical-thinking skills necessary in today's
              workplace.   The courses, one in Applied Mathematics and one in Statistics, are
              implemented using lectures, physical experimentation, data collection, and
              computer laboratory sessions. Case studies are used during the first semester.
              This course is followed by a second semester of faculty-guided student research
              projects. The students learn to model real-world processes and to analyze the
              models by implementing available computational algorithms and making necessary
              modifications to them. They are also required to communicate project results
              orally and in writing. The undergraduate lab is administered as an extension of
              an existing faculty and graduate student computer lab, which allows graduate
              students to serve as mentors for undergraduates. The case studies and student
              projects developed for the course can be made available to other universities
              (via the World Wide Web) that have expressed interest in the project and can be
              presented at appropriate conferences.   The capstone courses and projects can
              significantly strengthen the undergraduate mathematics program by improving
              students' critical thinking, analysis, and synthesis skills and by better
              preparing students to enter industrial, government, or graduate research
              environments.                                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                    
