Title       : Undergraduate Field and Laboratory Equipment Improvement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1996      
File        : a9651492

Award Number: 9651492
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $39871              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul S. Goldberg paulberg@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This university is one of the few universities in the United States that has a
              Department of Archaeology. As such, it is able to provide a concentration of
              courses that would be difficult to obtain at other universities. An active
              faculty represents many aspects of the field, and all of them are committed to
              promoting the use of sciences in archaeology. Whereas the staff has a modern
              approach, the department's lack of equipment has prevented it from providing
              the most up-to-date scientific methodologies. Funds are now being used to
              obtain equipment that would ameliorate this problem and permit expansion of
              several courses that are critical to improving the quality of undergraduate
              instruction in archaeology.   The courses in question instruct students about
              the role of sciences and scientific methods as applied to archaeological
              problems. Equipment is being used for four courses that include both field and
              lecture/laboratory components:  Department Field Schools in conjunction with a
              course, Remote Sensing, Geoarchaeology, and Micromorphology of Terrestrial
              Materials.   The department is in the process of developing a concentration in
              geoarchaeology. In addition to a course in Geoarchaeology, a course in
              micromorphology and its application to archaeological problems is being added.
              Micromorphology is a relatively new subdiscipline in geoarchaeology. This
              course is unique in that it is aimed explicitly at advancing the application of
              this scientific technique to archaeological problems. Until recently, resources
              have not been sufficient to teach a small class of even 10 students. To augment
              the instrument to student ratio, this project will purchase binocular and
              petrographic microscopes, as well as teaching aids such as a video camera and
              monitors to train students in scientific observation and interpretation.       
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                    
