Title       : Quantitative Geochemical Laboratory Experiences in the Undergraduate Geology
               Curriculum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9651368

Award Number: 9651368
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David W. Mogk                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83485              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth A. Sargent ken.sargent@furman.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Ranson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles B. Andersen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Furman University
	      3300 Poinsett Highway
	      Greenville, SC  29613    864/294-3468

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Furman University is currently revising its curriculum to reflect the earth
              systems approach suggested by the NASA advisory council. As the earth systems
              approach involves the teaching of sophisticated geochemical concepts, it is
              necessary to incorporate analytical instrumentation, the process of geochemical
              analysis, and data interpretation into each of the classes. This project
              focuses on developing an integrated, problem-solving-based curriculum in which
              the sophistication of geochemical concepts and participation in sample analysis
              will increase as the student moves through the curriculum. Current research in
              pedagogy indicates that (1) problem solving increases learning retention and
              critical thinking ability and (2) active participation in a cooperative
              learning environment will attract women and minorities into the sciences.
              Therefore, the acquisition of a new, fully automated x-ray fluorescence (XRF)
              unit will have a major impact on the Earth and Environmental Sciences
              Department by allowing students to discover geochemical principles through
              integrated field and laboratory exercises and research projects.    At the
              introductory level, students are being introduced to geochemical analysis
              through demonstration of sample preparation and analysis, followed by
              interpretation of a data set from rocks seen on previous field trips. At the
              advanced level, the presence of an XRF unit in the department enables faculty
              to give increasingly more responsibility for sample preparation and analysis to
              the students as they progress through the major. Data collected by the students
              can be used to illustrate the partitioning of elements in the Earth's crust by
              geologic processes such as magma crystallization and weathering. The XRF unit
              can be used in nearly all courses for majors including earth materials,
              advanced earth materials, sedimentary geology, ore deposits, and a field-based
              course in geochemistry. As active, participatory learning is important to the
              curriculum, all students participate in res earch projects throughout their
              career, finishing with an independent research project. The XRF unit enables
              students involved in geochemical research to be involved in the process of
              research beyond data interpretation.
