Title       : Undergraduate Investigation and Experiences in Physiology and Neuroscience
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1996      
File        : a9651458

Award Number: 9651458
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Herbert Levitan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34884              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay A. Blundon blundon@rhodes.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rhodes College
	      2000 North Parkway
	      Memphis, TN  381121624    901/843-3850

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project involves the implementation of changes in the programs of
              Physiology and Neuroscience that are designed to train students more
              effectively in the fundamentals of physiology and in the methods of scientific
              inquiry and independent investigation. The role of the professor is not to
              present a prespecified number of facts for memorization, but instead to provide
              experiences that enhance student ability to teach themselves and think more
              critically and analytically about fundamental physiological principles that are
              common throughout the animal kingdom. Laboratory research experiences of
              introductory-level students involve the noninvasive measuring of human
              physiological variables. Research experiences of upper-level undergraduates are
              centered around the use of live invertebrate or vertebrate animals or animal
              tissues. The project includes the purchase of six physiological workstations,
              each including an Apple MacIntosh Performa computer and MacLab computer
              software and hardware for acquiring and analyzing physiological data. These
              workstations enable students to propose and perform a wide variety of hands-on
              investigations that serve to reinforce concepts they have learned in class and
              give them a greater appreciation for principles and methods of scientific
              inquiry. Specifically, students in Core Zoology use these workstations to study
              principles of human muscle physiology, circulation, and respiration. Physiology
              students can investigate the properties of animal organ systems that result in
              homeostasis of the internal environment. Neuroscience students can explore the
              cellular phenomena of excitable cells that give rise to resting potentials,
              action potentials, synaptic potentials, and synaptic plasticities.
