Title       : Development of Intelligent Systems Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 29,  1996     
File        : a9651082

Award Number: 9651082
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72834              (Estimated)
Investigator: Hossein Moini   (Principal Investigator current)
              Susamma Barua  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal State U Fullerton Fdn
	      2600 E. Nutwood Ave.
	      Fullerton, CA  92831    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project utilizes new equipment in developing an Intelligent Systems
              Laboratory (ISL). By using this equipment, senior mechanical engineering
              students are receiving hands-on experience with the design and manufacturing of
              intelligent systems. Specifically, they are becoming familiar with the theory
              and applications of smart materials as sensors and actuators. To maximize their
              learning, students work in small groups of two or three, using separate
              workstations at the ISL.   The laboratory features eight stations composed of a
              desktop computer, data acquisition hardware, oscilloscope, multimeter, function
              generator, and a microcontroller. For economical efficiency, some items (e.g.,
              printers and actuators) can be shared by adjacent stations or used on a rotary
              basis. The equipment can be used for conducting both structured experiments and
              design projects. The experiments include software and hardware development.
              Students also practice interfacing the electronic and mechanical devices. The
              design projects develop students' appreciation for challenges involved with
              proper location of sensors and actuators, preparation and application of smart
              materials, and manufacturing of microprocessor-based systems.   The project
              significantly affects students' education in intelligent systems and materials
              through the development of a newly approved lab course, and the enhancement of
              three other senior-level courses. The ISL facilities can be used by one course
              for experiments and design projects, by two others for microprocessor-based
              capstone design projects, and by the other lab course for up to three
              structured experiments.   Over the life of the new equipment, more than 500
              students will benefit from the lab.
