Title       : Data Acquisition, Manipulation and Presentation in Physics and Physical Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 19,  1996 
File        : a9651477

Award Number: 9651477
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15227              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan H. Long longb@coscc.cc.tn.us  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia State Cmty Col
	      P O Box 1315
	      Columbia, TN  384021315    615/388-0120

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The goals of this project are to improve the quality of physics instruction at
              this institution by enhancing and updating the laboratory equipment and
              curricula; to increase enrollment and retention of students in mathematics- and
              science-related programs of study; and to increase the enrollment of women,
              minorities, and undeclared majors in careers in science by providing resources
              to aid in the instruction and application of knowledge.    The department is
              using microcomputer-based laboratory experiments in data acquisition, analysis,
              and presentation in undergraduate physics and physical science laboratories in
              the areas of mechanics, heat and thermodynamics, electrical and magnetism, and
              optics. Microcomputer-based laboratory experiments are being designed to enable
              students to gain hands-on experience with new technology while reinforcing
              traditional instructional methods. These enhanced laboratory experiences
              provide students with effective learning to support lecture theory. In addition
              to increasing learning, exposure to current laboratory instrumentation and
              technology makes students more competitive upon transfer to a senior
              institution or entrance into the workforce. Previously, there had been no
              classes in the curricula of Elementary Education, Pre-Professional Engineering,
              or Science in which students experience this type of computer utilization.   
              The project supports seven microcomputer workstations equipped with seven
              computers, appropriate software, and supplementary laboratory equipment. This
              configuration supports all of the redesigned and newly developed laboratory
              experiments. Up to 102 students enrolled in Physics and Physical Science
              courses may benefit and be better prepared for the technologies of the 21st
              century.
