Title       : Enhancing Thinking Skills Using Computers in Non-Majors Biology at a Community
               College
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9651059

Award Number: 9651059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60234              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Russin russinj@lanecc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gail A. Baker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Null  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Carrie L. Newell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lane Comm Col
	      4000 East 30th Avenue
	      Eugene, OR  974050640    503/747-4501

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The science faculty at this college believe that a basic knowledge of
              biological concepts and an awareness of the relevance and applicability of
              these concepts to current social issues is essential for students to make
              responsible life choices. The goal of this project is to provide students with
              the tools and activities to help them develop critical thinking,
              problem-solving, and decision-making skills that will help them achieve this
              knowledge and awareness. The project utilizes computer-based inquiry-learning
              activities and computer technology to enhance student learning in several
              so-called emphasis biology classes for nonmajors.   The biology faculty is
              collaborating with faculty in the University of Oregon's Workshop Biology
              project to customize existing learning activities and develop new ones for
              these unique emphasis classes and for the nontraditional student population.  
              The college has not previously had enough equipment to implement these
              activities effectively. However, the equipment makes it possible to install
              computers in three classrooms so that students may work collaboratively in a
              variety of learning activities which foster problem-solving and critical
              thinking. In addition, a computer resource center with 16 computers is being
              set up to allow independent use outside of classtime.   The project is being
              evaluated through pre- and post-testing and surveys to determine the degree to
              which students have developed critical thinking, problem-solving, and
              decision-making skills. Through dissemination, this project can serve as a
              model for other schools to develop their own computer-enhanced biology
              curricula.                                                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                    
