Title       : Improving Science Education through GIS/GPS Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 9,  1996       
File        : a9651211

Award Number: 9651211
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jill K. Singer                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1996  
Expires     : August 31,  1998     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary Beluzo gbeluzo@hcc.mass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Holyoke Cmty College
	      303 Homestead Avenue
	      Holyoke, MA  010401091    413/538-7000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Vastly improved Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and Global Positioning
              Systems (GPS) and low cost of Pentium processors are revolutionizing methods of
              research and analysis of data that are geographically distributed. New GIS/GPS
              technology and software products are ideally suited for the study of
              environmental science and related disciplines, yet most two- and four-year
              colleges are ill-prepared to adapt their current curriculum to use this
              valuable tool. Holyoke Community College (HCC) believes that a strategic
              investment in this keystone technology will have a long-term payoff in a broad
              range applications in many disciplines and will result in better prepared
              transfer and career graduates. This project has two major foci: 1) enhancement
              of the Environmental Science curriculum through the use of GIS/GPS, including
              the creation of a new major devoted solely to GIS/GPS; and 2) enrichment of
              teaching and learning of science in area secondary schools through the use of
              HCC as a GIS/GPS technology transfer station via collaborative relationships
              with Salem State College. This project will create a 10 station Pentium GIS/GPS
              lab. Classroom and laboratory learning at the college and area high schools
              will be enhanced by hands-on, discovery-based learning, especially important
              for nontraditional learners, particularly students for whom English is a second
              language. A formative and summative evaluation process will be used over the
              two-year life of the project. Modifications will be made based upon feedback
              from pilot testing of new GIS/GPS classroom and lab modules and ongoing input
              and evaluation from a project advisory committee comprised of local and
              national experts from two- and four-year institutions and private industry.
              Final products developed and experience gained will be shared with other
              educational institutions through HCC's home page on Internet and published in
              appropriate GIS journals.
