Title       : Plant Responses to the Environment: Exposing Students to Modern Environmental
               Measurements, Physiological Techniques and Computational Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9651277

Award Number: 9651277
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16933              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael E. Loik   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cal St San Bernardino Fdn
	      
	      San Bernardino, CA  92407    /   -

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project fills a void in an otherwise well-supported Biology program. In
              particular, it makes it possible to make sophisticated environmental
              measurements, provides equipment to make detailed measurements of plant
              responses to environmental variables, and increases computer availability in
              the undergraduate Biology courses. Until now, the Biology Department has had no
              dedicated computers for undergraduate instruction. The goal of this project is
              to improve the quality of the educational experience and techniques learned by
              undergraduate students in Ecology, Plant Physiology, Physiological Ecology, and
              Independent Research courses offered in Biology. In order to expose students to
              environmental measurements, sophisticated biological instrumentation, and to
              enhance computer literacy, this project provides funds to purchase a Li-Cor
              LI-1200 environmental data recording system, a Li-Cor LI-6400 Portable
              Photosynthesis System, and a Dell notebook computer. The environmental sensors
              and data-logger teach students how to accurately measure variables that
              influence the establishment, survival, productivity, and reproduction of all
              organisms. The photosynthesis system allows students to examine carbon dioxide
              uptake, water loss, and stomatal responses during photosynthesis in both field
              and indoor laboratory settings. The sensors are connected to the portable
              computer, so students also learn how to interface equipment to computers and
              program the computer for data acquisition. The computer is also used to
              download weather data files and climate change datasets from the Internet. The
              project can result in a Laboratory Manual for Physiological Ecology. The
              effectiveness of the exercises developed around the equipment can be determined
              by student evaluations.                                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
