Title       : A Coordinated Cross-Course Approach to Upper Division Undergraduate Laboratory
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 6,  1998    
File        : a9651302

Award Number: 9651302
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter W. Hoffman phoffman@NDM.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Therese Dill  (Principal Investigator former)
              Cynthia McDaniel Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : College of Notre Dame
	      4701 N Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212102404    301/435-0100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project is designed to strengthen the teaching of biology at the college.
              Students in upper-division courses often tend to compartmentalize the concepts
              and laboratory skills learned in one course and do not carry them over to the
              problems encountered in other courses. This project develops a series of
              experiments that involve the laboratory students of two different courses
              within the same semester. In addressing a routine problem, students in Course 1
              identify an aspect of the problem that is beyond the scope of their course.
              They engage the students in Course 2, who bring the techniques and expertise of
              their course to the problem-solving process. The students in the two courses
              work collaboratively to address the problem, each using their specialized
              knowledge base, problem-solving skills and experimental approaches. The project
              targets students enrolled in one 200-level course (Microbiology) or one of four
              300- or 400-level courses (Cell Biology, Genetics, Biochemistry and
              Developmental Biology). Assistance was received in the C. elegans experiments
              from Andrew Fire, Ph.D., at the Carnegie Institute in Baltimore, Maryland.   
              This series of laboratory sequences affects the biology students in several
              ways. Students are challenged to integrate concepts and skills across the
              various disciplines of the biological sciences. They use the same experimental
              organisms in the laboratory component of several courses and come to an
              understanding of the general applicability of these model systems in biological
              research. They use many of the same techniques of cell and molecular biology to
              address a variety of problems. They are required to communicate their
              experimental findings clearly to their collaborators in the cross-over lab,
              thus strengthening their writing and oral communication skills. This approach
              to teaching can be adopted by other institutions that are interested in the
              development of their students as active biologists.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
