Title       : A Virtual Reality and Scientific Visualization Laboratory for Undergraduates in
               Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9651237

Award Number: 9651237
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48348              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger W. Webster webster@cs.millersville.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul W. Ross  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Millersville University
	      
	      Millersville, PA  17551    717/872-3024

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project provides funds for focused investment in instrumentation for
              undergraduate study in the area of Virtual Reality and Scientific Visualization
              for undergraduates in Computer Science.   A great deal of projects being
              performed in computer science and in undergraduate and graduate programs in the
              sciences center around collaborative scientific projects and the visualization
              of the results. Many of these projects use simulation and virtual reality to
              model virtual environments to help visualize scientific experiments. With so
              much activity in the scientific community today composed of collaborative
              projects that include and require computer scientists, a logical step at this
              time is to build a specialized laboratory and expose undergraduate students to
              the software techniques of virtual reality, virtual world modeling, and
              scientific visualization.   Virtual reality and scientific visualization is
              composed of high-performance three-dimensional computer graphics for scientific
              modeling and simulations for training and experimentation in the natural and
              physical sciences. This project allows for greater graphical computational
              power, flexibility, and more efficiency, which will lead to increased
              productivity of faculty/student teams. This project may also provide a
              springboard for collaborative student projects between Computer Science and
              Biology, Physics, Chemistry, and Meteorology majors. Many science students, as
              well as computer science students, can greatly benefit from this project,
              giving them opportunities to engage in high-performance computer simulations
              and visualization techniques at the undergraduate level.   One of the primary
              objectives of this project is to boost student interest in pursuing more
              scholarly activities such as student publications, going on to graduate school,
              and seeking employment in scientific research-oriented institutions. This
              laboratory for experimentation in developing software for virtual environments
              may be of potential interest to other institutions and may lead to the
              development of new experiments and approaches in laboratory instruction in
              computer science.                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                             
