Title       : Neural, Social and Electronic Networks: A Cluster Course Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1996      
File        : a9651206

Award Number: 9651206
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17232              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra K. Webster websters@Westminster.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Alan G. Gittis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Blase B. Cindric  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Kelliher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Westminster College
	      
	      New Wilmington, PA  16142    724/946-8761

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The equipment requested is for two psychology and computer science cluster
              courses:  "Neural and Machine Intelligence" and "Social Networks on an
              Electronic Network." Both cluster course pairs are addressed to the general
              sophomore/junior level student and must meet the needs of majors and non-majors
              alike.  Students enroll in both courses simultaneously.  Lectures are  
              coordinated or team taught, while labs are completely integrated.  Ideally,
              approximately 24 students (8 computer science, 8 psychology, and 8 other
              majors) enroll in each course, each semester.  In the laboratory components
              students combine psychology and computer science knowledge and skills to
              conduct experiments in neural, social and electronic networks.  The proposed
              UNIX server supports the preemptive multi-tasking operating system that is
              essential to support both clusters.  Integrating psychology and computer
              science in these courses promises to actively involve students with the course
              content and enable them to apply that content through meaningful laboratory
              experiments and simulation.      The equipment requested is essential for two
              psychology and computer science cluster courses:  "Neural and Machine
              Intelligence" and "Social Networks on an Electronic Network". Both cluster
              course pairs are addressed to the general sophomore/junior level student and
              must meet the needs of majors and non-majors alike.  Students will enroll in
              both courses simultaneously.  Lectures will be coordinated or team taught while
              labs will be completely integrated.  Ideally, approximately 24 students (8
              computer science, 8 psychology, and 8 other majors) will enroll in each course,
              each semester.  In the laboratory components students will combine psychology
              and computer science knowledge and skills to conduct experiments in neural,
              social and electronic networks.  The proposed UNIX server supports the
              preemptive multi-tasking operating system that is essential to support both
              clusters.  Integrating psychology and computer science in these c ourses
              promises to actively involve students with the course content and enable them
              to apply that content through meaningful laboratory experiments and simulation.
