Title       : Undergraduate Instructional Laboratory in Phonetics and Speech Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 7,  1997      
File        : a9651405

Award Number: 9651405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kim A. Wilcox kim@dole.lsi.ukans.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clifton L. Pye  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kansas Main Campus
	      2385 Irving Hill Road
	      Lawrence, KS  660447552    785/864-3441

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              84        Linguistics                             
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The widespread availability of economical, digital technology is changing how
              society views machines and communication. In the future, work in speech
              recognition and analysis will be an essential component of person-machine
              interaction. Thus, in the coming years, successful phonetics scientists and
              engineers will need to understand and appreciate speech production and speech
              acoustics. Traditionally, engineers have had limited instruction in speech
              production, while those studying linguistics and speech production have had
              limited training in speech acoustics. This project addresses these needs by
              developing an undergraduate phonetics laboratory. The laboratory serves as the
              basis for three new courses:  an introductory lecture course, an introductory
              laboratory course, and an upper-level undergraduate analysis course.   A key
              feature of this project is the expansion of an existing collaboration with
              Haskell Indian Nations University. The Department of Speech-Language-Hearing
              has been operating the Native American Training Program (NATP) in collaboration
              with Haskell. This project builds on that collaboration by expanding
              instruction in basic science. In addition to cross-listing courses at both
              universities, this project is developing laboratory assignments that utilize
              both English and Native American language materials. These materials are being
              developed by NATP students working with faculty from the Department of
              Linguistics who have expertise in Native languages. This cross-cultural
              collaboration holds great promise for recruitment of Native American students
              into science-related careers.                                                  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                     
