Title       : Web-Based Support for Cooperative Learning Teams in CS and IS Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 21,  1996       
File        : a9651132

Award Number: 9651132
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael C. Mulder                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $22500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Catherine M. Beise   (Principal Investigator current)
              Merle S. King  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin L. Elder  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Martha E. Myers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kennesaw State University
	      1000 Chastain Road
	      Kennesaw, GA  301445591    404/429-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This project consists of providing World-Wide-Web-based course materials,
              tools, methods, and support to student teams working on computer information
              systems analysis, design, and development projects within a computer science
              and information systems (CSIS) curriculum. Computer professionals, in spite of
              excellent technical skills, often lack teamwork skills. Because of this
              problem, CSIS curricula increasingly require team projects, often in system
              development courses, that reflect the realities of large systems development
              situations. This approach is consistent with current theories in education that
              emphasize active, experiential, problem-based, collaborative approaches to
              learning and draws inspiration from the emerging field of computer-supported
              collaborative learning.    For student teams, scheduling meeting times and
              exchanging, reviewing, and discussing formatted and graphical information is
              often difficult, particularly for nontraditional and commuting students who may
              have other demands on their time such as work and family. The objectives of the
              project are to provide remote, convenient, and state-of-the-art multimedia
              support for student teams working on authentic systems development projects; to
              facilitate cooperative learning; to provide faculty with easy-to-use
              development tools; and to increase students' technical skills through
              experience with widely-used information technologies such as the World Wide
              Web. The Web serves as a widely accessible and relatively inexpensive platform
              for teaching and learning, and also as an outlet for the dissemination of
              results and the potential campus wide, state wide, and world wide interaction
              with students and educators.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                
