Title       : Creation of Economic Science Laboratory to Teach Classroom Experiments at
               Multiple Sites
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9651170

Award Number: 9651170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1996    
Expires     : September 30,  1998  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: R. D. Mullin   (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Hoag  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert Piron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Debbie D. Mullin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowling Green U Main Cam
	      
	      Bowling Green, OH  43403    419/372-2531

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              At Bowling Green State University -- Firelands College, the installation of a
              dedicated local area network (LAN) of personal computers will be used to create
              an innovative economics curriculum in which new classroom experiments will be
              conducted in international finance, public goods, and bargaining.  With these
              and other previously used economic experimental designs, undergraduate students
              will use the scientific method to empirically verify economic theories. This
              lab may also be useful in generating data for assessing whether using classroom
              experiments in economics enhances retention of knowledge versus using only
              standard lecture teaching methods. The lab will also be used for statistical
              data analysis not only in economics, but also in statistics, psychology, and
              sociology courses.     The LAN will have a file server, instructor's machine,
              and 20 workstations with Pentium microcomputers.  This LAN will be connected to
              the university-wide TCP/IP backbone.  Consequently, this LAN can be connected
              to the pre-existing LANs at other locations within and outside the university.
              This will allow for real time interaction between two or more LANs.  This means
              that two or more sections of students will be able to jointly participate in a
              market experiment.  In all, 500 students per semester will use the lab.    
              Firelands College serves a distinctive student body, with women comprising 67.1
              percent. The Humanistic Educational Learning Process Program assists over 120
              women each year who are recipients of Aid to Families with Dependent Children
              to receive associate degrees and gain employment. Nearly all of these Program
              participants will use the lab.
