Title       : Capillary Electrophoresis Applications in Chemistry and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 16,  1996     
File        : a9651424

Award Number: 9651424
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myra O. Smith                           
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31297              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary A. Mabbott gamabbott@stthomas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. DeJong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of St. Thomas
	      2115 Summit Avenue
	      St. Paul, MN  551051096    651/962-6720

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Modern methods of analysis in chemistry and biology involve molecular
              separations of complicated mixtures. Often separations on large numbers of
              samples are necessary in order to reveal important trends. This problem is
              particularly evident in behavioral and ecological studies where the need to
              determine kinship among large numbers of individual plants and insects using
              DNA fingerprinting methods is critical. The final step in these analyses is a
              separation of pieces of DNA. However, the traditional electrophoresis methods
              of separation are labor intensive and slow.   Capillary electrophoresis
              represents a powerful technique that provides rapid separation of charged
              molecules such as proteins and DNA. This project incorporates the use of a
              capillary electrophoresis instrument into several biology and chemistry
              courses. The instrument can be used by undergraduate students in biology
              courses to separate fragments of DNA as a means of fingerprinting individual
              plants and insects in behavioral and ecological studies. It can also be used by
              chemistry undergraduates to study the ionic speciation of acids and bases and
              mechanisms of separation. Environmental chemistry students look at ionic
              pollutants in rain and run-off waters, and biochemistry students use the
              instrument to separate proteins, DNA, and small molecules in projects of their
              own design. The efficiency of the instrument permits the analysis of large
              numbers of samples, which increases the probability of observing statistically
              significant trends. Since the experimental preparations are simpler than older
              methods, the use of capillary electrophoresis also frees up laboratory time for
              additional focus on the scientific principles of the study.   Innovative
              applications, advantages, and limitations of using capillary electrophoresis in
              student labs will be disseminated through two workshops, publications, and the
              World Wide Web.                                                                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                 
