Title       : SMART LAB, An Integrated Interdisciplinary Science/Math Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9651042

Award Number: 9651042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Myles G. Boylan                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35200              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip A. Sandberg sandberp@columbia.dsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dakota State Univ
	      
	      Madison, SD  57042    605/256-5111

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The College of Natural Sciences is developing a computer-based SMART LAB
              (Science/Math Active Response Technology Laboratory) to support
              interdisciplinary, undergraduate learning in science and mathematics. The
              learning model for the laboratory is technology mediated, allowing for active
              student response to science/math topics through involvement in cooperative
              learning groups, which design, complete, and report on lab projects.
              Laboratories use topic-based investigations, which are structured to emphasize
              the interconnected nature of the science disciplines and mathematics, both
              through the particular exercises used and through collaborative interchange
              within and beyond the immediate lab setting. The SMART LAB serves as a locus
              for exchange of data, insights, and science/math concepts among classes in
              different disciplines using the lab. Computers function in four major roles: 
              as device controllers for laboratory data acquisition; as analytical tools for
              the visualization, inspection, evaluation, and interpretation of lab data; as
              gateways to network data resources relevant to the lab projects; and as links
              for communication with other educational communities, such as South Dakota
              tribal and nontribal K-12 classrooms and other undergraduate science/math
              classes, both in the United States and abroad.   Preservice secondary
              science/math education majors in combined Education/Natural Sciences programs
              and preservice elementary education majors are a substantial part of the
              student population addressed by the project. Learning science by doing science,
              the central theme of the SMART LAB, is particularly important in the
              preparation of K-12 science teachers. Those preservice teachers, as well as
              other undergraduate majors, benefit from the shared knowledge and the network
              links between the laboratory and other classrooms (K-12, tribal colleges,
              universities). By assuming the role of mentor/teacher, college students in the
              SMART LAB add significantly to their own comprehension of the particular lab
              topics and of general science/math concepts.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                              
