Title       : The Mechatronics Design Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9651083

Award Number: 9651083
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 15,  1996    
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Culver rculver@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Bergman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George F. Sackman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a Mechatronics Design Laboratory for use in DTeC III, the
              third of a three course sequence.  The sequence introduces engineering students
              to graphics, computer applications, writing and oral communication, and
              open-ended problem solving.  The projects undertaken by sophomores in the
              mechatronics laboratory will be for external clients in the disabled community,
              and will provide practice in using the knowledge and skills learned in the
              course sequence, exposure to the working environment of the engineering
              professional, and experience with team-based project management and problem
              solving.     In 1995, The Watson School of Engineering at Binghamton University
              received State approval to expand its transfer-based engineering program to
              include the first two years.  Coincidentally, the University Faculty approved a
              general education (Gen.Ed.) requirement to be met in the first two years.  The
              Design, Technology, and Communication (DTeC) course sequence, which started in
              September 1995, is designed to meet the composition and aesthetics Gen.Ed.
              requirements, as well as ABET requirements in graphics, computer programming,
              engineering design, and technical writing.  The course consists of three
              24-student sections studying graphics, computer applications, and
              writing/design, rotating through three two-hour labs per week.  Eventually, 200
              students will enter the course sequence each year.     DTeC is designed to
              improve enrollment and retention in engineering education, in particular, for
              women and minorities.  Experience has shown that hands-on activities with
              social relevance are important in retention.  Starting with simple exercises, a
              sequence of projects for the disabled tie human factors to the creation of
              useful products using computers, graphics and mechatronic devices controlled by
              a computer.  Machine and electronic shop instruction complements the
              mechatronics instruction.  The laboratory equipment will include multifunction
              analog and digital I/O systems which interfa ce to the DTeC projects, and the
              host computers and development software.
