Title       : Development of a Computer Based Problem Solving Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  1996      
File        : a9651339

Award Number: 9651339
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : August 1,  1996     
Expires     : July 31,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $250999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth Heller heller@mnhep.hep.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Patricia M. Heller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Theodore W. Hodapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9178,9255,SMET,
Abstract    :
               In this proposed work, we intend to merge the technology of using computers in
              the laboratory for introductory physics with the problem solving pedagogy we
              have found to be successful with large classes at the University of Minnesota.
              Where applicable, we intend to make extensive use of video data acquisition
              techniques. The goal is to produce a one year, computer-based introductory
              physics laboratory that is directly applicable to large classes and also
              suitable for small classes interested in stressing a problem-solving approach
              to introductory physics.   This laboratory will build upon our current
              laboratory manuals and apparatus. We expect that certain laboratory problems
              will be easily adapted to the computer and others will not. In addition, new
              problems will be added which were not possible without the technological
              strengths of the computer. We intend to use a commercially available software
              environment. One which is commonly used in engineering and research is
              LabVIEW/Labwindows. We will adapt LabVIEW to existing hardware packages, such
              as NIH image for video analysis, and the tools used in CUPLE and Real-time
              Physics.   This proposal will bring together the problem-solving expertise of
              the University of Minnesota with the technical experience of Hamline
              University. The formative and summative evaluation of this project will use
              ethnographic and numerical techniques to determine successful attainment of our
              goals. The results of this project will be disseminated through the American
              Journal of Physics, relevant conferences, and workshops.
