Title       : Instrumentation Stations for Integrated Engineering Fundamentals and Design
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1996       
File        : a9651084

Award Number: 9651084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99117              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron S. Collins collins as@mercer.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert I. Gray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron R. Byerley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Edward M. O'Brien  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramesh Rajagopalan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Mercer University
	      1400 Coleman Avenue
	      Macon, GA  312070001    912/744-2700

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              59        Engineering NEC                         
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               This university's innovative engineering design thread, which begins with a
              freshman design project and culminates with an interdisciplinary senior
              capstone design project of some significance, is one of the stronger such
              design sequences. Unfortunately, the capabilities of the laboratories have not
              been sufficient to properly support the program. As part of a comprehensive
              curriculum upgrade opportunity, this project further strengthens the
              curriculum's strongest component.   All freshmen are being introduced to
              virtual instruments and to measurements concepts, an idea not achievable with
              discrete instruments. All sophomores take a broad sophomore instrumentation
              laboratory based on the same software with extended hardware capabilities.
              Statistical analysis of data, sampling for quality control, transient capture,
              frequency domain analysis, and filtering of data are all components of this
              laboratory. The broad coverage of instrumentation concepts is made possible by
              the participation of faculty from all engineering departments. Finally, junior
              and senior laboratories gain similar data acquisition and processing
              capability, which students should already know how to use, and students in
              (required) senior capstone design projects are given access to the automated
              data acquisition hardware and software which they have been using for 4 years.
              The 4-year design sequence, which terminates in an interdisciplinary senior
              capstone design project, is already out in front of the ABET 2000 proposed
              design criterion. With the new laboratory support, it could well serve as a
              model program for the new team-based, interdisciplinary, 4-year design
              experience being proposed by ABET. The participating faculty can perform
              longitudinal evaluation of the project.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                         
