Title       : Scanning Electron Microscope for the Materials and Manufacturing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  1996        
File        : a9651338

Award Number: 9651338
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel B. Hodge                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 1,  1996       
Expires     : May 31,  1998        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50490              (Estimated)
Investigator: Von L. Richards richardsv@tristate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ira F. Jones  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tri-State University
	      1 University Avenue
	      Angola, IN  46703    219/665-4100

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Undergraduate engineering majors need to develop a better understanding of
              processing effects on microstructure and the properties of engineering
              materials. Therefore, the two objectives of the proposed laboratory improvement
              are (1) to develop a better understanding of the
              properties-structure-processing triad for engineers and (2) to prepare students
              in engineering and the sciences to be intelligent users or consumers of
              electron optical techniques. For the first objective, the scanning electron
              microscope may facilitate term projects in the upper-level metallurgy and
              manufacturing processes courses, which require students to understand the
              relationships among materials, design performance, and manufacturing processes.
              The department has begun to equip the metallurgical laboratory for this type of
              project, but more thorough evaluations of fracture surfaces and fine scale
              morphology of the phases present are required. For the second objective,
              hands-on experiences enable engineering and science students to recognize the
              appropriate capabilities of analytical tools. The development of the materials
              in design exercise and manufacturing sequence projects can be reported in
              papers and proceedings of the American Society of Engineering Education. Also,
              students continue to participate in project work under the sponsorship of the
              Steel Founders' Society of America, which is disseminated in their technical
              reports series with student co-authors.                                        
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                             
