Title       : A Knowledge-Integrated Virtual Reality Machining Laboratory for Innovative
               Undergraduate Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  1999  
File        : a9651195

Award Number: 9651195
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Eric J. Sheppard                        
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $188000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy M. Vance jmvance@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Xiangdong D. Fang  (Principal Investigator former)
              James H. Oliver  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              T. Kesavadas  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
                      A common problem in teaching undergraduate manufacturing courses
              involving machining is the difficulty to arrange appropriate machining
              experiments for a number of possible reasons such as:  limitations on
              laboratory facilities, insufficient support of technicians, large size of
              class, limited funds for running the costly experiments, and safety
              considerations.  Lack of physical understanding about the machining undermines
              the learning effectiveness in this course.                       The goal of
              the proposed project is to develop a virtual reality (VR) machining laboratory
              integrated with computer graphics animation, process knowledge and predictive
              machining models. The specific objectives are to help students in obtaining
              important hands-on" machining experience, enhance their physical understanding
              of machining principles, and promote their latent learning capability to the
              maximal possible extent. In such a virtual environment, all the students have a
              ' one-to-one" opportunity to "physically" operate various kinds of machines
              (both conventional and CNC) on their own and observe and study the on-line
              simulated dynamic machining performance by choosing different process
              parameters. The significance of the proposed project is that it can be used as
              a national model for future machining laboratories with the advantages of
              significant cost-effectiveness, knowledge-integrated interactive learning
              environment, great flexibility for various machining operations and, C-based
              software for easy portability.     The results should  be very attractive to
              other colleges for setting up a similar system and should have a significant
              impact on current teaching practices of manufacturing courses. The
              effectiveness of the VR system at different development stages will be
              evaluated through four consecutive teaching semesters of the course ME322
              Manufacturing Processes (offered every semester). As a national model for
              future machining laboratories, the results of the proposed project will be
              publicize d through conferences, publications and the World Wide Web.
