Title       : Creating an Interactive, Collaborative, Groupware supported Learning Environment
               for Computing Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  1998    
File        : a9651044

Award Number: 9651044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lillian N. Cassel                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : June 15,  1996      
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74374              (Estimated)
Investigator: Doris K. Lidtke dlidtke@towson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              H. Harry H. Zhou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Clements  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Towson University
	      8000 York Road
	      Towson, MD  21252    410/704-2236

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               Industry demands that graduates of programs in the computing sciences be able
              to work collaboratively in teams. However, students have often fallen short of
              the industry's expectations in this regard. Today, most universities have only
              one or two courses in which students work in small groups. This project is
              making use of an initial collaborative learning laboratory course with emphasis
              placed on teamwork, effectiveness of communication, and cooperation in problem
              solving. Students work together in small groups with the idea that, in later
              courses, they will gain experience in working with larger teams made up of
              people with a range of backgrounds and abilities. Since research shows that
              students' learning is improved by active involvement, this project uses an
              interactive-collaborative learning environment, building on several research
              projects which have investigated collaborative and interactive learning.
              Students meet regularly with the instructor in a laboratory situation. Very
              brief lectures are used to introduce the topics, while intensive laboratory
              work is used to explore the topics actively. The laboratory has modern
              groupware and a user-friendly software development environment with a physical
              arrangement that supports collaborative activities. This development
              environment also supports work conducted at remote sites.                      
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                               
