Title       : Improvement in Undergraduate Student Comprehension of Molecular Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  1996        
File        : a9651056

Award Number: 9651056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Terry S. Woodin                         
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1996       
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41223              (Estimated)
Investigator: Geoffrey W. Gearner g.gearner@morehead-st.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Craig A. Tuerk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David J. Saxon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              David T. Magrane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Morehead State University
	      University Boulevard
	      Morehead, KY  40351    606/783-2221

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Department of Biological and Environmental Sciences is developing the
              Undergraduate Molecular Biology Laboratory to improve undergraduate
              comprehension of molecular biology. The equipment needed to develop the lab
              includes eight student workstations composed of three micropipettors and rack,
              250-volt power supply, horizontal submarine gel box, water bath, and vortex
              mixer and a floor model refrigerated low-speed centrifuge and rotors, an
              integrated vacuum centrifuge/gel drying system, four microcentrifuges, a
              shaking water bath, a shaking platform incubator, a 37 C incubator, an
              ultraviolet spectrophotometer, an ultraviolet transilluminator and
              photodocumentation system, and a microplate reader and data capture/analysis
              software. The lab will be an innovative learning environment in which students
              will gain hands-on experience in exercises that utilize modern technologies.
              These experiences can improve student comprehension of molecular biology and
              the process of science and enable students to develop problem-solving and
              interpersonal skills. The lab will improve the department's curriculum by
              including state-of-the-art equipment and instrumentation to teach modern
              biological methodologies and demonstrate to students the concepts of molecular
              biology. This laboratory can be used primarily to teach two courses: 
              Biotechnology and Laboratory Techniques in Biochemistry. The laboratory can
              also share equipment with other laboratories to add molecular biology
              laboratory activities to their respective courses, including Principles of
              Biology, Genetics, and Cell Biology. The laboratory can help the department
              prepare undergraduate students for careers in the health sciences, research,
              teaching, and other professions.
