Title       : Environmental Monitoring and Analysis for Undergraduate Investigative Laboratory
               Instruction in Environmental Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 5,  1996       
File        : a9651400

Award Number: 9651400
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Saundra H. Oyewole                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1996      
Expires     : June 30,  1998       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25346              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Curry kcurry@bridgew.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Jahoda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bridgewater State College
	      
	      Bridgewater, MA  02324    617/697-1200

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9178,9267,SMET,
Abstract    :
               The Biology Department has recently revised its Bachelor of Science degree
              program in Biology to include a concentration in Environmental Biology and to
              incorporate a field internship/research component. To support the new
              concentration, the department is restructuring its course in Ecology developing
              new upper-level courses in Environmental Biology, including a course on
              Biomonitoring and Water Pollution. The revised Ecology course emphasizes the
              principles of sampling, data collection, analysis, and presentation in a 6-week
              investigation of Carver Pond in Bridgewater using continuous recording field
              water quality probes. This presentation serves as the background database of
              the dynamics of a local ecosystem that students use to study patterns of change
              in biotic communities within and surrounding Carver Pond. The new course in
              Biomonitoring and Water Pollution involves upper-level students in a
              semester-long field and laboratory investigation of stress indicators in fish
              and macroinvertebrate communities of a local river system.   This project makes
              use of new equipment to support the investigative undergraduate laboratory
              experience in the revised Ecology course and the ecosystem stress investigation
              in the Biomonitoring course. The major equipment items needed to support these
              undergraduate research experiences include a single-channel Auto Analyzer II
              Continuous Flow Autoanalyzer with a TAOS Operating System for data acquisition
              and graphical analysis, Hydrolab recording environmental sondes to continuously
              monitor water quality changes occurring in a local pond, and a Doppler flow
              meter for improved discharge measurements for loading calculations.            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                              
