Title       : Soil Horizon Stratigraphy: A Framework for Elucidating the Structure, Evolution
               and Function of the Soil-Landscape Continuum
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9210093

Award Number: 9210093
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151679             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin McSweeney kmcsween@facstaff.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Ventura  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Characterization of landscapes into domains where soil,                   
              hydrologic, and landform attributes can be considered products of              
              common processes of formation and function in an integrated                    
              manner remains a challenge for earth scientists.  Such a                       
              synthesis is desirable to advance fundamental and applied                      
              knowledge of earth surface processes operating at a local scale.               
              Although a close relationship among soil, landform, and hydrology              
              has long been recognized, a coherent framework that promotes                   
              disciplinary integration has yet to emerge.  Scale, space, and                 
              time, the three-dimensional complexity of the interdependencies,               
              and divergent disciplinary foci pose considerable challenges to                
              effective integration.  This study will build upon advances made               
              through linkage of hydrology and geomorphomotry for terrain-                   
              based modeling of hydrologic processes.  It will develop and                   
              evaluate approaches to incorporate approximations of the soil-                 
              landscape continuum into terrain models.  It will develop a                    
              three-dimensional model of the soil-landscape continuum with a                 
              geographical information system (GIS).  The research will                      
              construct a model of soil horizon stratigraphy for the study of                
              local and regional earth surface processes which require an                    
              understanding of processing operating in the pedosphere.  The                  
              model will be tested in a reconstruction of soil-landscape                     
              evolution in the Driftless Area of southwestern Wisconsin, which               
              had experienced considerable landscape instability during the                  
              Quaternary Epoch.                                                              
                   This study uses a new conceptual and methodological approach              
              which will improve upon more conventional ways of elucidating                  
              soil-landscape relationships.  It will reduce reliance on                      
              subjective assessments in soils analysis and replace it with a                 
              spatially rigorous analytic model.  The model will be developed                
              and tested for soil-landscape evolution, but it will be                        
              applicable to surface and subsurface hydrologic modeling and for               
              simulating vegetation and landscape change in response to                      
              climatic change.
