Title       : Power in Negatively Connected Exchange Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1993  
File        : a9210058

Award Number: 9210058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $110389             (Estimated)
Investigator: Phillip Bonacich bonacich@soc.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Elisa J. Bienenstock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This study consists of a series of experiments testing                    
              different models for the determination of power in social                      
              exchange networks.   The experiments will be set up so that it is              
              possible to test the effects of nine different types of social                 
              networks on the exchange that occurs among individuals in the                  
              networks.  Networks are different in size, in the number and                   
              direction of exchanges which can be made, in the values                        
              associated with an exchange between two individuals, and in the                
              alternatives available outside the network.  In the experiments,               
              subjects will be playing a game where the object is to agree with              
              one or more other players on how to divide points between them.                
              These points can later be exchanged with money.  Depending on the              
              type of network a subject is in and on his or her location in                  
              that network, one player may have more power than others because               
              he or she can negotiate with more players, have alternatives for               
              gaining points from outside the network, or because he or she is               
              forced to trade with certain other players in order to earn any                
              reward.  The experiments provide tests of competing hypotheses                 
              about the effects of such structural conditions on the actions                 
              and decisions of the participants in the experiment.                           
                   Although this study is experimental, and thus highly                      
              abstract, the results will improve our understanding of the ways               
              in which social structures differ in the power embedded in                     
              different positions in a given social structure and how that in                
              turn influences individual actors behavior and decisions.
