Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Combinatorics of 3-Manifolds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 2,  1992  
File        : a9210044

Award Number: 9210044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48776              (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus Johannson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project is concerned with the combinatorics of 3-                    
              manifolds.  Specifically, it studies Heegaard surfaces of 3-                   
              manifolds, essential maps between Haken 3-manifolds, and the outer             
              automorphism group of Haken 3-manifold groups.  Part of the work               
              involves development of practical algorithms, e.g., for                        
              constructing surfaces of specified types in 3-manifolds.                       
                   The study of 3-dimensional manifolds is aided by the fact that            
              our experience of living in such a space endows us with a strong               
              intuition for what can and cannot take place.  Studying the                    
              topology of higher dimensional manifolds is necessarily dependent              
              upon the algebraic machinery available to assist in it, but in                 
              dimension 3 we also have at our disposal a direct avenue of                    
              perception.  It is therefore surprising to learn that some                     
              questions that have natural generalizations to higher dimensions               
              have been answered already for these higher cases, while the 3-                
              dimensional case that inspired them remains obdurately                         
              unassailable.  There is a classical conjecture of Poincare about               
              spheres that is the most notorious example of this phenomenon.                 
              What appears to be at work in thus violating our natural over-                 
              estimate of the advantage that geometric intuition should confer in            
              dimension 3?  It is at least partly a naive faith in intuition and             
              mistrust of computation, but it is also the fact that the known                
              methods of computation perform best with the luxury of excess                  
              dimensions in which to maneuver.  They are somehow cramped in the              
              presence of only three dimensions.  Bearing this in mind, one can              
              see that the investigator's nitty-gritty combinatorial                         
              constructions and algorithmic computations may just possibly be the            
              brute force that is essential to progress in dimension 3.
