Title       : Collaborative Research in Decision, Risk, and Management Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  1992      
File        : a9210746

Award Number: 9210746
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69924              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon B. Hazen hazen@iems.nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Determining how detailed risk analysis models should be is an                  
              important question in analyzing the risks of complex technological             
              systems such as nuclear power plants, liquid natural gas storage               
              facilities, hazardous material transport, and the space shuttle.               
              Both overly detailed and overly simplistic models can lead to                  
              erroneous risk estimates.  However, this issue has gone virtually              
              unstudied despite the widespread growth of risk analysis in the                
              last 15 years.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              Past work by one of the investigators on this project has                      
              identified three potential sources of error in risk analyses:                  
              modeling error; parameter error; and aggregation error.  Different             
              types of errors are minimized by simple versus detailed models.  In            
              particular, in the case of aggregation error, the use of overly                
              simple models can neglect information that may be available at more            
              detailed levels.  For example, at the time of the Challenger                   
              disaster, an aggregate analysis based only on 0 accidents in 23                
              flights would have indicated increasing reliability with each                  
              flight.  However, a disaggregate analysis including the evidence of            
              O-ring erosion on 6 of the 23 flights would have concluded that a              
              substantial level of risk remained.                                            
                                                                                             
              The principal investigators for this project have identified                   
              necessary and sufficient conditions for aggregation error to vanish            
              in simple risk analysis models.  However, these conditions are                 
              unlikely to be achieved in practice.  Therefore, there is a need to            
              understand the determinants of aggregation error when perfect                  
              aggregation is not achieved.  The proposed work will provide                   
              guidance on the circumstances under which aggregation error will be            
              severe, so that large errors can be avoided through the use of more            
              detailed models in such cases.
