Title       : The Site of Androgen Action on Synapse Elimination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 4,  1993        
File        : a9210229

Award Number: 9210229
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia L. Jordan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              During synapse elimination, adult patterns of synaptic connections             
              are established through an elimination of excess neural                        
              connections.  For example, although adult mammalian muscle fibers              
              are each typically innervated by only a single motoneuron, in                  
              newborns, muscle fibers receive innervation from several different             
              motoneurons.  During synapse elimination, all but one motoneuronal             
              input is retracted from each muscle fiber, thus establishing the               
              adult pattern of single innervation.  In the hormone-sensitive                 
              perineal levator ani (LA) muscle of the rat, synapse elimination is            
              regulated by androgen.  Testosterone (T) treatment of castrated                
              males prevents some synapse elimination.  Notable, T treatment has             
              no effect on synapse elimination in the extensor digitorum longus              
              muscle (EDL), a limb muscle generally less sensitive to androgen.              
              The primary goal of the proposed experiments is to determine the               
              site where androgen acts to alter synapse elimination.  Three                  
              candidate sites will be tested: the brain, the spinal cord, and the            
              LA muscle.  One experiment will examine the effect of 3 different              
              androgen metabolites (testosterone, dihydrotestosterone, and                   
              estradiol) on synapse elimination in the LA and EDL.  Results from             
              this experiment will identify the active metabolite that influences            
              synapse elimination in the LA and given our current knowledge about            
              the steroid binding and/or accumulating characteristics of rat                 
              motoneurons, and their target muscles, may also suggest where                  
              androgen acts.  A second experiment will examine the effects of                
              systemic androgen on synapse elimination in the LA of spinally                 
              transected animals to test whether androgen acts in the brain to               
              alter synapse elimination in the LA muscle.  3,4) Two additional               
              experiments will assess whether androgen acts on the muscle or in              
              the spinal cord to influence synapse elimination in the LA by                  
              locally exposing each site to androgen.  Information about where               
              androgen acts to prevents synapse elimination in the LA is                     
              necessary for directing future experiments aimed at identifying the            
              mechanisms underlying synapse elimination that are regulated by                
              androgen.
