Title       : RIA: Innovative Design and Analysis of Blind Adaptive Equalization Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1996       
File        : a9210100

Award Number: 9210100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : November 30,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89986              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhi Ding   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              Blind adaptive equalizers are important elements in high data rate             
              digital communication systems to remove linear distortions incurred            
              by nonideal and bandlimited channels. By removing linear channel               
              distortions without the aid of a training sequence, blind                      
              equalization makes it unnecessary for the transmitter to interrupt             
              the normal data transmission in order to generate a training signal            
              for the sake of a newly tuned receiver. Despite the plethora of                
              existing blind equalization schemes, few exhibit the desired global            
              convergence property. Many existing blind equalizers are prone to              
              undesirable local convergence corresponding to little or no                    
              intersymbol interference removal, as shown in the previous works               
              by the principal investigator and others. In addition, the                     
              convergence rates of many of the existing algorithms are very slow.            
              A principal objective of this research is to improve the                       
              performance of blind equalization systems by designing new and                 
              better blind equalization algorithms.                                          
                                                                                             
              Various linear and nonlinear constraints will be utilized in                   
              developing, analyzing and testing fast and globally convergent                 
              equalization algorithms.  The cyclostationary nature of the PAM/QAM            
              modulated channel output will be exploited to generate innovative              
              designs of blind equalizers. In addition, various stochastic                   
              dynamic systems analysis tools (such as probability and stochastic             
              processes, spectral analysis, averaging and stability theory) will             
              continue to be exploited in this study, as it has been in many                 
              previous adaptive system studies. However, unlike most of the                  
              previous studies, cyclostationary signal analysis will also be                 
              utilized in the design of blind equalizers based on the                        
              cyclostationarity of the channel output.                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed research is aimed at expanding the utility of the                 
              concept of blind adaptive equalization and applications of                     
              broadcast digital communication systems, and is expected to have               
              significant direct and indirect impact on the application of                   
              adaptive systems in areas such as adaptive system control,                     
              robotics, array processing, mechanical and aerospace engineering,              
              and geophysical signal processing.
