Title       : Farming Systems and Agroclimatological Development Planning in Tanga Region,
               Tanzania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9210189

Award Number: 9210189
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $13033              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip W. Porter   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                   Sustainable agriculture and environmental preservation are                
              important topics in research on development in Third World                     
              settings at present.  It is important that this research be                    
              informed by longitudinal studies of agroclimatological change                  
              which document change, explain the processes and events leading                
              to change, and consider the consequences of change in the lives                
              of people living in developing societies.  Longitudinal studies                
              of change in agricultural regions of developing countries are                  
              uncommon.  This project offers a unique opportunity to revisit a               
              region in East Africa that was studied twenty years ago.  The                  
              Tanga Region of Tanzania lies along a climatic transect where                  
              rainfall distribution changes from two seasons in the northeast                
              to one season in the southwest.  This situation presents                       
              interesting and potentially significant questions of agricultural              
              potential and management.  The research will analyze                           
              climatological data, crop productivity, and agricultural risk in               
              this area of great climatic variability and uncertainty.  A                    
              random sample of farmers will be interviewed about their                       
              agricultural practices, management decisions, and social                       
              behavior, and these data will be compared to those collected in                
              the same region two decades earlier.  These data will be used to               
              assess changes in the effects of rainfall variation, moisture                  
              stress in crops, crop yields, and management interventions on                  
              agricultural practices.  The objective will be to enhance the                  
              ability to predict which practices will produce different crop                 
              yields under conditions of environmental uncertainty.                          
                   This research should provide basic knowledge about whether                
              and how agricultural practices have changed over the twenty year               
              interval since the original survey.  It will also improve our                  
              understanding of the relationship between climate variation over               
              space and time and its effect on agricultural management                       
              practices.  These insights will be helpful in formulating                      
              agricultural policy which attempts to foster sustainable                       
              development practices in sensitive agricultural areas of                       
              developing nations.
