Title       : Robustness Quantification and Performance Improvement in Adaptive Control
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 1,  1992  
File        : a9210726

Award Number: 9210726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Aniruddha Datta datta@ee.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The aim of the research outlined in this proposal is                           
              two-fold.  First, we intend to develop a systematic                            
              quantitative theory for the design and analysis of                             
              robust adaptive control schemes.  The second                                   
              objective is to develop a methodology for studying                             
              and improving the transient performance of                                     
              adaptive control schemes, as also alleviating erratic                          
              steady state behaviour such as bursting.  The                                  
              objectives mentioned above relate to two of the                                
              outstanding problems in the area of adaptive                                   
              control.  None of the existing theory (Lyapunov                                
              approach, persistence of excitation, etc.) can solve                           
              these problems in a practical or satisfactory                                  
              manner.  The lack of such results is a major                                   
              stumbling block that engineers invariably encounter                            
              in attempting to put the results of adaptive control                           
              theory to practice.  The methods we plan to use are                            
              based on recently obtained breakthroughs in robust                             
              parametric stability (Kharitonov's Theorem and its                             
              extensions, calculation of parametric stability                                
              margins, connections between parametric and                                    
              unstructured (Hoo) perturbations) and parameter-                               
              error compensation methods.  We are motivated by                               
              the possibility of exploiting these recent results in                          
              robust parametric (nonadaptive) stability and                                  
              control to obtain non-conservative (practically                                
              useful) stability margins for adaptive systems, and                            
              to develop effective design schemes for robust                                 
              adaptive control.  Though the robust adaptive                                  
              control problem is much more difficult than the                                
              corresponding nonadaptive one, the payoff is that                              
              the results obtained are likely to be more useful.
