Title       : Cholinergic Inhibition of Cochlear Hair Cells
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1993 
File        : a9210173

Award Number: 9210173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127316             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Fuchs   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This is a project by Dr. Fuchs to study the biophysical mechanisms             
              by which brainstem neurons exert inhibition of the sensory receptor            
              cells of the cochlea.  The sensitivity of the inner ear is                     
              controlled by central neurons whose axons project to the cochlea               
              and there release the neurotransmitter, acetylcholine (ACh) to                 
              inhibit the cochlear cell (hair cells).  While the actions of ACh              
              are well-known on nerve and muscle, the hair cell cholinergic                  
              receptor and its physiological effect, are quite unusual.  ACh                 
              inhibits hair cells first causing calcium entry, followed by a                 
              calcium-activated potassium current which actually hyperpolarizes,             
              and inhibits, the cell.  These actions are mediated by a                       
              neurotransmitter receptor that appears to be related to the                    
              nicotinic receptors of nerve and muscle.  While unusual, there is              
              some evidence that similar cholinergic effects may occur elsewhere             
              in the brain.  Dr. Fuchs will identify and study the mechanism of              
              cholinergic inhibition of cochlear hair cells and its developmental            
              regulation.  He will use state-of-the-art techniques to explore                
              these mechanisms and the hair cell ACh receptor will be                        
              characterized both pharmacologically and physiologically.  This                
              detailed study of the hair cell ACh receptor will provide                      
              fundamental insights into brain cholinergic systems.***//
