Title       : Information and Electoral Choice in US National Elections
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  1994     
File        : a9210742

Award Number: 9210742
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34860              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Zaller   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research involves a comparative investigation of the effects              
              of campaign information on voting in elections for the U.S. House,             
              Senate, and Presidency.  More specifically, it will examine how                
              differences in the information generated in these different                    
              elections, in combination with voter differences in partisan values            
              and in political attentiveness, account for differences in both                
              individual-level voting patterns and aggregate level election                  
              outcomes.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The central theoretical idea is that voters who are more attentive             
              to politics are more heavily exposed to campaign information, but              
              that different voters encounter different campaign messages,                   
              depending on the relative intensity of the opposing campaigns.  The            
              major purpose of the project is to investigate the effects of                  
              differences in campaign intensity across and within different types            
              of elections.  The researchers are particularly interested in the              
              effects of differences in information flow between campaign and                
              non-campaign periods, the effects of changes over the past 40 years            
              in the amount of information reaching voters, and the effects of               
              different kinds of information on different kinds of voters.  The              
              researchers expect to be able to accommodate these various effects             
              within a framework that explicitly models the diffusion of two                 
              competing and highly variable information flows (one for each                  
              candidate) through an electorate in which voters vary greatly in               
              their political values and political attentiveness.                            
                                                                                             
              The project, based on National Election Studies data, develops                 
              models of how changes in the flow of campaign information from 1952            
              to the present have affected different types of voters and                     
              elections.
