Title       : Coercive Strategies in Power-Dependence Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9210399

Award Number: 9210399
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $72520              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda D. Molm molml@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  This award provides support for an experimental study of the              
              effects of two bases of power derived from the capacity to reward              
              or to punish others.  Earlier research found that the effects of               
              punishment power were consistently weaker than those of reward                 
              power.  A structural imbalance in the power to reward others                   
              consistently affect behavior by producing asymmetric exchanges                 
              between actors.  A structural imbalance in the power to punish                 
              others does not necessarily affect the behavior and actions of                 
              individuals.  Reward power requires only that actors pursue their              
              own self interest, but punishment power requires actors to                     
              monitor and respond contingently to others' actions.  This work                
              will continue a series of experiments designed to test a theory                
              to explain why reward-and punishment based power have such                     
              different effects.  The new experiments are testing hypotheses                 
              derived from an analysis of how actors' assessments of the risk                
              of power use and the fairness of power use affect the strategic                
              use of reward and punishment-based resources.                                  
                   This research program will make a significant contribution                
              to the study of social behavior and the effects of structural                  
              inequalities in the access to resources and the capacity to                    
              reward or punish others on individual behavior and social                      
              exchange.
