Title       : Small Firms, Business Cycles and Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9210160

Award Number: 9210160
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark Gertler mark.gertler@nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/598-3131

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this research is to analyze the cyclical behavior               
              of small versus large firms, and to understand the differential                
              response of the two kinds of firms with respect to monetary                    
              policy.  The long run objective is to assess the importance of                 
              recent theories which emphasize the role of credit market                      
              imperfections in the propagation of business cycles and in the                 
              monetary transmission mechanism.  The focus on cross-sectional                 
              differences in firm behavior at different stages of the business               
              cycle exploits that idea that small firms are more likely than                 
              large firms to face problems getting credit.                                   
                                                                                             
              The empirical work centers on examining panel data on real and                 
              financial firm variables provided by the Census Bureau.  Data is               
              available for firms in the manufacturing, wholesale trade, retail              
              trade, and mining sectors.  An important difference with existing              
              panel studies of firm behavior is that the sample distribution of              
              firms is highly representative of the true firm population within              
              each sector.  In particular, small firms are more accurately                   
              represented.  The representative nature of these data will                     
              facilitate drawing inferences about the relevance of the results               
              for macroeconomic behavior.  An objective is to quantify the                   
              impact firms facing financial constraints have on the aggregate                
              volatility of output, inventories, and investment.  This research              
              is important because it will provide a better understanding of                 
              the interaction of small firm behavior and the business cycle.
