Title       : Non-Intrusive Laser Diagnostics Applied to Strained Hydrogen-Air Diffusion
               Flames
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1996      
File        : a9210988

Award Number: 9210988
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Farley Fisher                           
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116509             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Wehrmeyer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1407      COMBUSTION AND PLASMA SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This program will provide a library of strained flamelet                       
              structures for hydrogen-air turbulent combustion modeling.                     
              Spontaneous Raman scattering will be used to obtain                            
              temperature and major species concentration profiles in                        
              opposed-jet hydrogen-air counterflow diffusion flames at                       
              varying fuel dilutions and strain rates.  The strain rate will                 
              be determined from axial velocity profiles using laser                         
              velocimetry.  Laser-induced fluorescence will be used to                       
              obtain the OH concentration profile which can be related to                    
              the extent of local chemical reaction.  Flames with strain                     
              rates up to extinction will be examined, as will flames with                   
              varying amounts of nitrogen diluent added to the fuel.  The                    
              effects of finite-rate chemistry, preferential diffusion,                      
              Lewis Number, and strain rate on opposed jet flames can be                     
              discerned from these experimentally measured flame structures.                 
                                                                                             
              An important modeling effort directed toward the                               
              characterization of turbulent combustion is the laminar                        
              diffusion flamelet theory, which models turbulent diffusion                    
              flames as ensembles of strained laminar diffusion flamelets.                   
              This type of combustion model can be used to predict                           
              temperature profiles, pollutant production, and liftoff                        
              characteristics of turbulent flames, but the laminar flamelet                  
              data that are utilized by the model must correctly represent                   
              the various fluid dynamical, diffusional, and kinetic effects                  
              present.  This laminar flamelet information can be in the form                 
              of "libraries" of diffusion flamelet structures of the type to                 
              be developed in this program.  Once the laminar diffusion                      
              flamelet library correctly treats the effects listed above, it                 
              can be used to more successfully model turbulent hydrogen-air                  
              combustion, including the high speed combustion in Scramjet                    
              engines.
