Title       : Exploring Fundamental Utility Tradeoffs in Plan Reuse
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 1,  1992       
File        : a9210997

Award Number: 9210997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry H. Reeker                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Subbarao Kambhampati rao@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9264,
Abstract    :
              Despite the attractive generality of domain independent planning               
              techniques, their inefficiency has severely hampered the attempts              
              to scale them to complex real world planning domains.  One very                
              promising solution to this involves enabling the planner to improve            
              performance from experience by reusing previously generated plans              
              to solve new planning problems.  Developing effective plan reuse               
              frameworks is thus currently a very active area of research in                 
              automated planning, machine learning and case based reasoning                  
              communities.  Successful design of such planning systems requires              
              a thorough understanding of the fundamental tradeoffs between                  
              storage, retrieval and modification in plan reuse.  In the previous            
              work, a domain independent planning framework called PRAIR which               
              facilitates flexible modification of existing plans to solve new               
              planning problems in the context of hierarchical least commitment              
              planning has been developed.  Experiments with PRAIR have                      
              demonstrated its potential to bring about order of magnitude                   
              improvements in planning performance by incrementally modifying                
              existing plans in a variety of domains.  PRAIR framework thus                  
              promises to be an ideal test bed for investigating the issues of               
              utility of reuse.  This research, a unified reuse framework is                 
              proposed based on PRAIR modification framework, an is used to study            
              the utility tradeoffs involved in plan reuse  This framework will              
              also be used to study ways of integrating reuse with other speedup             
              learning techniques such as abstraction and search control rules.              
              The effectiveness of the resulting reuse framework will be                     
              demonstrated by experimenting with the classical planning domains              
              and more complex real world applications such as process planning.             
              Results from this research will help to design plan reuse                      
              frameworks with demonstrably favorable utility tradeoffs thereby               
              facilitating scaling up of domain independent planning techniques              
              to more complex domains.  This research will thus have a                       
              significant impact on automated planning, machine learning, and                
              case based reasoning communities.                                              
                 //
