Title       : Incorporating More Realistic Psychological Assumptions into Economics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1992   
File        : a9210323

Award Number: 9210323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37772              (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthew Rabin rabin@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project involves efforts to incorporate more realistic                    
              psychological assumptions into formal economics, both at a general             
              level and in particular economic applications.  The research                   
              emphasizes two general areas.                                                  
                                                                                             
              First, many social scientists have criticized mainstream economics             
              as too narrowly focused on how people pursue their material self-              
              interest, ignoring social goals such as fairness.  The project                 
              involves developing a general game-theoretic model of the fact that            
              people try to help those who help them and hurt those who hurt                 
              them.  The model's implications in several economic situations are             
              considered, and it is shown how consumer concerns over fairness                
              will lead a monopolist to lower its price.                                     
                                                                                             
              The second area of research is to understand the economic                      
              implications of "loss aversion" and the "endowment effect."  These             
              notions summarize strong psychological evidence of seemingly                   
              central features of human preferences: our utility from consumption            
              is heavily influenced by our status quo, and we tend to weigh                  
              losses relative to this status quo more heavily than gains.                    
              Foundations are developed for incorporating such issues, and                   
              economic applications are pursued.  The main application under                 
              development is consumer dynamic savings-versus-consumption                     
              decisions, investigating whether consumers tend to resist lowering             
              their consumption in response to bad news about future income.                 
                                                                                             
              This research brings more realism to economic models by                        
              incorporating well-established psychological findings.  It takes a             
              significant step toward building a useful and descriptive theory to            
              enhance our understanding of human behavior.
