Title       : RIA: Quantitative Quality Metrics for Halftone Images and Visual-Model-Based
               Halftoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 13,  1992       
File        : a9210365

Award Number: 9210365
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John Cozzens                            
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96091              (Estimated)
Investigator: Theophano Mitsa mitsa@eng.uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 4720      SIGNAL PROCESSING SYS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9216,
Abstract    :
              The recent proliferation of digital binary output devices, such as             
              laser printers and facsimile machines, has brought increased                   
              attention to high quality halftone reproduction. A question that               
              often arises in halftone research is how to evaluate the quality               
              of halftone images using a quantitative quality metric. Such                   
              metrics would allow objective evaluation, in addition to being                 
              independently reproducible. Halftoning introduces unique types of              
              distortions, and to be able to formulate quantitative quality                  
              measures for halftones it is first needed to develop visual models             
              that agree with the response of the human visual system to halftone            
              images.  However, the problem of developing such models has                    
              received scant attention. For the above reasons, the first                     
              objective of the proposed research is to investigate how different             
              visual models can predict the quality of halftone images, and then             
              based on these models, formulate quantitative quality metrics.                 
                                                                                             
              Visual modeling can also be used for the improvement of existing               
              halftone processes, and provide a basis for the development of                 
              visual-model-based halftoning algorithms. In the proposed research,            
              visual modeling will be incorporated in the construction of a                  
              halftone mask which was developed by the investigator in her Ph.D.             
              thesis. The incorporation of visual modeling will improve the                  
              performance of the halftone mask and permit the development of a               
              halftoning algorithm that combines utilization of information about            
              the human visual system and speed, since the mask is completely                
              independent of the image to be halftoned and needs to be                       
              constructed only once.
