Title       : Getting to the Core: The Effect of Bicameralism and the Committee System on
               Coalition Formation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 29,  1993 
File        : a9210114

Award Number: 9210114
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : April 30,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $84993              (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary J. Miller gjmiller@artsci.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William Bottom  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Cheryl L. Eavey  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The theory of democracy requires that the outcome chosen by                    
              majority rule from among the set of available alternatives should              
              reflect the preferences of the voters in some meaningful way.  When            
              an outcome is said to be a "majority rule winner", no majority                 
              coalition should be able to imagine a different outcome that all               
              coalition members would prefer.  Procedural rules should simply be             
              neutral conveniences enabling a voting body to determine the                   
              majority rule winner efficiently and easily.                                   
                                                                                             
              Unfortunately, none of these desirable propositions is true in                 
              general for majority rule voting.  When voters have strong                     
              differences of opinion, then there may be no single alternative                
              that can be chosen that reflects the "will of the people" in any               
              meaningful way.  For any possible selection, there will always be              
              some majority coalition that would prefer a different choice.  When            
              this is true, different procedural rules may lead to quite                     
              different outcomes simply by protecting favored outcomes from a                
              majority coalition that would prefer a different choice.                       
                                                                                             
              It is troubling to realize that any possible democratic procedure              
              could determine the outcome in a way that is in some sense                     
              arbitrary and "independent" of the preferences of the voters.  But             
              if so, it is important to understand the effects of alternative                
              procedural rules on democratic decisions.                                      
                                                                                             
              The proposed research conducts controlled laboratory experiments               
              in which subjects are paid amounts that vary with the alternative              
              selected from a two-dimensional grid.  Subjects have quite                     
              different preferences over the alternatives to be selected, but the            
              preferences are held constant from one voting body to another.  But            
              different voting bodies are allowed to vote over the alternatives              
              using quite different procedural rules.  Different rules determine,            
              for example, the procedure by which alternatives are introduced for            
              consideration and balloting.                                                   
                                                                                             
              If rules are simply neutral means by which voting bodies                       
              conveniently arrive at invariant outcomes, then the outcomes chosen            
              should not differ from one experiment to another.  However, early              
              experiments indicate clearly that different rules lead                         
              systematically to quite different outcomes, even though the                    
              preferences of the voters are held constant.  Different theories               
              make quite different predicitions about the outcomes to be selected            
              under different rules; with sufficient experimentation, it should              
              be possible greatly to increase our understanding of the effects               
              of the rules of the game on democratic choice.
