Title       : Policy Design and Implementation with International Macroeconomic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9210928

Award Number: 9210928
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187649             (Estimated)
Investigator: John B. Taylor   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,9278,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Recent developments in the international economy have raised new               
              questions and possibilities about international macroeconomic                  
              policy.  Many of these questions have to do with changing or                   
              reforming the institutions of policymaking.  From an economic                  
              perspective, analysis of these questions involves specifying                   
              alternative rules or systems for the conduct of policy-- say                   
              feedback rules for interest rates or exchange rates--and examining             
              how these rules work by stochastically simulating them in a                    
              rational expectations econometric model.  From a practical or                  
              institutional perspective, they involve examining the role and                 
              operation of the institutions of macroeconomic policy making and               
              policy analysis--including the international financial                         
              institutions.  For example, the trend toward regional trading areas            
              has raised questions about coordination of economic policy both                
              across countries and within countries, including macroeconomic                 
              policy, labor market policy, environmental policy, and trade                   
              policy.  Questions about the need for increased monetary                       
              integration, cooperation in financial market regulation, exchange              
              rate stabilization, common currency, or the coordination of fiscal             
              policy have been raised.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research focuses on developing an analytical approach to these            
              types of policy issues.  The approach builds on the principal                  
              investigator's earlier research on international economic models.              
              The proposal is divided into four parts.  The first part                       
              investigates the use of rational expectations econometric models               
              for forecasting.  The second part uses full information maximum                
              likelihood techniques to estimate a multi-country econometric model            
              which would be updated and modified as part of this estimation.                
              The third part examines the practical significance of the Lucas                
              critique by using stochastic simulations of a rational expectations            
              econometric model.  The fourth part focuses on policy design and               
              implementation issues using the framework developed in the first               
              three parts.  A key element in the proposed research is the                    
              examination of alternative ways to improve the implementation of               
              policy rules or systems that result from policy design research.
