Title       : Osmium Isotopes in Seawater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 14,  1993     
File        : a9210028

Award Number: 9210028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153745             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kelly K. Falkner kfalkner@oce.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9251,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The work to date on the marine geochemistry of osmium points to the            
              need to constrain the Os-isotopic composition of the oceans in                 
              order to derive cosmic and terrestrial Os fluxes from the more                 
              readily conducted measurements on sediments and Mn-nodules.  The               
              Os-isotopic composition of the oceans cannot be properly assessed              
              without at least a first order understanding of the oceanographic              
              behavior of the element.  This research will elucidate the marine              
              chemistry of Os through determination of its distribution and                  
              isotopic composition in seawater.  Together with a separate but                
              compatible study of marine solid phases, the project will                      
              significantly increase our overall comprehension of the marine                 
              geochemical cycle of this element.  Such groundwork is prerequisite            
              to exploiting the potential of this isotopic system for probing                
              marine geochemical processes.  Whether the Os-isotopic system in               
              seawater is homogeneous will determine if its sedimentary signature            
              records the relative magnitudes of its crustal, mantle and                     
              cosmogenic sources on the global scale or if it traces more local              
              processes affecting its accumulation.  This in turn determines                 
              whether the paleo cosmogenic material flux or the paleo-redox state            
              of the oceans might be reconstructed from sedimentary records of               
              Os.  On a more immediate timescale, an understanding of the                    
              behavior of Os in the water column will provide the basis for using            
              anthropogenic Os as a tracer in affected coastal areas and enclosed            
              basins.
