Title       : Acquiring Techniques to Study Somatic Mutation in Immunoglobulin Genes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 12,  1992      
File        : a9210186

Award Number: 9210186
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30976              (Estimated)
Investigator: Roberta R. Pollock pollock@oxy.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Occidental College
	      1600 Campus Road
	      Los Angeles, CA  900413384    213/259-2500

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is to study the role of somatic mutation of                   
              immunoglobulin variable (V) genes in development of antibody                   
              diversity. A fusion protein containing a rearranged V gene with a              
              stop codon 5' to the lacZ gene will be constructed. The lacZ gene              
              can be easily detected by fluoresence or histochemistry. The fusion            
              protein will be used to make transgenic mice and in cell lines. The            
              stop codon prevents translation of the lacZ "exon" unless a somatic            
              mutation occurs, causing reversion of the stop codon and expression            
              of lacZ. Fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) will be used to            
              isolate cells expressing lacZ; and putative mutations will be                  
              confirmed by sequencing after PCR. The expression and location of              
              somatic mutation during ontogeny will be determined by                         
              histochemistry and FACS analysis of isolated cells. This should                
              help determine the mechanism of somatic mutation.                              
              %%%                                                                            
              Antibodies are proteins which react with millions of different                 
              kinds of compounds, and among other things are a major source of               
              defense from disease-causing organisms.  Antibodies to each                    
              compound are not identical to those against other compounds. The               
              mechanism by which this specificity is obtained is still not                   
              completely understood. A method to study the role of somatic                   
              mutation in producing antibody diversity involves making a fusion              
              construct which contains a piece of rearranged V gene and the gene             
              for a reporter protein called lacZ. The rearranged V gene contains             
              a "stop" signal which will prevent synthesis of the lacZ protein.              
              The product of the lacZ gene can be easily detected. Only if a                 
              mutation occurs in the "stop" signal can this product form. Mice               
              containing the fusion construct will be used for several studies,              
              to see where and when the lacZ can be detected. This may help                  
              increase our understanding of antibody diversity.
