Title       : Gang Behavior and the Control of Crime in the U.S. Inner City
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1993       
File        : a9210826

Award Number: 9210826
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $172184             (Estimated)
Investigator: George A. Akerlof akerlof@econ.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Janet Yellen  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              During the last thirty years, there has been a burgeoning of                   
              crime in U.S. inner city neighborhoods.  Over this period, gang                
              behavior is believed to have changed, with gangs becoming more                 
              intensely involved in income earning pursuits, especially in the               
              sale of drugs.  The level of police control in gang ridden                     
              neighborhoods has also deteriorated.  This research will use                   
              recent sociological findings to model crime and gang behavior.                 
              The resulting theory will be useful in understanding the                       
              determinants of crime and in evaluating policies geared to halt                
              the deterioration of inner cites in the United States.                         
                                                                                             
              This project builds on the important recent sociological study by              
              Martin Sanchez Jankowski, which provides a detailed portrait of                
              the operation of teenage gangs in three U.S. cities.  Gangs are                
              portrayed as neighborhood militia, whose communities forbear                   
              their crimes in return for protection they afford against the                  
              depredation of outsiders.  In contrast, the prevailing economic                
              theory of crime, due to Gary Becker, ignores the role of the                   
              community in determining the level of criminal activity.  This                 
              research will entail modifying the prevailing economic theory of               
              crime to include the critical role of the community.  Crime is                 
              not only due to the behavior of individual offenders, but also to              
              the community's noncooperation with the police and the police's                
              attendant loss of control of criminal activity.                                
                                                                                             
              The theory predicts that in neighborhoods which are sufficiently               
              rich, crime will not pay; in poorer neighborhoods, however, crime              
              will pay, and the police will lose control in the sense that the               
              community will not cooperate.  Nevertheless, police monitoring                 
              and legal penalties still affect criminal activity.  Crime is                  
              largely determined by the threshold at which the community will                
              switch from protecting their neighborhood gangs to helping the                 
              police.  A model is developed to analyze alternative crime                     
              control measures and to expand the research to study the                       
              interrelationships among crime and other inner city problems such              
              as the disappearance of jobs, increased homelessness and the                   
              breakdown in family relations.
