Title       : The Cyclical Behavior of Inventories and Unfilled Orders
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  1993      
File        : a9210334

Award Number: 9210334
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $104964             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Kahn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project carries out research on the behavior of inventories               
              and unfilled orders.  The contributions of this research to this               
              line of work are important because unfilled orders play a very                 
              significant role in business cycles and in the overall volatility              
              of national output, yet there is relatively little empirical                   
              research on unfilled orders and there is no adequate theoretical               
              explanation of the reasons why unfilled orders and inventories are             
              positively correlated.  One would think that increases in                      
              inventories would reduce unfilled orders, but that is not what the             
              preliminary evidence shows.  The research builds on earlier work               
              on the stockout-avoidance motive for inventories in two main                   
              directions:  First, it extends the stockout-avoidance model to                 
              allow for strictly convex costs of production and inventory                    
              holding.  Second, it incorporates the joint determination of                   
              inventories and unfilled orders.  This is useful not only for those            
              industries in which orders data are available.  Many                           
              industries (most notably the automobile industry) are known to have            
              orders, but data on them are not available.  Consequently current              
              sales or shipments partly reflect unmeasured unfilled orders.  The             
              model developed will resolve this problem.                                     
                                                                                             
              The project also explores some new evidence of increasing                      
              marginal cost and extends the stockout-avoidance model to allow                
              for it.  Because the model is not linear-quadratic, and it                     
              explicitly incorporates non-negativity constraints on                          
              inventories, this extension is non-trivial and leads to the use of             
              some numerical methods that may themselves be of independent                   
              interest.  Preliminary work focused on evidence related to the                 
              slope of marginal cost.  The extreme sensitivity of inventory                  
              behavior in the model to small departures from zero marginal cost              
              suggests that marginal cost may be very close to flat.
