Title       : Within-Colony Kin Discrimination in a Social Insect
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 20,  1995     
File        : a9210051

Award Number: 9210051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joan E. Strassmann strassm@rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David C. Queller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1228,9119,9169,9178,9183,9251,BIOT,ENVI,SMET,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              From the time of Darwin on, the social insects have posed one of               
              the great puzzles of evolutionary biology.  Their worker castes                
              are the prime example of reproductive altruism in the natural                  
              world, yet the process of natural selection is expected, for the               
              most part, to lead to reproductive selfishness.  How can evolution             
              lead to giving up reproduction?  The answer for social insects                 
              (and perhaps also to some extent for humans) turns out to be                   
              kinship.  Colonies of social insects are groups of kin.  Workers               
              don't reproduce, but they help relatives to reproduce and this                 
              permits selection for genes for working behavior.                              
                                                                                             
              However, we still don't understand what kind of balance is struck              
              between the interests of the individual and the interests of the               
              group as a whole.  The same evolutionary kinship theory that                   
              explains how cooperation can evolve also predicts that there may               
              be conflict within colonies.  This is particularly true if                     
              individuals can distinguish and aid their closest relatives in                 
              their colony, but it is not known whether they do this.  Drs.                  
              Strassmann and Queller will use DNA technology to answer this                  
              question.  They will use a class of genes called microsatellite                
              genes.  Because these genes are both numerous and highly variable,             
              they can be used to make the necessary fine-level estimates of                 
              relatedness.                                                                   
                                                                                             
              Thus, Drs. Strassmann and Queller will determine to what extent                
              social insect colonies really are completely cooperative entities,             
              or if they are in part cryptically contentious assemblies of                   
              individuals, each pursuing its own aims.  This will greatly                    
              increase understanding of the extent and nature of altruism in the             
              natural world.                                                                 
                                                                                             
              This project will contribute to the new technology surrounding                 
              microsatellite genes, which is important in many areas, including              
              all kinds of evolutionary studies, conservation genetics,                      
              forensics, and gene-mapping studies for agricultural and medical               
              needs.  Besides contributing to the training of postdoctoral and               
              graduate students, Drs. Strassmann and Queller encourage                       
              participation of undergraduates, high school students, and                     
              teachers who take the knowledge they gain back to the classroom.
