Title       : Synthesis, Structure and Reactivity of Metal Complexes With Sterically Demanding
               Chalcogenolate Ligands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  1994       
File        : a9210406

Award Number: 9210406
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226600             (Estimated)
Investigator: John Arnold arnold@socs.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and                        
              Organo-metallic Chemistry Program, involves the study of                       
              tellurolate and selenolate ligands with both main group and                    
              transition metal centers.  The focus is on ligands that contain                
              bulky alkyl, silyl or aryl substituents such that monomeric                    
              complexes are formed.  Studies of the reactivity of these                      
              complexes will include chalcogenide displacement/substitution,                 
              insertions into the M-ER (E = Te, Se) bond, reactions of the E                 
              center, and cleavage of the E-R bond.  The long term objective                 
              of the research is to put this chemistry on the same basis as                  
              the much studied alkoxide and sulfide congeners.  The potential                
              for use of the molecular chalcogenide compounds as precursors                  
              for solid-state, materials will be examined as part of the                     
              project.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              This project involves the study of the fundamental chemistry of                
              selenium and tellurium.  Unlike the lighter elements in this                   
              family (the chalcogenides), relatively little attention has                    
              been given to the molecular chemistry of these elements,                       
              primarily because of the difficulty of working with them.  This                
              is in spite of the fact that they are constituents of                          
              technologically important devices such as infrared detectors                   
              rechargeable batteries, photothermic imaging materials and                     
              photovoltaic solar cells to name a few.  Professor Arnold, an                  
              excellent synthetic inorganic chemist, has laid the groundwork                 
              that could lead to some exciting advances in the chemistry of                  
              these elements and potentially to advances in technology arenas                
              as well.
