Title       : RIA: Degradation and Buckling of Thin-Walled Elastic-PlasticStructural Members
               Under Cyclic Bending
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1993     
File        : a9210894

Award Number: 9210894
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ken Chong                               
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  1993     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $95495              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edmundo Corona ecorona@bach.helios.nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1631      INFO TECH & INFRASTRUCT SYSTEM
Fld Applictn: 0109000   Structural Technology                   
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9102,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to study the degradation and                  
              buckling of metal beams subjected to cyclic bending into the                   
              plastic range of the material.  The cross-sectional shapes which               
              will be considered are: tubular (square and circular), I, wide-                
              flange and T. Previous work on cyclic bending of circular tubes                
              has indicated that the interaction of material and geometric                   
              nonlinearities causes accumulation of deformation in the beam                  
              cross-section.  This leads to degradation of the structural                    
              response.  Persistent cycling results in buckling and                          
              catastrophic collapse of the structure.  Evidence exists that                  
              similar degradation and failure can occur in the other geometries              
              mentioned.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              The problems will be studied through a combination of experiment               
              and analysis.  The cyclic bending experiments will be conducted                
              in a special purpose bending apparatus.  In these experiments the              
              curvature, bending moment and deformation of the cross-section                 
              will be monitored.  The analysis will be conducted using special               
              purpose numerical tools which include appropriate nonlinear                    
              kinematics and state-of-the-art cyclic plasticity models.  The                 
              models which yield good predictions in the cases studied will be               
              identified and used to help establish the cyclic degradation and               
              the onset of failure of the structures.
