Title       : CAA: Use of Molecular Techniques to Assess Microbial Adaptations to
               Environmental Disturbances
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9210369

Award Number: 9210369
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $34000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah D. Ross   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1181      ECOSYSTEM STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
              Microorganisms are key organisms in the recycling of carbon in                 
              ecosystems.  Not only do they recycle organic carbon produced from             
              photosynthesis, but they are also responsible for the                          
              biodegradation of man-made organic pollutants which are introduced             
              into the environment as a result of industrial and domestic                    
              wastewater discharges.  An understanding of how microorganisms                 
              respond to pollutant stress is key to understanding how polluted               
              environments function.  While pollutants may affect an environment             
              adversely by exerting toxic effects on the microbial population,               
              those microorganisms capable of degrading the pollutant in question            
              would be expected to increase in numbers as a result of pollutant              
              discharges.  DNA probe methodology will be used to address the                 
              dynamics of microbial adaptation to discharges organic pollutants,             
              using polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) as models.  These               
              relatively new methods permit the identification of and enumeration            
              of microorganisms responsible for biodegradation of organic                    
              pollutants.  By examining the genes which code for the underlying              
              metabolic precesses.  Knowledge of the numbers and activities of               
              biodegrading microorganisms in the environment is key to designing             
              effective bioremediation strategies.  In this clean-up method, the             
              natural capabilities of microorganisms are used to remove organic              
              pollutants in an environmentally safe way with minimal physical                
              disturbance to the environment.
