Title       : RIA: Time-Domain Permutation Networks for High Performance Computing and
               Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1992     
File        : a9210605

Award Number: 9210605
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John R. Lehmann                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $89825              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kyungsook Y. Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Denver
	      University Park
	      Denver, CO  80208    303/871-2000

NSF Program : 4715      COMPUTER SYSTEMS ARCHITECTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              0108000   Software Development                    
              0510403   Engineering & Computer Science          
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9215,
Abstract    :
              Time-Division Multiplexing is a technique for sharing multi-                   
              terahertz bandwidths of optics among multiple users connected to               
              a common channel of a communication network, or among multiple                 
              processors in a time-multiplexed optical multiprocessor.                       
              Communication among such users or processors requires time-domain              
              permutation via a time-slot permuter.                                          
                                                                                             
              The project is to design a wide array of time-slot permuters with              
              different hardware and control complexities for different                      
              applications.  The approach is to apply the rich knowledge in                  
              spatial interconnection networks to the permutation networks in the            
              time-domain.  We have formulated a general method for a mapping                
              from the space-domain to the time-domain, and have demonstrated how            
              the method can be used to design new time-slot permuters.  The new             
              designs will be verified with the simulator HATCH developed for the            
              logic level verification of optical systems at the NSF Engineering             
              Center for Optoelectronic Systems at the University of Colorado at             
              Boulder.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Time-slot permuters have very important applications in time-                  
              multiplexed communication networks, and in pipelined processor                 
              architectures where rearrangement of pipeline slots is required as             
              in a time-multiplexed optical multiprocessor.  The proposed                    
              research will enhance the knowledge base in the relations between              
              permutation networks in space-domain and permutation networks in               
              time-domain, as well as in tradeoffs between switching and control             
              complexity in different permutation architectures.  Such a                     
              knowledge base is critical for advancing the dissemination of                  
              optical technologies in high performance computing and                         
              communication.
