Title       : The Directional Theory of Issue Voting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  1992       
File        : a9210825

Award Number: 9210825
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Rabinowitz   (Principal Investigator current)
              Stuart MacDonald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Democracy is often idealized as a system in which citizens have                
              clear issue preferences, know where the parties stand on issues,               
              and cast their ballots accordingly.  Parties then pursue the                   
              policies expected of them.  In such a system there is a direct                 
              connection between the issue preferences of citizens, party choice,            
              and public policy.  The spatial theory of elections is a natural               
              representation of this classic concept.  In the theory, liking of              
              candidates is based on closeness to their issue positions.  The                
              theory requires two important assumptions:  that people have                   
              specific positions on an issue and that those positions can be                 
              arrayed along a continuum.  For example, on the issue of defense               
              spending, each person would have an exact level of spending they               
              most prefer.  Empirical research has found that voters are not well            
              enough informed about politics for these assumptions to be                     
              realistic.                                                                     
              An alternate view is that democracy is a system which provides                 
              citizen input for resolving social conflicts.  Sources of conflict             
              or cleavage are abundant in any society.  They can be related to               
              demographic differences such as rich versus poor, Protestant versus            
              Catholic, or management versus labor.  They can be rooted in                   
              ideological and issue divisions such as egalitarians versus                    
              individualists, environmentalists versus materialists, or pro-                 
              choice versus pro-life.  If the substance of politics is conflict,             
              an appropriate role for parties is advocacy.  Effective parties are            
              effective advocates, and elections decide which side has greater               
              weight in determining policy.                                                  
              The directional theory of issue voting is a natural vehicle for                
              modeling conflict-oriented politics.  In this theory, issues are               
              understood as a choice between two alternatives.  Voters may favor             
              a policy, oppose it, or be neutral.  This is a less demanding role             
              for voters and more in line with empirical evidence.  In                       
              directional theory, when voters choose, they do not ask "how close             
              are your positions to mine?"  Rather they ask, "are you on my                  
              side?" and "can I trust you to be responsible?"                                
              Both the directional and spatial theories can be represented                   
              mathematically and tested empirically.  In prior research by the               
              research team on the United States and Norway, the empirical                   
              evidence has clearly favored directional theory.  In this                      
              continuation the researchers further develop and empirically test              
              this theory.  Specifically the investigators will: (1) examine the             
              relationship between left-right ideology and support for political             
              parties in several European countries; (2) test the discounting                
              hypothesis; and, (3) test the rationalization hypothesis, i.e. the             
              spatial model states that voters prefer candidates who are close               
              to them on the issues but may rationalize candidate issue positions            
              and assume they are close to them on the issues.                               
              This research promises to refine further our understanding of the              
              relationship between directional theory and spatial theory
