Title       : Collaborative Research on Welfare and Inefficiency Under Directly Unproductive
               Activities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9210099

Award Number: 9210099
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $31178              (Estimated)
Investigator: Constantinos Syropoulos   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              There are numerous economic environments where agents use some of              
              their resources for directly unproductive purposes.  Rent-                     
              seeking, influence activities in organizations as well as                      
              expenditures on armaments are some activities which can be                     
              classified in this category.  Although undertaking such                        
              activities is an individually rational enterprise, the social                  
              outcome is typically inefficient.  The purpose of this research                
              is to analyze a series of topics using models where agents                     
              allocate their resource endowments between productive inputs and               
              directly unproductive activities.  Total output depends on the                 
              productive inputs and it is distributed among the agents                       
              according to their relative contributions in the directly                      
              unproductive activity.  This distribution mechanism sharply                    
              contrasts with the competitive mechanism in at least one respect:              
                                                                                             
              Agent-specific productivity improvements are disadvantageous to                
              the agent who undertakes them.  Related topics examined in this                
              setting include the determinants of the individual welfare of                  
              agents; the primary reasons for inefficiency and incentives for                
              the adoption of alternative allocation mechanisms; individual                  
              behavior within groups; and dynamic efficiency and distributional              
              effects.  The research is of descriptive as well as of normative               
              significance for variety of institutional environments where the               
              primary means of distribution are directly unproductive                        
              activities.
