Title       : RPG: Millennial-Scale Paleoclimatic Cycles Expressed in Paleozoic Basinal Marine
               Sequences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  1992      
File        : a9210462

Award Number: 9210462
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith L. Hannah                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Maya Elrick dolomite@unm.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of New Mexico
	      Sholes Hall
	      Albuquerque, NM  87131    /   -

NSF Program : 1575      EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The proposed research is to investigate the origin and                    
              periodicity of rhythmically interbedded limestone-marl couplets in             
              four separate Paleozoic basinal marine sequences.  In each of the              
              sequences, the limestone-marl couplets are characterized by                    
              decimeter-scale alternations of even-bedded, laminated limestone               
              and marls; well-preserved calcareous fossils in marl layers                    
              indicates a primary depositional(versus diagenetic origin) to the              
              interbeds.  Spectral analysis of the limestone-marl interbeds will             
              be conducted to determine whether there is a regularly cyclicity               
              to the bedding couplets, and the duration of the cycles will be                
              determined from a range of sedimentation rates calculated for each             
              individual sequence.                                                           
                   A planning grant is submitted to study the sedimentologic                 
              origin and periodicity pf rhythmically bedded limestone-marl                   
              couplets in one of the proposed sequences; the Middle Cambrian of              
              western Utah (Wheeler and Marjum Formations).  The emphasis of the             
              pilot project is to develop accurate and time-efficient sampling               
              techniques for generating time series in interbedded limestone and             
              marl facies.  In previous studies, time series generated from                  
              variations in HCI-insoluble residues has proven to be an accurate              
              method, however it is very laboratory-time intensive.                          
              Consequently, three other less-time consuming methods will be                  
              tested on the Middle Cambrian couplets determine which technique               
              (s) best reflects the rhythmic nature of the deposits.                         
                   Specific planning grant activities will include describing and            
              interpreting the sedimentologic and stratigraphic characteristics              
              of the basinal facies, evaluating the lateral continuity of                    
              limestone-marl couplets, sampling the best-exposed section for                 
              variations in HCI-insoluble residues, magnetic properties, and bed-            
              thickness variations.  Results from spectral analysis of the                   
              different time series will be compared to determine which time                 
              series sampling technique(s) are appropriate for interbedded                   
              limestone-marl facies.                                                         
                   The cause of millennial-scale paleoclimatic fluctuations is               
              not well understood, however they have been attributed to changes              
              in solar activity or due to the nonlinear response of the climate              
              to precessional (~20,000 yr) orbital forcing.  If the periods of               
              such persistent oscillations can be characterized, they offer the              
              potential for developing high-resolution chronostratigraphy, with              
              a greater resolution than Milankovitch cycles, that can be used to             
              calibrate the length of time between absolute datums, variations               
              in sedimentation rates, biologic evolution rates, and the time                 
              intervals over which geomagnetic reversals occur.
