Title       : Interfacial Transport Processes at Oil-Surfactant-Water Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 3,  1995   
File        : a9210737

Award Number: 9210737
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $265215             (Estimated)
Investigator: T. Alan Hatton tahatton@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1414,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The project deals with a topic of great importance in many                     
              industrial separation and purification operations, i.e., the                   
              transport of materials across surfactant-laden interfaces                      
              separating two macroscopic fluid phases.  At the colloidal                     
              level, an understanding of the dynamic processes in                            
              microemulsions systems as affected by the interfacial                          
              structure of the surfactant layer can lead to better                           
              mechanistic descriptions of such diverse phenomena as e.g.,                    
              phase transitions, emulsion stability, transport in cells and                  
              membrane mimetic media, and biocatalysis in reversed micellar                  
              systems.  To better understand the factors influencing these                   
              and other interfacial transport processes, the PIs plan to (i)                 
                                                                                             
              investigate the role of compressible and incompressible                        
              surfactant layers in retarding the transport of solutes across                 
                                                                                             
              interfaces separating two bulk phase, (ii) examine the                         
              kinetics of formation and coalescence of reversed micelles at                  
              such interfaces, and (iii) study experimentally the rate of                    
              association of probe molecules with their transport through,                   
              highly curved surfactant interfaces in water-in-oil                            
              microemulsion, (iv) develop a theoretical model for the                        
              interaction of solute molecules with the surfactant interface,                 
                                                                                             
              and of the formation and destruction rates of micelles at the                  
                                                                                             
              interface.  The thermal and structural relaxation behavior of                  
                                                                                             
              microemulsion systems will also be addressed.  To these ends,                  
                                                                                             
              the PIs will employ two complementary experimental techniques.                 
                                                                                             
              A unique diffusion cell has been designed which enables the                    
              introduction of a step change in concentration of the                          
              transferring solute very close to the interface without                        
              causing any disturbance of the interface itself.                               
                                                                                             
              The Iodine Laser Temperature Jump (ILTJ) method, a relaxation                  
                                                                                             
              technique, will be used to identify and quantify the                           
              interfacial diffusion time scales characteristic of the                        
              microemulsion systems.
