Title       : Protein-Protein Interaction Involving The Cellular CREB and Viral px Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1992 
File        : a9210392

Award Number: 9210392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ourania M. Andrisani   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is to study the interaction of a cellular trans-              
              cription factor, the protein CREB, and the hepatitis B transacti-              
              vating factor, the protein px.  Cellular genes are transcribed when            
              transcription activators react with specific DNA sequences.  When              
              viruses infect cells, immediate early viral genes are transcribed              
              in order to obtain expression of other virus-encoded genes.  CREB              
              is a leucine zipper protein, which also contains a specific DNA-               
              binding region, px is unable to bind DNA, but the px-CREB protein-             
              protein complex is able to bind to a variant CRE-like site present             
              in the viral genome.  The interactions between CREB and px will be             
              studied using CREB site-directed mutants expressed in and purified             
              from bacterial systems, and CREB-specific polyclonal antibodies.               
              The mechanism of recognition of the variant CRE-like site will also            
              be determined.                                                                 
              %%%                                                                            
              In order to have transcription of cellular DNA, proteins called                
              transcription factors bind to sequence-specific portions of DNA;               
              one such protein is called CREB.  When viruses infect cells, some              
              of their genes are transcribed; one protein product is called px.              
              When these two proteins interact, the complex can interact with a              
              viral DNA binding site very similar to the cellular DNA binding                
              site, that the two proteins separately cannot interact with.  This             
              allows synthesis of further viral proteins.  This proposal is to               
              examine the factors that allow the two proteins to interact, using             
              mutant CREB proteins and antibodies to CREB.  The mechanism of                 
              recognition of the viral DNA binding site by the protein complex               
              will also be determined.
