Title       : Adhesion and Fusion of Skeletal Myoblasts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9210305

Award Number: 9210305
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph Hecht                             
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $36752              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen A. Knudsen knudsenk@mlhs.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lankenau Medical Res Cntr
	      Lancaster Ave West of City Line
	      Philadelphia, PA  191512621    215/645-2025

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Skeletal muscle is a syncytium ensuing from the fusion of                      
              myoblasts.  Myoblast fusion is a complex process, involving                    
              differentiation, myoblast-myoblast adhesion, and cell union.                   
              Adhesion precedes and is necessary, but not sufficient, for fusion,            
              indicating separate mechanisms mediate the two events.                         
                                                                                             
              The molecules mediating adhesion are being elucidated and two cell             
              surface glycoproteins, N-CAM and N-cadherin, have been shown by us             
              to cooperate in promoting myoblast contact during membrane union.              
              N-cadherin seems to play the dominant role, perhaps reflecting its             
              intracellular linkage to the cytoskeleton via proteins currently               
              being identified by us.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Little is known about membrane union, except that it involves                  
              proteins, calcium, and a metalloendoprotease.  One of our goals is             
              to identify a putative myoblast "fusion protein".                              
                                                                                             
              Our long-term goal is to develop a comprehensive molecular                     
              description of myoblast fusion, which will enhance our                         
              understanding of skeletal myogenesis.  It may also optimize the                
              potential success of myoblast transplantation as an approach to                
              gene therapy, since long-term survival of donor myoblasts carrying             
              new genes depends upon their fusion with recipient muscle.                     
                                                                                             
              Our past approach has relied heavily on antibodies, but we now need            
              to apply molecular biology methodologies to our research.  The                 
              proposal is designed to re-tool our lab for this purpose.
