Title       : Derivation of DNA Probes for Analysis of the Junction of theMouse RB (6.16)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9210351

Award Number: 9210351
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. DeLeon pdeleon@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9222,
Abstract    :
                 This proposal is to study genetic factors that affect sperm                 
              function in fertilization. Previous work by the P.I. has identified            
              a factor near the centromere of mouse chromosome 6 which plays a               
              role in sperm maturation and function; this area was identified                
              using Robertsonian translocations involving the Rb (6.16) junction.            
              The current work will involve analysis of regions surrounding this             
              junction to identify sequences involved in delay in sperm                      
              viability. DNA clones from the Rb (6.16) junction and the                      
              centromeres/telomeres of the normal 6 and 16 chromosomes will be               
              prepared after microdissection. The clones will be characterized               
              and unique sequences will be localized and amplified. Genetic                  
              mapping of unique sequences will be done using recombinant inbred              
              strains and interspecies backcross. The presence or absence of                 
              telomeric repeats in the Rb junction will be determined, to try to             
              understand the origin of Rb translocations. Information about the              
              mechanism of centric fusions will also be obtained.                            
              %%%                                                                            
              This proposal is to study genetic factors in sperm that are                    
              involved in fertilization. Chromosomes or chromosomal regions that             
              play a role in mammalian sperm function are being identified, prior            
              to identifying genes that influence sperm maturation and function.             
              chromosomally different sperm in a predictable manner. Using mice              
              bred to carry certain chromosomal translocations, a factor(s) near             
              the centromere region of chromosome 6 has been identified which                
              affects sperm maturation and function. This area, known as an Rb               
              (6.16) junction, and the centromeres/telomeres of chromosomes 6 and            
              16, will be microdissected and cloned. Clones will be characterized            
              and unique sequences will be amplified; genetic mapping of unique              
              sequences will be done. The presence or absence of telomeric                   
              repeats in the Rb (6.16) junction will be assessed, to determine               
              what is involved in the origin of Rb translocations. This will be              
              the first molecular analysis of the junction of an Rb transloca-               
              tion. This may help in the understanding of centric fusion and its             
              role in sperm function.
