Title       : Acquisition of an Analytical Ultracentrifuge
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 18,  1993      
File        : a9216150

Award Number: 9216150
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62792              (Estimated)
Investigator: John J. Correia   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark O. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mona T. Norcum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven T. Case  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jonathan B. Chaires  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Mississippi Med Cen
	      2500 North State Street
	      Jackson, MS  392164505    601/987-3500

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9126,9162,
Abstract    :
              We propose to replace the Beckman Model E Analysis                             
              Ultracentrifuge with the new Beckman Optima XL-A Analytical                    
              Ultracentrifuge.  This will maintain state-of-the-art                          
              instrumentation and facilitate physical biochemical analysis                   
              of numerous protein and nucleic acid systems currently under                   
              study in the laboratories of the proposed user group.                          
              Analytical ultracentrifugation is the best technique for                       
              studying associating macromolecular systems and is extremely                   
              useful for elucidating the interaction, size, and shape of                     
              small molecules, proteins and nucleic acids.  Three primary                    
              and at least five secondary users will utilize the requested                   
              instrumentation in a variety of projects.  Major projects                      
              include:  1) tubulin polymer formation and microtubule-                        
              associated protein self-association, 2) specificity of drug-                   
              nucleic acid interactions, 3) assembly of amino-tRNA                           
              syntheses complexes, 4) protein-RNA interactions and 5)                        
              secretory protein association.  Minor projects include: 6)                     
              redox-electron carrier protein association, 7) molecular                       
              studies of secreted glycoproteins and 8) specificity of                        
              histone-DNA interactions.  Acquisition of the requested                        
              equipment will have an immediated and significant impact on                    
              each of the projects listed in this proposal.  The impact                      
              will include:  1) increased access to analytical                               
              ultracentrifugation for routine sedimentation velocity and                     
              equilibrium analysis, 2) access to rapid data acquisition                      
              and analysis through an interfaced PS/2 computer system, and                   
              3) support for maintenance and repair of the                                   
              ultracentrifuge.  The analytical ultracentrifuge work is                       
              complemented by a variety of other biophysical approaches                      
              including circular dichroism, fluorescence spectroscopy,                       
              differential scanning calorimetry, stopped-flow kinetics,                      
              electron microscopy, and molecular biology, protein                            
              engineering.  The applicants have an established record of                     
              shared instrumentation and of active collaboration in their                    
              research programs.  The Optima XL-A will be only functioning                   
              analytical ultracentrifuge in the State of Mississippi.
