Title       : Upgrade of ESR Facility
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1992  
File        : a9216693

Award Number: 9216693
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $81100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Nicholas J. Turro turro@chem.columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ann E. McDermott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Breslow  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Bersohn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1938      CHEMICAL INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9126,
Abstract    :
              The Department of Chemistry at Columbia University will use                    
              this award for the purchase of an upgrade for two electron spin                
              resonance (ESR) spectrometers.  Both instruments are capable of                
              acquiring ESR spectra in steady state operation and in                         
              time-resolved ESR experiments.  Fourier transform (FT) ESR                     
              methods will also be implemented.  Both instruments will be                    
              equipped with lasers capable of providing nanosecond pulses for                
              excitation of samples and the production of paramagnetic                       
              transients.  The instruments will be used by members of the                    
              department for a wide range of work and will be used for a                     
              variety of state-of-the-art experiments including:                             
                                                                                             
              1) Gas phase experiments employing time resolved laser flash                   
              photolysis to investigate the possibility of employing                         
              circularly polarized light to produce electron spin                            
              polarization of reaction products;                                             
                                                                                             
              2) Low temperature experiments which investigate the magnetic                  
              characteristics of novel materials;                                            
                                                                                             
              3) Room temperature solution experiments which employ time                     
              resolved methods to investigate electron polarization transfer                 
              for organic triplet states and radicals in order to elucidate                  
              the mechanism of electron exchange between paramagnetic                        
              species; and                                                                   
                                                                                             
              4) Low temperature electron spin echo envelope modulation                      
              (ESEEM) experiments to investigate photosynthetic reaction                     
              centers.                                                                       
              %%%                                                                            
              An electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrometer is an instrument                 
              used to obtain information about the molecular and electronic                  
              structure of molecules.  It may also be used to obtain                         
              information about the lifetimes of free radicals which are                     
              often essential for the initiation of tumor growth and/or a                    
              variety of chemical reactions.
