Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Measurements of Beryllium-10, Aluminum-26 and
               Helium-3 in Antarctic Glacial Deposits
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  1995      
File        : a9216914

Award Number: 9216914
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12100              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Kurz mkurz@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Edward J. Brook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0319000   Climate Related Activities              
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                  
              in glacial geochronology involving Mark D. Kurz and Edward J.                  
              Brook of Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute and Grant                          
              Raisbeck of the Center for Nuclear Spectrometry, Orsay. The                    
              principal objective of this research is to take collaborative                  
              measurements of cosmogenic isotopes - beryllium, aluminum and                  
              helium in order to define the chronology of Antarctic glaciations.             
              These isotope measurements are particularly suited for dating                  
              glacial deposits in Antarctica where erosion is slow and the                   
              surface exposures are excellent.  Dr. Kurz is a specialist in                  
              helium isotopes. He and Mr. Brook will work together on the                    
              measurements.  This is complemented by Dr. Raisbeck's                          
              pioneering work in radionuclides and collaboration with the AMS                
              (Accelerator Mass Spectrometry) group at Orsay and their                       
              expertise in the analyses of beryllium and aluminum. Inclusion of              
              these two isotopes will provide useful chronological information               
              and strengthen this technique for dating and detecting potential               
              analytical problems.                                                           
                                                                                             
              Exposure age dating, using cosmogenic isotopes, is an important                
              technique in the reconstruction of paleoclimate. This                          
              collaboration is part of a worldwide effort to establish this                  
              technique.  Results will contribute to our understanding of                    
              historical climate change and the chronology of Antarctic                      
              glaciations.
