Title       : A Generic Framework for Flexible Agent-Based Intelligent Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  1993   
File        : a9216545

Award Number: 9216545
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Howard Moraff                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : January 15,  1993   
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank L. Lewis flewis@controls.uta.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond R. Shoults  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              George V. Kondraske  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Owen Robert Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karan Harbison-Briggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Arlington
	      Office of Research
	      Arlington, TX  760190145    817/273-2105

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 6840,9105,9216,
Abstract    :
                   The research involves a multidisciplinary team, already                   
              working together, with heavy experience in control systems,                    
              artificial intelligence, power systems, human performance, neural              
              networks, and vision/CAD systems to design a Generic Framework for             
              Flexible Agent-Based Intelligent Control (IC).  This objective will            
              be accomplished via three goals:  1.  Defining the requirements for            
              an IC framework based on the common themes across existing UTA                 
              testbeds in manufacturing material handling, power systems                     
              simulation, human performance/telerobotics, automated surface                  
              finishing, flexible real-time digital control implementation, and              
              autonomous vehicle navigation and control; 2.  Development of a                
              generic IC framework applicable in all these testbeds to confront              
              design and control problems involving complex nonlinear systems,               
              hierarchical levels of abstraction and time scales, cognitive                  
              modeling and learning, human interface at several levels, man-in-              
              the-loop, coordination of multiple agents, sensor fusion, real-time            
              control system reconfiguration, and failure recovery.  The                     
              framework will be object-oriented, modular, and agent-based; and 3.            
              Evaluation of the generic IC framework by:  application to the                 
              testbed areas, verification of ability to support current                      
              architectures (e.g. NASREM, NGC), and development of a case-study-             
              based graduate course in intelligent control.  Extensive industry              
              involvement will be provided through existing Industry Advisory                
              Committees and company membership programs at ARRI and HPI, ongoing            
              industry contracts, and other UTA programs.  //
