Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1993   
File        : a9216225

Award Number: 9216225
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1993   
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5993               (Estimated)
Investigator: Scott Barclay  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The right of appeal is a critical factor in the American judicial              
              system not only because of its implications for the status of the              
              individual in the political system but also because its use defines            
              the real scope of the judiciary.  Therefore, the decision by a                 
              losing litigant to appeal, or not to appeal, carries great import              
              for the functioning and legitimacy of the political system.  This              
              issue has been addressed at the theoretical level, producing a                 
              range of models purporting to account for the decision to appeal:              
              a systemic model, that locates the explanation of a decision to                
              appeal in the structure and process of the judicial system itself;             
              an individual resources model, that imputes the decision to the                
              litigant's access to resources; an economic model suggesting that              
              a calculus of costs and benefits determines the decision; and a                
              psychological model that posits three motivational processes of                
              naming, blaming and claiming.  These models all assume that the                
              decision to litigate is determined by some kind of response to the             
              outcome of the case at trial, but no empirical work has yet been               
              done to test the validity of these models.  Another theory of                  
              litigant decision-making focuses not only on the outcome of any                
              case but also on how the procedure to reach that outcome affects               
              the litigant.  Empirical studies of this "procedural justice                   
              factor" at the trial level suggest that it could be applicable to              
              the decision to appeal.                                                        
                                                                                             
              This doctoral dissertation proposes to test hypotheses drawn from              
              these various theories.  Data will be collected from several                   
              sources.  First, the investigator will analyze interview data from             
              the RAND/ICJ study.  Second, 60 open-ended interviews will be                  
              conducted with losing litigants in tort and contract cases who                 
              filed a Notice of Appeal with the Court of Appeals of Cook County              
              in Chicago.  For purposes of testing external validity, a                      
              comparable group will be interviewed in Ramsey County in Minnesota.            
              A control group of losing litigants who chose not to appeal will               
              also be interviewed in each jurisdiction.  Third, an extensive                 
              questionnaire will be administered to 100 appellants and 100 non-              
              appellants in tort and contract actions, including both plaintiff              
              and defendant appellants.  Various quantitative and qualitative                
              analyses will be employed to test the validity of the various                  
              explanatory models discussed above.                                            
                                                                                             
              The research will make an important theoretical contribution to our            
              understanding of individual dynamics within the judicial system.               
              The findings will clarify a continuing debate over the character               
              of litigant motivations, and provide an empirical basis for                    
              interpreting how these motivations affect the appellate process.
