Title       : A Scientific Group Communications & Collaborative Testbed for Upper Atmospheric
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 11,  1998  
File        : a9216848

Award Number: 9216848
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Stephen Griffin                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1999     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4455329            (Estimated)
Investigator: Gary M. Olson  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Terry E. Weymouth  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              C. Robert Clauer  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Judy A. Cumnock  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    313/764-1817

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 0000,6850,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                 This is a cooperative agreement to fund a multidisciplinary                 
              effort linking research in computer science, behavioral science,               
              and upper atmospheric and space science to build a prototype system            
              for a distributed but shared working environment:  the vision of a             
              collaboratory.  This effort conceives, develops, deploys, tests,               
              evaluates, and integrates a high performance group centered                    
              computing environment into the collaborative experimental and                  
              modeling activities ongoing in the upper atmospheric research                  
              community.  The upper atmospheric researchers here are a                       
              collaborating group engaged in observational activities using a                
              variety of instruments located at the Sondre Stromfjord, Greenland             
              upper atmospheric research facility.  Many of these activities are             
              directed at rare or intermittent phenomena requiring real time                 
              control of instruments by the scientists observing the changing                
              conditions.  This is presently accomplished by visits to the remote            
              facility.  To prototype test and evaluate the distributed tools for            
              collaboration, research under this agreement will develop a user-              
              oriented, rapid prototyping testbed built around the Sondre                    
              Stromfjord facility and its user community.  Testing and evaluation            
              of the prototype tools will involve measurements of human behavior.            
                                                                                             
              This research will add to the understanding of effective use of                
              collaboration tools by performing studies of use and effectiveness             
              of these tools among the testbed users.  The Sondre Stromfjord                 
              researchers expect to obtain greater efficiency in joint                       
              experimental operations, analysis, and discovery by guiding the                
              requirements for the collaboration environment which they will                 
              utilize to support their research.//
