Title       : Center for Survey Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1996 
File        : a9216184

Award Number: 9216184
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1998      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4259566            (Estimated)
Investigator: Stanley Presser spresser@bss1.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0200000   Interagency                             
              0312000   Population                              
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Both the social sciences and the Federal Statistical System               
              are vitally dependent on survey research tools.  The knowledge                 
              required to use and refine these tools is unusually broad,  drawing            
              on a blend of many disciplines.  As a result,  the current                     
              organization of U.S. universities does not serve well the needs of             
              innovative survey research.  NSF funding for the Center for Survey             
              Methods in the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area offers a chance              
              to overcome the weaknesses of current programs.                                
                   The University of Maryland,  University of Michigan, and                  
              Westat,  Inc.,  jointly propose to create and staff a Center for               
              Survey Methods located at the University of Maryland's College Park            
              Campus.  Stanley Presser will be the Director;  Robert M. Groves,              
              the Associate Director.  Existing Maryland staff will be                       
              supplemented by a permanent Michigan team located at College Park,             
              a Westat team ,  and video instruction by Michigan faculty from Ann            
              Arbor.  The curriculum will pool existing Maryland courses,                    
              existing courses of the Michigan Summer Institute in Survey                    
              Research Techniques,  newly created specialty courses,  and a                  
              series of short courses targeted to the needs of the Federal                   
              Statistical System staff.  An evolutionary strategy is proposed for            
              the Center,  starting with easily developed and time-proven courses            
              and organizational ties,  to a fully integrated course structure               
              blending theory and practice and increased integration across                  
              organizations.  The research program of the Center will be built               
              around the selection of faculty devoted to ongoing research,                   
              research uses of a survey practicum,  small seed grants,  Master's             
              research experience requirement,  the research activities of                   
              visiting scholars,  and a research design seminar.                             
                   One measure of the Center's success will be collaborative                 
              research involving Center faculty and other survey statisticians               
              and methodologists who are affiliated faculty and/or located on                
              other campuses.  This strategy will be critical in advancing the               
              field of survey methodology.
