Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Segmentation and Fusion of Visual Motion
               Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 29,  1993     
File        : a9216895

Award Number: 9216895
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret M. Shiffrar   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0203000   Health                                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5918,5980,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                
              in neurosciences between Margaret M. Shiffrar, Rutgers                         
              University, and Jean Lorenceau, Experimental Psychology                        
              Laboratory, University of Paris.  Through a convergence of                     
              psychophysical, neurophysiological and computational studies, the              
              investigators propose to address the process of image                          
              interpretation in computational and biological visual systems.                 
              Signal fusion and fission; that is, how visual systems determine               
              which signals should be grouped together, and how human                        
              observers integrate visual motion signals across space and time,               
              are pivotal issues addressed by this research.                                 
                                                                                             
              Dr. Shiffrar and her colleagues bring to this collaboration                    
              expertise in computational studies of biological systems and the               
              environment for large scale computational modelling and                        
              simulations.  The French group will conduct complementary                      
              neurophysiological studies on the visual perception of motion                  
              coherence utilizing multi-electrode recording facilities.                      
              Psychophysical studies designed to measure sensitivity to                      
              direction of object motion will be performed jointly by both                   
              groups and serve as the unifying framework for the                             
              neurophysiological and computational methodologies.  This cross                
              disciplinary approach will further understanding of the human                  
              visual system and applied aspects of vision research in video                  
              technology and robotics.
