Title       : Kinetics, Structure, and Properties of Crosslinked Polymer Films Formed by
               Cationic Photopolymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  1995      
File        : a9216939

Award Number: 9216939
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $309362             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alec B. Scranton   (Principal Investigator current)
              Kris A. Berglund  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas P. Carter  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,9223,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The emission of volatile organic components (VOCs) from curing                 
              inks, films and coatings is a leading cause of atmospheric                     
              pollution.  Volatile organic solvents have traditionally been                  
              used to impart desirable viscosity and cure rate properties to                 
              ink and coating formulations.  An ink or coating formulation                   
              must be sufficiently fluid to be easily applied (often onto a                  
              rapidly moving substrate through a series of transfer                          
              rollers), but must cure rapidly to a hard film.  Historically,                 
              these processing demands have been met through the use of a                    
              rapidly evaporating organic solvent in the ink and coating                     
              formulations.  When these volatile organic solvents enter the                  
              atmosphere, they result in the formation of smog and air                       
              pollution.  There is a need for the development of high                        
              performance inks and coatings that will not emit VOCs to the                   
              atmosphere.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Cationic photopolymerizations of diepoxides and bisvinyl                       
              ethers exhibit potential for the development of high-                          
              performance inks and coatings which emit no VOCs during cure.                  
              However, because appropriate monomers and initiators have been                 
              developed only recently, the characteristics of these                          
              reactions and the structure of the resulting polymer films are                 
              not well understood.  This research project will provide                       
              fundamental experimental and theoretical investigations of UV-                 
              initiated cationic photopolymerizations.  Detailed profiles of                 
              the reaction temperature and the extent of reaction will be                    
              obtained using in situ time-resolved fluorescence and raman                    
              experiments, and the thermal, mechanical, and physical                         
              properties of the resulting highly crosslinked polymer films                   
              will be thoroughly characterized.  Nuclear magnetic resonance                  
              spin diffusion experiments will be used to investigate the                     
              homogeneity and morphology of the polymer films.  The goal of                  
              the theoretical effort is to develop computer simulations of                   
              the photopolymerization reactions which account for molecular                  
              mobility in a realistic manner.  These simulations should                      
              provide insight into the development of the highly crosslinked                 
              network structure.  The research will help evaluate the                        
              potential of these reactions for the development of high-                      
              performance, solvent-free inks and coatings.
