Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Four-dimensional String Theories and Low
               Energy Effective Lagrangians
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 18,  1993  
File        : a9216146

Award Number: 9216146
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15250              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomasz R. Taylor taylor@neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This two-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                  
              in theoretical physics between Tomasz Taylor of Northeastern                   
              University and Ignatios Antoniadis of the Ecole Polytechnique,                 
              Paris, France.  The investigators will study a theory of particle              
              physics based on four-dimensional superstrings.  Their principal               
              objective is to determine the derivation of actions that describe              
              the physics of string excitations at low energies.  They will                  
              achieve this by computing the relevant string scattering                       
              amplitudes.  The results will be applied to studies of non-                    
              perturbative effects in superstring theory and to the problem of               
              supersymmetry breaking.                                                        
                                                                                             
              Both investigators have been involved in research on supergravity              
              and superstring theory.  Dr. Taylor brings to this collaboration               
              his background in the phenomenological aspects of superstring                  
              theory and expertise on supersymmetry breaking and space-time                  
              symmetries.  This is complemented by Dr. Antoniadis expertise                  
              on superstring modes and theories and his involvement in the                   
              first constructions of four-dimensional string theories and their              
              properties.  Their combined effort will contribute to our                      
              understanding of superstring theory and string/particle interface.             
              Superstring theory is important to the fields of particle physics,             
              modern mathematics and condensed matter physics.  It provides                  
              a framework of unification for fundamental interactions of nature              
              and holds great promise as a theory of quantum gravitation.
