Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Peptides of the Somatostatin and Urotensin II
               Families from Frog Brain
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 27,  1993       
File        : a9216802

Award Number: 9216802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  1993       
Expires     : November 30,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15500              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Michael Conlon jmconlon@creighton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Creighton University
	      2500 California Plaza
	      Omaha, NE  68178    402/280-2360

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                
              in endocrinology between J. Michael Conlon of Creighton                        
              University and Hubert Vaudry of the Laboratory of Molecular                    
              Endocrinology, University of Rouen.  The objectives of their                   
              research are to continue investigations on the isolation and                   
              characterization of novel regulatory peptides in frog brain and                
              to identify the structure and function of other amphibian                      
              pancreatic polypeptides and tachykinin-related peptides.  The                  
              investigations involve tissue collection, purification and                     
              characterization, and synthesis of the peptides.  Subsequently,                
              the researchers will conduct receptor binding studies with the                 
              ultimate goal of characterizing as many novel biologically active              
              peptides as possible.                                                          
                                                                                             
              The project takes advantage of complementary expertise in the                  
              U.S. and France.  The U.S. investigator provides the experience                
              and facilities for isolating the pure frog peptides and for                    
              determining their complete primary structures.  This is                        
              complemented by the French investigator's ability to characterize              
              peptides functionally.  He has developed specialized bioassays                 
              utilizing frog tissues. The results of their joint efforts will                
              be of interest to endocrinologist and will improve our                         
              understanding of the evolution of peptide hormones and their                   
              receptors.
