Title       : Quantum Transport and the Aharonov-Casher Effect in Two Dimensional Electron
               Gases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  1994  
File        : a9216121

Award Number: 9216121
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jean Toulouse                           
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert G. Wheeler   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              14        Condensed Matter Physics                
Program Ref : 1761,9161,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this research is to show experimentally that the              
              phase of the electron spin in a two dimensional electron gas can be            
              manipulated to produce quantum interference effects modulating the             
              electrical conductivity; this effect was predicted by Aharonov and             
              Casher in 1984.  With the atomic strength electric fields present              
              in zincblende semiconductors, the Aharonov-Casher interference                 
              should be observable using the electron magnetic moment in a two               
              dimensionally confined electron gas.  The induced phase shift is               
              predicted to be 2-10 pi radians for realizable mesoscopic                      
              geometries.                                                                    
                                                                                             
              Ring geometries and Young interferometers will be defined on GsAs              
              heterojunction field effect devices.  The phase will be varied                 
              through the dependence of the electron magnetic moment upon                    
              electron surface density.  In zero magnetic field the observation              
              of oscillations in the electron conductivity, periodic in surface              
              electron density and of magnitude 1/(25812) mhos, will demonstrate             
              the validity of the Aharonov-Casher approach to the understanding              
              of the spin dependent properties of mesoscopic systems.  These                 
              experiments will be essential for predicting the role that electron            
              spin plays in quantum dot and ballistic transport experiments                  
              implemented in semiconductor heterojunctions.                                  
              %%%                                                                            
              The principles of electron transport in semiconducting solids have             
              been understood for a long time.  In the last decade, interference             
              effects illustrative of the wavenature of the electron have been               
              observed when very small device structures are made.  These sizes              
              need to be of the order of the electron wavelength, about one ten              
              millionth of a meter.  The fabrication technology for these quantum            
              devices originated in the requirements for ever smaller devices in             
              the computer chip industry.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The electron also carries a magnetic moment which can be                       
              represented as the physical observable of a spin quantum number.               
              The research proposed is to search for methods to manipulate the               
              spin phase of the electron waves such as to cause interference.                
              Spin phase can change as the magnetic moment moves through an                  
              electric field.  Here the internal electric fields existent in                 
              compound semiconductors will be exploited.  The results of this                
              research will assist in understanding the role of electron spin in             
              quantum dot and ballistic transport experiments implemented in                 
              heterojunctions and similar quantum device structures.
