Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Giant Magnetoresistance of Magnetic
               Multilayers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 7,  1997    
File        : a9216909

Award Number: 9216909
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 15,  1993     
Expires     : September 30,  1997  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $15850              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter A. Schroeder schroeder@msupa.pa.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jack Bass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William P. Pratt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              13        Physics                                 
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This three-year award supports U.S.-France cooperative research                
              in condensed matter physics involving Peter A. Schroeder,                      
              William P. Pratt and Jack Bass of Michigan State University and                
              Albert Fert of the University of Paris (Orsay), and M. Panissod                
              of the Institute of the Physics and Chemistry of Materials in                  
              Strasbourg, France.  The subject of the research explores the                  
              recent discovery that metallic multilayers with one ferromagnetic              
              component, display Giant Magnetoresistance (GMR).  GMR, a                      
              large drop in resistance when a magnetic field is applied, has                 
              been observed in several systems of metallic materials. The                    
              investigators propose to understand the physics involved and find              
              other systems which exhibit similar properties. The research has               
              important practical applications in the area of magnetic storage               
              and magnetic sensors and could lead to improved commercial                     
              devices based on GMR.                                                          
                                                                                             
              This cooperative research project takes advantage of unique                    
              facilities in Orsay and Strasbourg and complementary expertise of              
              the U.S. and French research groups.  The Michigan State group                 
              has a unique sputtering system, which has produced record high                 
              GMR samples.  They have also developed techniques for                          
              measuring magnetoresistance of metallic multilayers.  The Orsay                
              group was the first to discover the GMR phenomenon and bring                   
              to this collaboration their expertise in characterization of                   
              materials, which is further enhanced by NMR (nuclear magnetic                  
              resonance) techniques and theoretical expertise of the Strasbourg              
              investigators.
