Title       : Neural Network Fuzzy Adaptive Control
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 17,  1996  
File        : a9216004

Award Number: 9216004
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : December 31,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Augustine O. Esogbue aesogbue@isye.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9105,
Abstract    :
              The principal objective of our proposed research is                            
              to design, analyze and develop a neural network                                
              fuzzy adaptive controller model for complex                                    
              processes capable of learning fuzzy control rules                              
              using process data and improving its control                                   
              through on-line adaption.  The learned                                         
              improvement should be according to a performance                               
              objective function that provides evaluative                                    
              feedback; this performance objective should be                                 
              broadly defined to meet long-range goals over time.                            
              Fuzzy control has proven effective for complex,                                
              nonlinear, imprecisely-defined processes for which                             
              standard models and controls are either inefficient,                           
              impractical or cannot be derived.  Hitherto,                                   
              procedures for deriving fuzzy control, however,                                
              have been mostly as hoc heuristics.  The learning                              
              ability of neural networks can be used to                                      
              systematically derive fuzzy control and permit on-                             
              line adaption to optimize control.  The operation of                           
              neural networks integrates very naturally with fuzzy                           
              logic.  The neural networks will be designed and                               
              tested using simulation software and simulated                                 
              data, followed by realistic industrial data to the                             
              extent possible.  The statistical procedures of the                            
              learning process will be investigated and evaluated                            
              with standard statistical procedures (such as                                  
              ANOVA, graphical analysis of residuals, etc.).  The                            
              computational advantage of dynamic programming-                                
              like methods of optimal control will be used to                                
              permit on-line fuzzy adaptive control.  Tests for the                          
              consistency, completeness and interaction of the                               
              control rules, as well as tests for stability, will be                         
              applied.  Comparisons to other methods will be                                 
              made so as to identify any advantages of the                                   
              resulting model.
