Title       : Adaptive Rectification of Data from Nonlinear Dynamic Processes via Recursive
               Neural Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1993   
File        : a9216380

Award Number: 9216380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 15,  1992   
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $153764             (Estimated)
Investigator: David M. Himmelblau himmelblau@che.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9148,MANU,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              A problem in many areas of science and engineering is that of                  
              data rectification.  For example, in a plant a wide variety of                 
              measurements are made of the process variables for purposes                    
              such as cost accounting, process control, statistical quality                  
              control, and performance evaluation.  Not all of the possible                  
              variables are measured, some of the measurements are defective                 
              in the sense that gross errors creep into the measurements                     
              because of instrument degradation (or human error), noise                      
              exists, and unmeasured disturbances enter the processes.  The                  
              objective of data rectification is to provide the best                         
              estimates of the process variables that satisfy the process                    
              model assuming the process model is an accurate one - which                    
              may or not be the case.  If flawed information is used for                     
              process control or cost accounting, process performance can be                 
              degraded, perhaps substantially.  Data rectification involves                  
              not only reduction of noise but removing of other types of                     
              contaminants in the data, particularly gross errors.                           
                                                                                             
              A problem with some existing techniques for data rectification                 
              in dynamic processes is their inability to detect gross                        
              errors.  Often a process model of a complex nonlinear process                  
              may be inadequate to represent the dynamics of a process.                      
              Model mismatch prevents correct detection of disturbances and                  
              outliers, and rectified variables that satisfy an erroneous                    
              model will include systematic errors.  The use of artificial                   
              neural networks (ANN) for data rectification can ameliorate                    
              this problem because the mapping they accomplish can easily be                 
              of higher quality than that yielded by models based on                         
              physical principles or regression analysis.  At the same time,                 
              an ANN could serve as a filter to damp out random noise and                    
              gross errors.                                                                  
                                                                                             
              This research involves the investigation of the possible uses                  
              of recursive ANN to implicitly model dynamic chemical process                  
              equipment with the goal of data rectification.  The PI plans                   
              to generate deterministic simulations of simple and complex                    
              nonlinear dynamic processes (so that the true values of the                    
              process variables are known), and to these values add various                  
              kinds of random noise and gross errors to generate simulated                   
              measurements akin to real process data.  Scaled simulated data                 
              will become input to various kinds of recursive ANN, and the                   
              outputs of the nets will be the rectified values of the                        
              variables.  The effect of:                                                     
               (1) the magnitude and frequency of the gross errors,                          
               (2) the degree of auto and cross correlation in the noise,                    
               (3) model mismatch between the net and the true model,                        
               (4) missing measurements,                                                     
               (5) the sampling rate and delay in the measurements, and                      
               (6) the appropriate types of recursive nets                                   
              will be evaluated.***//
