Title       : Molecular Regulation of Carbon Fixation in Oceanic Picoplankton
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 20,  1994   
File        : a9216937

Award Number: 9216937
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 15,  1992  
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $184025             (Estimated)
Investigator: John H. Paul jpaul@seas.marine.usf.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of South Florida
	      4202 Fowler Avenue
	      Tampa, FL  336209951    813/974-5465

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 9117,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase (RuBPCase) is the                  
              enzyme responsible for nearly all carbon fixation on this planet               
              and is the major carboxylating enzyme in the phytoplankton of the              
              world's oceans.  Additionally, RuBPCase may play a global role in              
              modulating one of the greenhouse gases, CO2.  Knowledge of the                 
              regulation of this enzyme is important for understanding control of            
              primary production in the oceans and phytoplankton response to                 
              environmental perturbations or long term change.  Dr. Paul and his             
              collaborator, Dr. Tabita, will focus on the molecular regulation of            
              this enzyme in picoplankton in coastal and oligotrophic oceanic                
              environments.  They have recently developed a method for extraction            
              of mRNA from phytoplankton and have detected RuBPCase gene                     
              expression in natural populations.  These biomolecular techniques              
              will be used to study diel and light-dependent regulation of the               
              RuBPCase gene in cultured Synechococcus spp. and prochlorophytes,              
              and in natural populations.  The second objective is to identify               
              and characterize the key primary producers by amplifying RUBPCase              
              mRNA for cloning and sequencing from natural populations.                      
              Amplification of mRNA will result in clones that originated from               
              transcriptionally active phototrophs.  Sequence data will be                   
              compared to RuBPCase data bases to identify the active species.  If            
              novel phototrophs are encountered, parsimony analysis will be                  
              performed to relate these forms to their evolutionary closest                  
              relative.  In summary, the project will provide fundamental                    
              information on the control of the RuBPCase genes in response to                
              environmental factors and identify key phototrophic organisms in               
              oceanic picoplankton.
