Title       : Origin and Transport Properties of Coherent Structures in the Planetary Boundary
               Layer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 30,  1993  
File        : a9216189

Award Number: 9216189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert W. Taylor                        
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 1,  1993      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $165500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard S. Lindzen lindzen@wind.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Petros J. Ioannou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  The object of this research is the investigation of the origin            
              and transport properties of coherent structures in the planetary               
              boundary layer (PBL) using transient development theory.  Previous             
              theoretical work on this topic has been limited to the                         
              investigation of the modal instabilities and these studies confirm             
              that coherent structures in the form of rolls, often revealed as               
              cloud streets, are produced most efficiently under convectively                
              unstable conditions.  Recent work on transient non-modal                       
              development of unstratified laboratory flows demonstrates that                 
              coherent structures develop robustly in flows possessing no modal              
              instabilities.  In this project, transient development theory will             
              be applied for the first time to convectively stable and unstable              
              viscous shear flows.  The initial disturbances that lead to the                
              largest energy growth will be determined through the employment of             
              a variational method.  The structure and evolution of these                    
              disturbances will be studied, along with their dependence on the               
              Richardson, Reynolds, and Prandtl number.  Transport properties                
              associated with the second order exchange process will also be                 
              studied.  Because the structures evolve in time, the second order              
              correlations will be obtained as mean quantities over the life                 
              cycle of the dominant perturbations from initial growth to ultimate            
              decay.                                                                         
                                                                                             
                   This study addresses issues important to further progress in              
              understanding tracer transport, air-sea interaction, organization              
              of cloud streets, and parameterization of heat and momentum in NWP             
              and climate models.
