Title       : Theoretical Studies of Reaction Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 29,  1998   
File        : a9216073

Award Number: 9216073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard L. Hilderbrandt                 
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 15,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $685888             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Rice s-rice@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9215,9216,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Stuart Rice is supported by a grant from the                         
              Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform                     
              studies of elementary processes in chemical dynamics for the                   
              purpose of (i) improving the theory of laser control of product                
              selectivity in a chemical reaction, and (ii) improving the                     
              theory of unimolecular reaction rates.  Existing theories of                   
              laser control of the evolution of a quantum system will be                     
              extended to the case of nonadiabatic reactions, and the theory                 
              will be improved by incorporation of a feedback mechanism that                 
              shapes the optimal laser field without precise knowledge of all                
              of the molecular parameters in the system Hamiltonian.  The                    
              description of unimolecular reaction rates based on modern                     
              nonlinear mechanics will be improved by extension of the                       
              mapping methods which provide an exact representation of the                   
              dynamics of systems with two degrees of freedom to systems                     
              with many degrees of freedom. The results will be used to                      
              study several types of unimolecular fragmentation and                          
              isomerization reactions.  A quantum version of the classical                   
              theory of unimolecular reaction rates will also be                             
              developed.                                                                     
              %%%                                                                            
              The achievement of selective control of product formation in                   
              a reaction has been sought persistently throughout the                         
              evolution of chemistry.  To date, such control has only been                   
              accomplished at the macroscopic level, by the manipulation                     
              of external factors such as temperature, pressure, solvent                     
              character, etc.  With the advent of the tunable laser, it                      
              was hoped that product selectivity could be controlled at                      
              the microscopic level, and that individual bonds within a                      
              molecule could be selectively broken.  It was very quickly                     
              found that energy absorbed by a molecule was not easily                        
              localized in individual bonds, but preferred to redistribute                   
              throughout the molecule.  More recently, however, the                          
              concept of laser selective chemistry has had a rebirth, and                    
              theories developed by Rice and others have shown that energy                   
              could be localized by carefully choosing a complex sequence                    
              of laser pulses of prescribed shapes.  If this theory can be                   
              put to practice experimentally, it may still be possible to                    
              realize the goal of microscopic selective control of                           
              chemical reactions.
