Title       : Pollution Prevention Through Precision Process Modelling, Design and Operation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9216726

Award Number: 9216726
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Harmon Ray ray@chewi.che.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9223,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              To have a broad impact on pollution prevention at the source                   
              in the chemical process industries (CPI), a multifaceted                       
              approach to the underlying fundamental problems is needed.                     
              Developing totally new processes involves huge new capital                     
              investments in order to affect a fraction of the pollutants                    
              produced by the CPI today.  With many trillions of dollars                     
              invested in existing chemical and oil refining plants in the                   
              U.S., it will be many years before research directed at                        
              totally new processes will have widespread impact on pollution                 
              reduction.  In order to have an important effect in reducing                   
              the production of pollutants in the next 10-20 years, focusses                 
              process revamps which require modest capital investments and                   
              maximize the impact of pollution reduction are desirable.                      
              These approaches, while complementing important research on                    
              totally new processes, can have greater impact in the next two                 
              decades because they require the least investment and produce                  
              the greatest benefits.  A requirement for success is                           
              identifying good candidates for process modeling, design, and                  
              operation in order to achieve the desired pollution reduction                  
              goals.  This research is directed towards developing new basic                 
              engineering tools for analyzing and designing processes so as                  
              to make modifications for pollution prevention, and then                       
              demonstrating the tools and the underlying principles on real                  
              problems form the CPI.                                                         
                                                                                             
              This research consists of fundamental studies of new basic                     
              engineering tools for precision process technology directed                    
              towards improvements in process design and process operation                   
              so as to eliminate pollution at its source.  The project will                  
              be broken into four components:                                                
                (1) The application of detailed process models and the                       
                    emerging results in dynamic stability theory in order to                 
                    create parameter maps in process design and operation                    
                    space which simultaneously satisfy product                               
                    specifications, production goals, and process dynamics                   
                    which avoid process runaway episodes or large scale                      
                    venting for safety reasons.                                              
                (2) The development of fundamental control strategies for                    
                    nonlinear processes subject to runaway because of                        
                    process sensitivity and limited controller power (e.g.                   
                    limited heat transfer capabilities).                                     
                (3) The development of general principles and strategies for                 
                    product grade transitions for high volume processes in                   
                    which off-spec product must be disposed of as waste.                     
                (4) The development of new polymerization processes which                    
                    avoid the use of solvents in production and ultimate                     
                    application.                                                             
              The research will be carried out in collaboration with some of                 
              the twelve industrial sponsors of the University of Wisconsin                  
              Polymerization Reaction Engineering Laboratory (UWPREL).
