Title       : Electrolytic Steelmaking: Environmentally Sound Metal Production
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1995    
File        : a9216958

Award Number: 9216958
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald R. Sadoway dsadoway@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,1414,9223,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              It is estimated that the steel industry generates 5 percent of                 
              all greenhouse gases produced by human activity.  This is a                    
              consequence of the intensive use of carbon as a reductant to                   
              extract metallic iron from its ore.  The purpose of the                        
              proposed work is to examine the feasibility of electrolytic                    
              steelmaking, a process of direct electrolysis of molten iron                   
              oxide to produce pure liquid iron and oxygen gas.  While                       
              electrochemical processing in molten oxides has enormous                       
              potential for the carbon-free extraction and refining of                       
              metals, to date there has been no sustained effort to develop                  
              a commercial process based on this technique, in part due to                   
              the inadequacy of the database.  The question under study in                   
              the proposed investigation is the following:  is it possible                   
              to conceive of a chemistry to support the direct electrolysis                  
              process described? To answer this question the high-                           
              temperature physical chemistry of molten oxide solution will                   
              be studied.  Their electrical properties will be investigated                  
              by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).  A new cell                   
              for electrical conductivity measurements of highly reactive                    
              oxide melts has been designed for this purpose and is being                    
              certified in tests with aqueous KC1 solutions and melts of                     
              NaC1 and KC1.  The thermodynamics of molten oxide solutions                    
              will be investigated by emf measurements.  Reference                           
              electrodes have been designed for this purpose and will be                     
              examined during the course of investigation.  Finally,                         
              electrolysis trails will be conduced in laboratory-scale cells                 
              designed to operate in the parameter ranges indicated by the                   
              data taken earlier.  On an empirical basis, such tests have                    
              been conducted with feed consisting of oxide mixtures                          
              containing iron oxide and chromium oxide and oxygen evolution                  
              has been observed on an inert anode made of platinum.  This                    
              confirms that faradaic processes can be made to operate in                     
              these melts.  With a deeper understanding of the fundamentals                  
              it will be possible to optimize the system.                                    
                                                                                             
              Successful completion of the work will enable the development                  
              of a new carbon-free steelmaking process which in principle                    
              has the capability to be modified in accordance with different                 
              feedstock chemistries.  For example, one could make                            
              ferroalloys such as ferrochromium (as a precursor for                          
              stainless steel) by electrolysis of the mixed oxides of iron                   
              and chromium.  Similarly, one could produce ferromanganese by                  
              electrolysis of iron oxide-manganese oxide.  Thus, metal                       
              production by direct electrolysis in molten oxides would not                   
              only solve a wide array of environmental problems facing the                   
              steel industry but also would serve as the basis for leapfrog                  
              technology to strengthen the U.S. industry's international                     
              competitive position.
