Title       : Polymethylene Intermediates in Thermal and Photoinduced "Charge Transfer"
               Polymerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 8,  1994   
File        : a9216621

Award Number: 9216621
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Henry K. Hall hkh@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 1773,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Spontaneous polymerizations, observed when electron-rich and              
              electron-poor olefins are mixed, are initiated by tetramethylene               
              intermediates which can be either zwitterionic or diradical in                 
              nature.  Spontaneous free-radical copolymerizations have similarly             
              been shown to compete with the Diels-Alder cycloadditions in                   
              reactions of dienes and olefins; these polymerizations are proposed            
              to be initiated by 2-hexene-l,6-diradicals or zwitterions.  To                 
              date, highly functionalized olefins have been used to obtain fast              
              and clean reactions.  These investigations will be extended to                 
              common industrial olefin/olefin reactions, such as styrene and                 
              acrylonitrile, and diene/olefin reactions, such as the                         
              isoprene/maleic anhydride system.  Moreover, the effect of added               
              Lewis acid to increase the electronphilicity of the electron-poor              
              olefin will be studied in each case.  The generation of diradicals             
              or zwitterions from suitably substituted cyclopropanes and                     
              cyclobutanes will be used for initiation of polymerization of other            
              monomers.  The photochemical behavior of these systems will be                 
              compared to the thermal reactions and a uniform mechanistic picture            
              will be established.  This study is a continuation of the principal            
              investigator's elucidation of the mechanism of spontaneous charge-             
              transfer polymerizations.                                                      
                                                                                             
                   This research has as its aim to understand how, under certain             
              well-defined conditions, some monomer pairs can polymerize in the              
              absence of the usually needed initiating substances.  Greater                  
              control of the kinetics of polymerization and the resulting                    
              structures is a likely outcome.
