Title       : Dissertation Research: Organization of Chalichihuites Mining, Zacatecas, Mexico
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 4,  1992   
File        : a9216720

Award Number: 9216720
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Vincent W. Schiavitti  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Under the direction of Dr. Ben Nelson, Mr. Vincent Schiavitti will             
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct                    
              archaeological fieldwork in the Chalchihuites area of northern                 
              Mexico and combine ceramic analysis with survey of both                        
              archaeological sites and associated mine complexes. The goal of the            
              work is to define more clearly the chronological sequence for this             
              important region and to trace changes in settlement pattern and                
              mining activity. On this basis comparisons can then be made with               
              developments in other parts of both Mexico and the American                    
              Southwest and cultural interactions defined.                                   
                                                                                             
              The Chalchihuites area is important because it contains over 750               
              mines, the earliest of which are believed to date from ca. 300 A.D.            
              The tradition probably endured for at least 400 years.                         
              Chalchihuites mining consisted of the extraction of semi-precious              
              and utiliaarian stones and minerals such as hematite, limonite,                
              blue green stones, cinnabar, weathered chert and ochres. Some of               
              these were mined in quantities far exceeding local needs and these             
              activities left behind a wealth of archaeological remains that can             
              be used to explore organizational aspects of this once thriving                
              mining society.                                                                
                                                                                             
              In prehistoric times Central and Northern Mexico reached levels of             
              complexity characterized by the integration of local groups into               
              larger regional networks. Archaeologists wish to understand just               
              how these larger units or primitive "states" functioned and the                
              extent to which developments - such as the development of the                  
              extensive Chalchihuites mining  complex - can be interpreted only              
              in this broader context. During much of this time period the                   
              Mesoamerican world was dominated by Teotihuacan in Central Mexico              
              and it is unclear how far to the North its power extended. Because             
              the mining complex is not well dated it is not possible to examine             
              such issues. Mr. Schiavitti's research will help to answer this                
              question.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              This research is important because it will provide data of interest            
              to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of how              
              states develop and will assist in the training of a promising young            
              scientist.
