Title       : The Design, Analysis and Management of High Speed Packet Switched Networks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  1995      
File        : a9216287

Award Number: 9216287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tatsuya Suda                            
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401180             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert R. Boorstyn   (Principal Investigator current)
              Tony T. Lee  (Principal Investigator former)
              H. Jonathan Chao  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Polytechnic Univ of NY
	      Six Metrotech Center
	      Brooklyn, NY  112013840    718/260-3550

NSF Program : 4097      NETWORKING RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4097,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  High speed packet switches are essential elements in the                  
              high-performance integrated communication networks for providing               
              multimedia services.  This project in high speed switched networks             
              can be divided into three categories:  the development of a                    
              theoretical foundation for the evaluation and comparison of a very             
              broad spectrum of high speed switching techniques, exploration of              
              the principle of error correcting routing in high speed switched               
              networks, and the study of fundamental properties governing traffic            
              management in ATM networks in order to simplify network level                  
              management.  We have been developing a theoretical foundation for              
              the evaluation and comparison of the complexity of a very broad                
              spectrum of high speed packet switching designs.  We have developed            
              a uniform approach to determining the growth of the switch                     
              complexity as a function of switch size for a given performance                
              requirement.  We are also studying the property of dual shuffle                
              exchange switching network that makes use of the principle of                  
              error-correcting routing.  Based on an error-correcting an                     
              self-routing algorithm, we have shown by analysis and simulation               
              that the dual shuffle-exchange network can achieve the Shannon                 
              lower bound on switch complexity with arbitrarily small packet loss            
              probability.  A network node that incorporates traffic control                 
              policies that depend only on each individual input and output, but             
              not on the details of the traffic distributions from  inputs to                
              outputs, is said to have the distribution-independent property .               
              This is a fundamental property that is essential for simplification            
              of network level traffic management. We have established this                  
              property for some switch designs.  The goal of this part of this               
              project is to clarify issues related to the                                    
              distribution-independent  property and to establish its feasibility            
              for a generic output queued switch on a rigorous basis.
