Title       : Isolation of Copper-Complexing Organic Ligands from Seawaterand Characterization
               of Their Copper-Complexation Characteristics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 22,  1994  
File        : a9216882

Award Number: 9216882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rodger W. Baier                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149440             (Estimated)
Investigator: John R. Donat   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew S. Gordon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
              Dissolved copper in surface seawater in many locations exists                  
              primarily in complexes with strong organic ligands, which are                  
              distinguished by their complexing strengths.  However, these                   
              ligands have never been isolated and characterized;  thus, almost              
              nothing is known about their chemical nature.  Isolation and                   
              characterization of these ligands is extremely important to our                
              understanding of the biogeochemical cycling of copper and the                  
              ligands themselves, and perhaps that of other metals which may be              
              similarly complexed.  Recently, immobilized metal (Cu2+) affinity              
              chromatography (IMAC) has been used to purify extracellular copper-            
              binding proteins produced by marine bacteria, and also to isolate              
              and partially characterize organic compounds with affinity for                 
              copper from estuarine, coastal, and open ocean waters.  IMAC-                  
              isolated ligands have depth distributions similar to those of                  
              ligands that strongly complex Cu in the Atlantic and Pacific.  This            
              pilot project will determine whether IMAC, using either established            
              or modified protocols, can isolate these ligands, ligands detected             
              in seawater by differential pulse anodic stripping voltammetry                 
              (DPASV) and ligand competition/differential pulse cathodic                     
              stripping voltammetry (LC/DPCSV).  The appropriate IMAC protocol               
              will then be used in conjunction with DPASV and LC/DPCSV to                    
              characterize the ligands in coastal surface seawater with respect              
              to:  their concentrations, conditional stability constants,                    
              relative proportions of protein and polysaccharide comprising them,            
              and molecular weight.
