Title       : Experimental Studies of Organic Charge Transfer Salts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 18,  1995   
File        : a9216155

Award Number: 9216155
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : October 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Chaikin chaikin@pupgg.princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              16        Solid State Chem and Polymers           
Program Ref : 1761,1762,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The goal of this research is to explore how low dimensions, strong             
              interactions and frustration from applied fields act together to               
              produce interesting states of matter.  One such material (Bechgaard            
              salt) exhibits metallic, insulating, antiferromagnetic, density                
              wave, superconducting, non-ohmic, quasi-periodic and Quantum Hall              
              Effect phases as temperature, pressure and magnetic field are                  
              varied.  Experiments involving magnetic, thermal, elastic, and                 
              structural measurements are conducted on normal, superconducting               
              and exotic phases of the quasi-one and quasi-two dimensional                   
              organic charge transfer salts.  New phenomena found in no other                
              materials also are examined.  These include a cascade of magnetic              
              field induced transitions and new forms of quantum oscillations.               
              In addition, the effects of extraordinary magnetic field, up to 65             
              Tesla, on the behavior of low-dimensional systems are investigated.            
              %%%                                                                            
              In this work, electronic properties of highly anisotropic organic              
              conductors are studied.  Typically, the conductivity is one million            
              times better along the best conducting direction of the crystal                
              than along the worst.  Because the electrons are constrained to                
              move along chains, they interact more strongly with other                      
              electrons, thus causing a number of unusual transitions and                    
              properties.  At room temperature, the materials are metallic.  On              
              cooling to liquid helium temperatures, the materials become                    
              insulating, magnetic or superconducting.  When magnetic fields are             
              applied and oriented in different directions relative to the                   
              chains, striking changes in material properties are noted.  The                
              object of these studies is to understand the basic competition                 
              between metals and insulator, magnet and superconductor in a                   
              molecular system.  The successful completion of the proposed                   
              studies ultimately will lead to the development of new materials               
              for fabrication of new electronic devices.
