Title       : U.S.-Brazil Coooperative Science Program: New Developments in Nonlinear
               Conservation Laws
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 12,  1993       
File        : a9216357

Award Number: 9216357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1993       
Expires     : June 30,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $23300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley J. Plohr plohr@ams.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 5977      AMERICAS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              20        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 5913,
Abstract    :
              This US-Brazil Cooperative Science Program                                     
              award will support research collaboration by                                   
              seven US mathematicians from various                                           
              institutions, led by Bradley Plohr of the State                                
              University of New York at Stony Brook, with a                                  
              Brazilian group led by Daniel Marchesin of the                                 
              Pure and Applied Mathematics Institute (IMPA)                                  
              in Rio de Janeiro.  The award will also support                                
              participation by two US mathematicians in a                                    
              July 1993 Workshop on Partial Differential                                     
              Equations, held at IMPA.  The research project                                 
              aims to analyze mixed-type systems of                                          
              conservation laws, which will also be a focus                                  
              of the Workshop.                                                               
                                                                                             
              These systems occur in several scientific                                      
              areas, including multiphase flow,                                              
              elastoplasticity, and magnetohydrodynamics.                                    
              Funds will support travel to Brazil by four US                                 
              mathematicians and three US graduate students,                                 
              as well as travel to the US by a Brazilian                                     
              graduate student.  The researchers will build                                  
              on their previous work on the mathematical                                     
              theory of fundamental solutions of nonlinear                                   
              systems of conservation laws, including                                        
              stability and bifurcation.  They will use this                                 
              theory to upgrade the general computer program                                 
              for nonlinear waves, to allow use in more                                      
              complicated systems that arise in applications,                                
              such as enhanced oil recovery and                                              
              elastoplasticity.  They will also focus on modelling                           
              issues uncovered from knowledge of such                                        
              solutions.  The US side will benefit from                                      
              interaction with counterparts at IMPA, which is                                
              a center of excellence in dynamical systems.                                   
              The Brazilian side will strengthen their                                       
              expertise in applied mathematics.
