Title       : U.S.-France Cooperative Research: Small Angle X-Ray Scattering Studies of Block
               Copolymer Ionomers and their Blends
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  1996    
File        : a9216859

Award Number: 9216859
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rose Gombay                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1993        
Expires     : October 31,  1997    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $14650              (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Weiss rweiss@mail.ims.uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 5980      WESTERN EUROPE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 5918,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award supports U.S.-France cooperative research in                        
              materials science between                                                      
              Robert A. Weiss of the University of Connecticut and                           
              Claudine Williams of the University of Paris Sud (Orsay).                      
              The investigators plan to conduct small angle x-ray                            
              scattering studies of block copolymer ionomers and their                       
              blends.  They propose to characterize the microstructures of                   
              lightly sulfonated di- and tri-block copolymers to determine                   
              their composition, sulfonational level and cation.                             
              Microstructure and temperature studies will be carried out                     
              using the synchrotron light source available at LURE                           
              (Laboratoire pour l'Utilisation du Rayonnement                                 
              Electromagnetique).  Dr. Weiss brings to this collaboration                    
              extensive experience in the synthesis and characterization                     
              of block copolymer ionomers. This is complemented by Dr.                       
              Williams' expertise in the use of synchrotrons for small-                      
              angle x-ray scattering studies generally and specifically                      
              related to ionomers.  The project will benefit from the                        
              excellent facilities at LURE.                                                  
                                                                                             
              Copolymer ionomers are an important class of materials whose                   
              chemical composition, properties and microstructure can be                     
              adapted by polymer chemists for specific applications.                         
              Polymeric materials are utilized in microelectronic and                        
              information storage devices and in the aerospace, marine,                      
              automotive and biomedical fields.  Ionomers have important                     
              applications as membranes, thermoplastic elastomers and                        
              adhesives.  This project will advance our understanding of                     
              structure-property relationships of copolymer ionomers and                     
              their potential as advanced materials.
