Title       : Collaborative Research: Control of Natural Convection Alonga Heated, Inclined
               Plate
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 21,  1997     
File        : a9216021

Award Number: 9216021
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  1993     
Expires     : January 31,  1998    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $291107             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chuan F. Chen   (Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey W. Jacobs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1406      THERMAL TRANSPORT & THERM PROC
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The proposed research focuses on the active control on the origin and evolution
              of the streamwise vortices in a flat plate boundary layer along an inclined
              heated surface.  Because these vortices play important roles in transport
              phenomena near the surface, active control of their onset and evolution can
              become a powerful tool for the manipulation of heat transfer and surface
              deposition for free convection boundary layers of practical interest, including
              cooling techniques and manufacturing of electronics chips.  The proposed
              experiments will be conducted in water, and the flow instabilities leading to
              the formation of the streamwise vortices will be manipulated using mosaics of
              individually-controlled film heaters flush-mounted on a submerged test surface.
               An important feature of such manipulation is that the ensuing flow structures
              are extremely repeatable in time and space, thus allowing for detailed
              measurements and flow visualization studies that are phase-locked to the
              excitation wave-form.  Of particular interest are the flow mechanisms,
              associated with the evolution of the streamwise vortices.  Spanwise
              interactions of these vortices appear to be a precursor to the development of a
              secondary instability that is followed by rapid transition to turbulence. 
              High-resolution measurements of cross-stream and spanwise time-dependent
              temperature distributions will be obtained using rakes of miniature cold-wire
              temperature sensors, and the flow will be visualized using sensitive
              double-pass Schlieren system.  An important aspect of the proposed work is the
              measurement of global and of planform distributions of heat flux from the test
              surface to the adjacent fluid.  Of particular interest is the incremental
              change in heat transfer between the forced and unforced flows.  At the later
              stages of this research, the surface actuators will be used to control
              suppression or enhancement of the longitudinal vortices.
