Title       : Environmental Policies in an International Context
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9216028

Award Number: 9216028
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1993       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118152             (Estimated)
Investigator: Graciela Chichilnisky gc9@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 1577,9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
              The global environment is a major issue between industrial and                 
              developing countries.  The proposals advanced by the United                    
              Nations Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro during June 1992 relating               
              the environment with international debt, investment and                        
              technology policies are properly regarded as general equilibrium               
              phenomena, centering on the behavior of markets.  This is because              
              the environmental actions of a country affect the others, and the              
              markets for environmental resources affect all other markets.                  
              This project addresses the following unanswered questions:  Why                
              do developing countries specialize in the production and the                   
              export of goods which overuse environmental inputs such as rain                
              forests?  What is the role of international trade in global                    
              environmental issues?  Is it possible to protect resources                     
              without interfering with free markets?  When is market                         
              intervention required?  Will taxes on the use of environmental                 
              resources improve the pattern of trade and of resource use?                    
                                                                                             
              The research is based on the analysis of a general equilibrium                 
              model of North-South trade where the environment appears as a                  
              renewable common property resource such as aquifers, fisheries                 
              and forests, whose by-products are used as inputs to the                       
              production of traded goods.  The data will be provided by                      
              simulating the model for representative examples, and used as a                
              foundation for evaluating two alternative policies.  The first is              
              levying taxes or imposing quotas on the use of the environmental               
              resources.  The second is promoting changes in property rights                 
              for the environmental common property resources.  The simulations              
              use parameters obtained from innovative arrangements involving                 
              property rights in the case of the US and UK pharmaceutical                    
              industries and Central and South American rain forests.                        
              Illustrative case studies are given by two pharmaceutical                      
              companies in the US: Shaman Pharmaceutical of California, and                  
              Merck and Co. of New Jersey.  Both use biodiversity from Latin                 
              American and Central American forests to develop medical                       
              products.
