Title       : A Workshop on: Integrated Regional Models and Analysis of Human-Nature
               Interactions, to be held October 4-8, 1992, Millbrook, NY
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1993      
File        : a9216667

Award Number: 9216667
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114769             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gene E. Likens likensg@ecostudies.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark J. McDonnell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter M. Groffman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steward T. A. Pickett  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Ecosyst Stud
	      Box AB
	      Millbrook, NY  125450129    914/677-5343

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              49        Environmental NEC                       
Program Ref : 1129,1196,9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will support a workshop on Integrated Regional Models             
              (IRM) for analysis of human-nature interactions.  Integrated                   
              regional models are conceptual and mathematically based models that            
              include within the structure of the model mathematical descriptions            
              of the physical environment, biological interactions, and human                
              decision making and its consequences.  Despite concerns about                  
              "global" change, many key scientific and policy issues in the                  
              environment are developed, considered and ultimately implemented on            
              regional scales - local jurisdictions, watersheds, agricultural                
              production regions.  At these scales, regional interactions of                 
              physical, biological and social systems play a critical role in                
              defining the problems that must be resolved.                                   
                                                                                             
              Environmental issues which require an integrated analysis include              
              coastal zone management, regional atmospheric chemistry and                    
              pollution, non-point source pollution, commodity production in                 
              forested landscapes, and urban growth.  Progress on coupling models            
              from physical, biological and social sciences has been limited by              
              lack of interactions between disciplines, differences in technical             
              approaches, and the absence of appropriate interdisciplinary data              
              sets.  The objective of the workshop will be to provide a forum for            
              scientists from different disciplines to learn about the state of              
              knowledge and models in other disciplines, and to explore ways that            
              scientists from different disciplines can work together on the same            
              problems.  Further, the workshop will identify specific steps and              
              data requirements necessary for the development of IRM's for                   
              specific environmental problems.  The workshop will open with paired           
              overviews of physical, biological and social science models by                 
              scientists from both within and outside of each discipline.  The               
              workshop will then move on to group discussions of specific problems           
              requiring IRM's, and finally to group discussions of specific                  
              regions and how differences in physical, biological and social                 
              variables in different regions will affect the development of IRM's.           
              Workshop participants will be evenly divided between physical,                 
              social, biological and integrative disciplines, and will include               
              scientists from several countries.
