Title       : Zeolitic Solid Acid Catalysts for the Alkylation of Isoparaffins with Olefins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  1995  
File        : a9216699

Award Number: 9216699
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Maria Burka                             
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $343847             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sankaran Sundaresan sundar@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James Wei  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 9146,9163,9197,9223,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              Through the process of alkylation, lighter isoparaffins can be                 
              combined with small olefins to produce heavier, higher octane                  
              gasoline components.  This alkylation of light isoparaffins,                   
              typically isobutane, with olefins, typically butenes or                        
              propylene, to produce high octane gasoline components, is an                   
              important process in refinery operation.  It is currently                      
              carried out with either sulfuric acid or hydrogen fluoride as                  
              the catalyst, the choice depending on specific conditions and                  
              requirement.  Environmental and safety pressures are forcing                   
              refiners to replace corrosive, toxic or hazardous materials                    
              with more benign and environmentally acceptable materials.                     
              The sulfuric acid process produces a hazardous sludge which                    
              needs to be disposed of.  The explosion hazard with resulting                  
              toxic vapor cloud makes the HF process undesirable.  New                       
              catalytic routes for alkylation utilizing solid acid catalysts                 
              are therefore being developed.                                                 
                                                                                             
              While various zeolites have been studied as potential                          
              catalysts for the reaction of isobutane with butenes (or                       
              propylene), no viable commercial process has yet emerged                       
              primarily because of the unacceptably rapid rate of catalyst                   
              deactivation through coking.  The PIs will synthesize and                      
              modify a number of potentially viable zeolite catalysts with                   
              the properties of high reactivities and low coking rates, and                  
              will carry out a study of the reaction kinetics and coking                     
              characteristics.  They will then select the most promising                     
              catalyst, and perform a detailed reactor design analysis in                    
              order to identify the most desirable process configuration.
