Title       : Acquisition of a Photon-Counting Video Imaging System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 1,  1996        
File        : a9216920

Award Number: 9216920
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Karl A. Koehler                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1993      
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $73431              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephanie E. Curtis   (Principal Investigator current)
              William F. Thompson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Linda K. Hanley-Bowdoin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              We propose to purchase a photon-counting video imager                          
              capable of recording digital images of low level biological                    
              luminescence.  This  instrument will be used primarily by a                    
              group of faculty in experimental plant biology, most of whom                   
              are already collaborating in a research and training program                   
              sponsored by the McKnight Foundation.  A common theme among                    
              major users is the need for a non-destructive gene                             
              expression assay.  Our experiments require repeated analysis                   
              of the same material during various physiological and                          
              developmental transitions, and we wish to develop mutant                       
              isolation procedures for which a non-destructive assay is                      
              absolutely required.                                                           
                                                                                             
              We propose to meet these needs by using by using photon                        
              counting video imaging techniques to visualize and quantify                    
              gene expression in transgenic plants containing chimaeric                      
              genes with firefly or bacterial luciferases as reporters.                      
              Individual projects will seek to identify mutations                            
              affecting trans-acting regulators of plant gene expression                     
              or viral DNA replication, to identify developmentally                          
              regulated enhancers in plants by "enhancer trapping", to                       
              follow virus movement during the infection process, to                         
              monitor transgene expression in vivo in the early stages of                    
              plant transformation, and to study genes involved in                           
              heterocyst development in cyanobacteria.
