Title       : Systems with Competing Periodicities
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 4,  1996      
File        : a9216045

Award Number: 9216045
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 15,  1993  
Expires     : July 31,  1997       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $163000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Indubala I. Satija isatija@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              B. Joseph Lieb  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              A two-dimensional electron gas in a generic potential and a                    
              transverse magnetic field exhibits very intriguing fractal spectra             
              with various crossings and avoided crossings in the band structure.            
              These crossings are characterized by integral topological                      
              invariants.  These features are key towards understanding some                 
              recent experiments in the organic conductors which exhibit cascades            
              of field-induced spin density waves and will have novel                        
              consequences in experiments involving quantum dot arrays.                      
                                                                                             
              In the incommensurate limit, a two-dimensional electron gas                    
              exhibits a cascade of metal-insulator transitions which at zero                
              temperature has a "devil's fork" phase diagram.  A large class of              
              models will be studied to demonstrate that this fractal phase                  
              diagram is universal.  Some of the quantum chaos models will be                
              examined and their experimental consequences will be explored.  In             
              addition, topological aspects of quantum chaos will be studied in              
              order to obtain a unified picture of a large class of systems with             
              competing periodicities.                                                       
                                                                                             
              A general formalism to study the finite temperature properties of              
              systems with competing lengths will be developed.  This method will            
              be applied to calculate thermodynamical properties of field-induced            
              spin density waves systems and the magnetic Fibonacci and other                
              periodic superlattices.  A novel aspect of the Fibonacci lattices              
              is the power law behavior with modulations in the thermodynamic                
              properties.                                                                    
              %%%                                                                            
              Theoretical research will be conducted on a variety of physical and            
              model systems which have competing periodicities.  This competition            
              between various natural periods of the systems results in highly               
              nonlinear behavior.  Special mathematical techniques need to be                
              applied to understand the resulting behavior.  Physical systems to             
              be studied include the two-dimensional electron gas which forms at             
              semiconductor interfaces exposed to high magnetic fields, quantum              
              dot arrays, and magnetic waves induced in organic conductors.  The             
              chaotic limit will also be studied.  The results of this work will             
              yield generic techniques to handle these type of systems and will              
              assist in interpreting the behavior of these technologically                   
              important materials.
