Title       : U.S.-Bulgaria Research on Neogene Extension and its Relations to the Regional
               Tectonic Setting of the Eastern Mediterranean Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  1996    
File        : a9216217

Award Number: 9216217
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1992   
Expires     : May 31,  1997        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27100              (Estimated)
Investigator: B. Clark Burchfiel bcburch@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leigh H. Royden  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0510704   Geophysical Monitoring                  
              42        Geological Sciences                     
Program Ref : 5958,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Bulgaria research project between Dr. B. Clark Burchfiel               
              of Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Dr. Christo Nikolov               
              Dabovski of the Geological Institute, Bulgarian Academy of                     
              Sciences proposes an interdisciplinary program designed to                     
              document and understand late Cenozoic extensional deformation in               
              Bulgaria from a regional tectonic and process oriented                         
              perspective.  Bulgaria is part of the broad eastern Mediterranean              
              region of active extensional tectonism.  Bulgarian geologists                  
              have done excellent work on the late Cenozoic tectonics of the                 
              region and this permits a rapid synthesis of existing data and                 
              focusing on the key areas within Bulgaria where additional work                
              will enhance the data so that the study of both local and                      
              regional extensional processes can yield well constrained                      
              results.  The research consists of two parts: (1) a study of                   
              young extensional deformation in Bulgaria from a regional and                  
              process-oriented perspective, and application of fluid dynamic                 
              concepts to understanding the role fo lower crustal flow.  These               
              two basic goals overlap in that models of lower crustal flow                   
              driven by extensional deformation will be applied to gravity,                  
              topography and geomorphological data from Bulgaria.                            
                                                                                             
              Both parts of the research are of broad applicability in                       
              understanding the relationship between surface deformation and                 
              deeper processes in the crust and mantle: the first part bears on              
              the relationship of subduction and its driving forces to regional              
              deformation in the upper lithosphere, while the second is an                   
              essential step toward understanding the processes and                          
              consequences of continental deformation.                                       
                                                                                             
              This project in geological sciences fulfills the program                       
              objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading                
              experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine                     
              complementary talents and pool resources in areas of strong                    
              mutual interest and competence.
