Title       : Simulation Models in Adaptive Human Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 28,  1992       
File        : a9216401

Award Number: 9216401
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Oscar N. Garcia                         
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $28206              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Prueitt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 6845      HUMAN COMPUTER INTER PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Three is a Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) effort.               
              The research is a contribution to the theory of non-linear                     
              simulation, to the theory of adaptive human interfaces and                     
              intelligent interface agents, and to the theory of human-computer              
              interaction.  Episodic transitions occur during human-computer                 
              interaction and in systems in related fields including biolog, the             
              physical sciences and the behavioral sciences.  For examples, the              
              transition from one focus of attenstion to antoher is an episodic              
              transition between homeostatic states of selkective attention.                 
              These "phase transition" behaviors may be triggered by a variety               
              of events such as completion of a cognitive subtask or by external             
              interrupts.  The present research is to develop tests for the                  
              hypothesis that critical phase transitions are governed by a                   
              conservation law called the lae of "conservation of affordance.."              
              Affordances are expressions of system needs which are dynamically              
              created and annihilated through the perturbation and subsequent                
              restoration of homeostatic conditions.  Affordances constitute the             
              linking of behaviors of various parts of the system that normally              
              operate at different time scales in order to achieve behavioral                
              goals.  Affordance is modeled mathematically by two oppowsing                  
              sources in a non-conservative energy flow on embedded Hamiltonian              
              manifolds.  This mathematical formulation provides an explicit                 
              theoretical basis for dynamic engines in use on the domain of                  
              human-comupter interaction and elsewhere.  In particular it                    
              provides a portable computational modules that support the                     
              conservation law.  A set of simulations will be developed useing               
              this mechanism whcih can support modeling of higher order functions            
              such as perceptual simulation issues.  An important anticipated                
              result is that the correct use of these mechanisms will make                   
              possible sensory encodiung and data fusion for artigificial                    
              syustems to permit the capture and understanding of rare and novel             
              events.  The interface and modularity ussues have conseqwuences for            
              interoperabbility, software capitalization adn the flexibily                   
              sharing of research results between groups of investigaotors.
