Title       : Collaborative Research on the Deterrent Effects of Formal and Informal Sanctions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9122403

Award Number: 9122403
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18299              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel S. Nagin DN03@Andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Deterrence research has focused more on the costs than the rewards             
              side of criminal offending.  Also, most of the research on                     
              deterrence has measured the threat of sanctions at a time far                  
              removed from the point at which the individual considers the                   
              commission of an offense.  But models based on rational choice                 
              assume deterrent effects to be instantaneous, not delayed.  In                 
              addition, most deterrence research fails to take into account the              
              wide range of contextual factors surrounding a criminal act.  To               
              overcome these deficiencies, Professor Nagin, in collaboration with            
              Raymond Paternoster of the University of Maryland, will combine the            
              use of judgement scenarios with traditional survey methods to                  
              analyze issues in deterrence theory.  This methodological                      
              innovation will enable measurement of risk perceptions and                     
              intentions to offend under very specific and controlled                        
              circumstances.  Also, this innovative approach will permit the                 
              examination of the instantaneous relationship between the costs and            
              benefits of offending and one's intention to commit a criminal act.            
                                                                                             
              Specifically, the study will expose male college students to                   
              hypothetical situations related to sexual assault, theft and drunk             
              driving, criminal acts that this population shows a considerable               
              propensity to commit.  Also, the survey instrument enables                     
              collection of data on a range of variables related to the deterrent            
              effects of punishment, including the deterrent effect of formal                
              versus informal sanctions, of the certainty versus the severity of             
              punishment, the impact of moral beliefs, and the determinants of               
              perceptions about risk of sanctions.  The analytical techniques                
              will enable analysis of the data for each crime category                       
              separately.  The research will put to test the usefulness of the               
              scenario method for deterrence research and holds promise for                  
              advancing empirical knowledge related to a series of recurring                 
              issues, yet unresolved, in the literature on the deterrent effects             
              of punishment.
