Title       : Cooperative and Quantum Effects in Condensed Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 1,  1994       
File        : a9122784

Award Number: 9122784
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1995  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $219000             (Estimated)
Investigator: A. Brooks Harris harris@harris.physics.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              17        Materials Theory                        
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical research will be conducted in a number of areas of                 
              statistical physics.  The orientational ordering of icosahedral                
              fullerene molecules will be studied using mean field theory.                   
              Intermolecular potentials will be studied which can explain the                
              orientationally ordered structure and from which a calculation of              
              the librational excitation spectrum can be undertaken.  This will              
              help explain future inelastic neutron scattering experiments.                  
              Research will also be done on the way quantum fluctuations select              
              a ground state out of a manifold of states which classically would             
              be degenerate.  This work will be based on the use of degenerate               
              perturbation theory to construct an effective interaction mediated             
              by quantum fluctuations.  Additional research, motivated by the                
              magnetic properties of the copper oxide materials, will be done on             
              the effects of various types of localized magnetic defects at low              
              defect densities.  Work will also be done on interpreting the                  
              observed properties of antiferromagnets on a kagome lattice by                 
              using high temperature expansions.                                             
              %%%                                                                            
              A variety of projects will be undertaken in condensed matter                   
              physics using statistical mechanics techniques.  These projects                
              have to do with the recently discovered solid carbon-sixty and the             
              copper oxide high temperature superconductors.  These condensed                
              matter systems pose difficult and intriguing problems which push               
              the limits of conventional condensed matter theory and, at the same            
              time, hold high potential for real applications.  Successful                   
              completion of this work will provide a significant contribution to             
              this field.
