Title       : Acquisition of X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy to Study Structure in Biological
               and Chemical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  1991   
File        : a9122609

Award Number: 9122609
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael K. Lamvik                       
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $234419             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith O. Hodgson   (Principal Investigator current)
              Sebastian Doniach  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This award provides funds to Stanford University for the                  
              purchase of instrumentation for the Stanford Synchrotron Research              
              Laboratory (SSRL).  The equipment will facilitate data collection              
              and analysis, allowing a significant increase in the number and                
              types of experiments that can be performed, and will maximize the              
              benefits to be gained from the recent improvement in quality and               
              availability of synchrotron radiation at SSRL.                                 
                   The rapid growth in the understanding of the structure and                
              function of proteins at the atomic level has resulted in large part            
              through the development and perfection of computational tools and              
              hardware used for X-ray crystallographic analysis of enzymes and               
              other proteins.  The use of synchrotrons as X-ray sources has, in              
              particular, allowed the investigation of the structure of viruses              
              and other very large protein structures that are otherwise                     
              inaccessible.  Recent improvements in synchrotron design and in the            
              equipment used for data collection and reduction has made once                 
              difficult investigations routine and has made new lines of                     
              investigation into enzyme mechanism possible.  The equipment being             
              purchased will provide the benefits of this progress to a large                
              number of investigators from all sectors of the research community             
              who use the SSRL.
