Title       : Dissertation Research: Reproductive Strategies in Yucca whipplei: Roles of
               Inflorescence Size and Fruit Abortion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9122915

Award Number: 9122915
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin S. Richter  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Despite the fact that about seventy percent of all flowering plants            
              are hermaphroditic, the reproductive consequences of combining both            
              sexes on a single plant are still poorly understood.  Traditional              
              studies of reproductive success in such plants have focused on                 
              fecundity, ignoring the affects of pollen flow.  Recent                        
              investigations have switched attention to patterns of paternal gene            
              flow in search for "sexual selection" in plants.  Few studies to               
              date have attempted to quantify the affects of floral                          
              characteristics on both male and female reproductive fitness.  I               
              propose to investigate the affects of inflorescence size on the                
              reproductive success of Yucca whipplei, a semelparous hermaphrodite            
              native to southern California.  Inflorescence size typically                   
              differs greatly between males and females in dioecious plant                   
              species, indicating that selective pressures on inflorescence size             
              are not the same for the two functions.  Several alternate                     
              hypotheses which could explain apparent overproduction of flowers              
              by Yucca whipplei will be tested.  These hypothesis include aspects            
              of both male and female reproductive success.  This research will              
              help determine some of the fitness consequences of hermaphroditic              
              reproduction, and how plants can respond to the sometimes                      
              conflicting selective pressures resulting from combining both sexes            
              on a single individual.
