Title       : Collaborative Research on Politics and Monetary Policy: Evidence From Individual
               FOMC Members' Reaction Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1992  
File        : a9122322

Award Number: 9122322
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Havrilesky   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Previous studies of monetary policymaking have examined how the                
              Federal Reserve has manipulated the supply of money or short term              
              interest rates in response to prevailing economic conditions.  Most            
              findings support the view that the Fed attempts to stabilize                   
              business cycle fluctuations, but there is also some evidence of                
              political influences on the Fed.  For example, it is sometimes                 
              argued that monetary policies are sensitive to impending elections             
              or to partisan pressures applied by incumbent Presidents.  With                
              just a few exceptions, investigators have based their analyses on              
              statistical relationships between variables indicative of the                  
              stance of monetary policy (like interest rates) and variables                  
              indicative of business cycle conditions (like unemployment and                 
              inflation rates).                                                              
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate political influences on the policy              
              process within the Fed.  It is important to recognize that monetary            
              policy decisions are made by a committee, the Federal Open Market              
              Committee (FOMC), not by a single individual.  The members of that             
              committee differ from one another in their powers, ideologies, and             
              political loyalties.  This project will study how members differ               
              from one another in their monetary policy preferences, and how they            
              differ in their responses to political pressures.  For example, the            
              researchers will investigate whether appointees of Democratic and              
              Republican Presidents have systematically differing policy                     
              preferences.  They will investigate whether pressure exerted by                
              Presidents is effective, and if so, whether it is felt most keenly             
              by appointees of his own party.  They will also explore the special            
              role of the Chairman of the Fed's Board of Governors within the                
              FOMC, and ask if he serves as a conduit for Presidential influence.            
              Answers to these questions are central to an understanding of                  
              monetary policy decision-making.  Moreover, since the institutional            
              arrangements defining FOMC procedures are subject to change through            
              legislation, an understanding of current institutional arrangements            
              is important for evaluating possible reforms.                                  
                                                                                             
              The methodology for this project is notable in several respects.               
              First, the investigators will employ a statistical model which                 
              permits them to make inferences about the policy preferences of                
              particular members using both economic data and data describing                
              individual FOMC member votes on policy decisions.  Second, the                 
              project is notable for its construction of an original data set                
              based upon individuals' statements of policy preferences reported              
              in detailed minutes of FOMC meetings prior to 1976.  This                      
              compilation will yield a data set of interest to other scholars                
              concerned with the history of monetary policymaking.
