Title       : Managerial Opportunism, Solutions, and Strategies: Evidencefrom Early Chartered
               Companies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  1995      
File        : a9122705

Award Number: 9122705
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lynn A. Pollnow                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $85737              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ann M. Carlos ann.carlos@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Coincidentally with the growth of European overseas trade in the               
              sixteenth and seventeenth centuries was the use of the chartered               
              company as the preferred means by which trade was carried out.                 
              These chartered companies were, for all intent and purposes,                   
              multinational firms.  The head office was located in Europe and                
              managers, factories, and trading sites were located around the                 
              world - in Africa, Asia, Canada.  Because these firms operated                 
              their branch plants with salaried managers, the head offices were              
              immediately faced with the question of how to ensure that those                
              managers worked for the company and not for themselves.  This is               
              a problems which faces all modern multinational and                            
              multilocational firms.  In fact, it is the very immediacy of the               
              issue that makes the study of these far older companies                        
              important.  These companies operated in a less complex                         
              environment.  Communications were slower and a separation between              
              ownership and control at the head office level did not exist.                  
              Thus, the links between owners and strategies chosen are very                  
              clear, and it is possible to analyze which strategies chosen to                
              control managers were viable solutions and to examine what                     
              circumstances allowed firms to choose those solutions.   This                  
              information will help us to better understand why some American                
              firm structures are successful while others not in different                   
              situations and time periods.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Because chartered companies were vertically integrated firms,                  
              they faced potentially serious principal/agent problems.  In                   
              fact, the secondary literature is almost unanimous in its verdict              
              that a company's agents were the company's worst enemies.                      
              Despite such statements, little archival work has been done to                 
              examine the extent of managerial opportunism.  These companies                 
              may be old, but this does not necessarily mean that they were                  
              unsophisticated in managerial practices.  The objective of this                
              research is to study a range of early chartered companies and to               
              examine the strategies and solutions chosen by firms operating in              
              different external markets, but all with the same internal                     
              structure.  The theoretical literature on such problems and on                 
              game theory directs the focus of this project towards employment               
              contracts, bonding relations and monitoring strategies;  all of                
              which help to ameliorate moral hazard and adverse selection                    
              amongst managers.
