Title       : Dissertation Research: The Pollination Ecology of Calyptrogyne sarapiquensis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9122958

Award Number: 9122958
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8076               (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert K. Colwell Colwell@uconn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robin L. Chazdon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Saul A. Cunningham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Univ of Connecticut
	      14 Dog Lane
	      Storrs, CT  062694133    203/486-2000

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Floral display can vary between plants and animals of the same                 
              species, and this variation can affect reproductive success.                   
              Displays may vary in their capacity to attract pollinators, and in             
              their attraction to destructive florivores.  I will examine how the            
              variation in floral display affects visitation by pollinators and              
              florivores of Calyptorgyne sarapiquensis, a rain forest understory             
              palm.  Although a number of flowers may well have evolved to                   
              maximize long-term reproductive success, plants rarely set fruit               
              from all of their female flowers.  Fruit set may be reduced by many            
              factors, including lack of pollination, predation of flowers, and              
              lack of resources to develop fruit.  In the first field season I               
              will examine the natural levels of variation in these factors and              
              relate them to amount of fruit set in the field.  These correlative            
              data will be used to design manipulative experiments for the second            
              field season.  These experiments will consider the interaction of              
              factors determining fruit set.  Plants also achieve reproductive               
              success by dispersing their pollen.  The distance over which pollen            
              is moved influences key elements of the plant's reproductive                   
              ecology, such as the number of prospective mates, the availability             
              of pollen for females, the size of the mating population and the               
              area it covers.  I will examine pollen flow by tracing the movement            
              of a pollen analog.
