Title       : Topics in Macroeconomics and Forecasting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1992     
File        : a9122463

Award Number: 9122463
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233901             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark W. Watson mwatson@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James H. Stock  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Overall, this project addresses three areas of time series                     
              econometrics and empirical macroeconomics.  The first area                     
              consists of methodological and empirical issues in business cycle              
              forecasting.  The second concerns econometric inference about the              
              long-run properties of economic time series.  The third part of                
              the project examines econometric issues about dynamic equilibrium              
              macroeconomic models.                                                          
                                                                                             
              Recent advances in computational technology and data availability              
              have made it possible to contemplate macroeconomic forecasting                 
              with literally hundreds of economic time series.  This large                   
              number of potentially important time series raises important                   
              methodological issues.  This project addresses empirical and                   
              methodological issues related to parameter instability, changing               
              cyclical patterns, and forecasting in high-dimensional systems.                
              Economic theory suggests and studies of individual relations                   
              (such as the money-income relation) provide evidence of                        
              instability in reduced form forecasts of the business cycle.                   
              Obtaining a better empirical understanding of this instability is              
              of interest from the perspectives of both macroeconomic theory                 
              and economic forecasting.  Understanding whether, how and when                 
              relations have changed provides an empirical foundation for                    
              theoretical investigations of macroeconomic dynamics and suggest               
              ways to develop adaptive forecasting models.                                   
                                                                                             
              This project is part of our economics of global change research                
              agenda.  It relates to the very high priority goal of developing               
              forecasting tools for assessing the economic consequences of                   
              global climate change.  The tools that are now used by government              
              and industry to make forecasts are subject to serious                          
              methodological criticisms.  The time series methods developed in               
              this project could provide much better forecasts of the impacts                
              of the types of structural changes in the economy anticipated                  
              from global warming and from government policies to constrain or               
              sharply reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
