Title       : The Bipolar Fluxonic Transistor: Exploratory Development of a Novel
               Superconducting Device
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 4,  1992  
File        : a9122679

Award Number: 9122679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian J. Clifton                        
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alan M. Kadin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1456      SOLID-STATE&MICROSTRUCTURE RES
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              Recent research has indicated that there is a                                  
              formal electrical duality between electrons in                                 
              semiconductors and fluxons in superconducting                                  
              thin films.  Magnetic flux can be transported                                  
              across a superconductor only via fluxons (or                                   
              vortices), in analogy to charge transport across                               
              a semiconductor via electrons and holes.  A                                    
              fluxon of either polarity is driven by a current                               
              and produces an electric field in the same way                                 
              that an electron or hole is driven by an                                       
              electric field and produces a current.                                         
              Superconducting devices that are dual to                                       
              unipolar semiconducting devices (such as the                                   
              field-effect transistor) have recently been                                    
              demonstrated.  The proposed research will go                                   
              further to design and fabricate simple bipolar                                 
              fluxonic elements that are the duals to                                        
              semiconducting bipolar junction diodes and                                     
              transistors.  A bipolar fluxonic transistor is a                               
              three-terminal active superconducting device                                   
              that can exhibit substantial voltage gain.                                     
              These devices will be prepared by patterning                                   
              of high-temperature superconducting YBCO                                       
              thin films, without the need to fabricate                                      
              Josephson tunnel junctions or other more                                       
              complex structures.  The research will seek to                                 
              determine whether these new devices may                                        
              provide a promising new approach for the                                       
              next generation of superconducting integrated                                  
              circuit technology.
