Title       : Behavior of Fluids in Microporous Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 7,  1993   
File        : a9122460

Award Number: 9122460
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $276019             (Estimated)
Investigator: Keith E. Gubbins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Porous materials, such as activated carbons, zedites, silicas                  
              and metal oxides, are widely used in industry for                              
              purification, separation and chemical reaction processes.  The                 
              choice and design of these materials is empirical of present,                  
              and the materials are not optimal.  Classical methods for                      
              interpreting gas behavior in porous solids rely on equations                   
              derived in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and are                     
              inaccurate for small pores.  The aim of this projects is to                    
              provide more powerful methods based in molecular theory, for                   
              predicting adsorbed fluid behavior.  Modern statistical                        
              mechanical methods -- nonlocal density functional theory,                      
              percolation theory, kinetic theory and molecular simulation --                 
               will be used to make a systematic study of the role of pore                   
              characteristics (size, shape, interconnectedness, etc.)                        
              temperature, and intermolecular forces (fluid-fluid and solid-                 
              fluid) on the adsorption isotherm, heat of adsorption,                         
              solvation force, diffusion and selectivity for fluids and                      
              fluid mixtures in model porous materials.  Initially, Lennard-                 
              Jones fluids will be studied in model materials with (a)                       
              independent pores of simple cylindrical or slit geometry, and                  
              (b) nonuniform and networked pores, in which pore blocking can                 
              occur.  The range of independent variables, and the key                        
              features that yield each of the observed classes and                           
              subclasses of isotherm, will be determined, and the results                    
              will be arranged in a form that is easy to use by                              
              experimentalists interested in characterizing porous                           
              materials.  The theory will be developed as a new means for                    
              determining pore-size distributions.
