Title       : Synthesis and Reactivity of Metallaradicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 5,  1994    
File        : a9122580

Award Number: 9122580
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $232500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Klaus H. Theopold theopold@udel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 0000,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With funding from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organo-                      
              metallic Chemistry Program, Professor Theopold will continue                   
              his studies of chromium alkyl complex chemistry.  In this grant                
              period the focus will be on Cp*Cr(III), Cp*Cr(II) and Cp*Cr-oxo                
              alkyl complexes, and on some novel Cp*Cr-oxo-M cluster                         
              compounds (Cp* is the pentamethylcyclopentadienyl group).                      
              Examples of Cp*Cr-oxo alkyl complexes in the formal IV, V and                  
              VI oxidation states have already been discovered.  Although one                
              objective of the research is the synthesis and structural                      
              characterization of new examples of the above compounds, the                   
              primary thrust of the work is to define the reactivity patterns                
              of these classes of compounds.  Of special interest is their                   
              activity as new polymerization catalysts and as models for the                 
              known heterogeneous chromium oxide/aluminum alkyl based                        
              industrial olefin polymerization catalysts.  Because most of                   
              the compounds to be considered are paramagnetic, their                         
              characterization must rely on elemental analysis, reaction                     
              product analysis and x-ray structure determinations on suitably                
              crystalline materials.                                                         
              %%%                                                                            
              This project will explore the fundamental chemistry of                         
              organometallic compounds that contain unpaired electrons.  As                  
              such, they have very different properties from the vast                        
              majority of known organometallic compounds.  Because they are                  
              much harder to characterize with respect to structure, the                     
              chemistry of these novel compounds is not well known.  It is                   
              believed that they may be related to current industrial                        
              catalysts that are used for production of polyolefins which are                
              used in many household consumer products.  This research may                   
              lead to even better catalysts for the production of these                      
              materials.
