Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  1992  
File        : a9122700

Award Number: 9122700
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3395               (Estimated)
Investigator: David Witwer  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A fundamental premise of the Labor Management Reporting and                    
              Disclosure Act of 1959 is that if the democratic rights of union               
              members are protected, the members can eliminate corruption and                
              racketeering.  Currently there is a great deal of debate about the             
              use of civil actions such as the Racketeer Influenced Corrupt                  
              Organization Act (RICO) and the remedy of government-imposed                   
              trusteeships to control union corruption.  None of these measures              
              have proved to be entirely successful in combating union                       
              corruption.  To date, there has been no empirical inquiry into when            
              and to what extent the premises of these Acts are functionally                 
              valid, nor has there been systematic examination of what legal                 
              measures may be necessary to encourage development of reform                   
              movements and establish democratic processes in racketeer                      
              controlled unions.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This doctoral disseration project will analyze why these efforts               
              have not succeeded in the past and how democratic reform has                   
              functioned or failed to function.  Since the Teamsters Union                   
              presents the best example of the failure of unions to combat                   
              corruption, the study will encompass four generations of democratic            
              reform in the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.  Sources for             
              the study will include internal union documents, trial testimony,              
              rank and file literature and government documents from the National            
              Labor Relations Board, and congressional hearings.                             
                                                                                             
              This project will provide an empirical base and systematic factual             
              analysis for understanding the phenomena of corruption in unions,              
              potentials for internal correction by reform movements, and the                
              role of union democracy in allowing and correcting various forms               
              of corruption and racketeering.  The results will not only                     
              contribute to basic knowledge about the impact of law but will be              
              directly relevant to unions which want to protect themselves from              
              racketeer infiltration, to law enforcement officials and judges who            
              attempt to design remedies in specific cases, and to regulators and            
              legislators who must develop general rules regulating internal                 
              union affairs.
