Title       : RUI: The 1992 Presidential Election in Prime Time
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  1992   
File        : a9122729

Award Number: 9122729
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $189777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marion R. Just mjust@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    617/235-0320

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 9229,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In the fifty years of social scientific examination of voting                  
              decisions in presidential elections, the mass media have been                  
              transformed; so too has the presidential election campaign.  In                
              addition to newspapers and magazines; and the "two-step flow" of               
              news from opinion leaders to the mass public, we now have an array             
              of broadcast media that bring citizens virtually in direct contact             
              with the presidential campaign.  The historical political staple               
              of lengthy campaign speeches has been supplemented, if not                     
              supplanted, by 10-second "sound-bites" and elaborately produced 30-            
              second advertisements.  The campaign itself, which was once limited            
              largely to a fall contest between two major party nominees, now                
              stretches through a calendar year, with voters taking a direct role            
              in nominations and the news media taking over the task of winnowing            
              the field of presidential candidates.                                          
                                                                                             
              Despite these changes in the campaign process, there have been few             
              studies that focus on how voters make sense of the new mass media              
              campaign, what information and understanding they acquire, and how             
              they decide to vote.  The bulk of scholarly attention has been                 
              concentrated on campaign coverage in prestige newspapers and                   
              network news, ignoring the role of advertising, and neglecting the             
              local newspapers and local TV news on which more and more Americans            
              depend on for information.  This investigation seeks to bridge this            
              gap by looking closely at voters and their media environment during            
              the 1992 presidential election campaign in four diverse                        
              communities:  Los Angeles, California; Boston, Massachusetts;                  
              Winston-Salem, North Carolina; and the twin towns of Fargo, North              
              Dakota-Moorhead, Minnesota.  These sites represent a range of very             
              small to very large media markets in each major geographic region              
              of the country.  Using a variety of methods, the researchers                   
              investigate how people in these diverse communities use campaign               
              news and political advertising, as well as their contacts with                 
              other people to arrive at voting decisions.                                    
                                                                                             
              Through content analysis of local newspaper and television news and            
              the political advertising broadcast in that media market, the                  
              investigators will compare and contrast the information that is                
              most available to voters in their communities throughout the                   
              campaign.  Particular attention will be paid to the primary                    
              election phase.  Voter decision-making will be explored in public              
              opinion polls, focus groups, and periodic in-depth interviews with             
              representative panels of citizens in four communities throughout               
              the campaign season.  The aim of the project is to gain a fuller               
              understanding of the news media environment, and how citizens                  
              become interested in the campaign, acquire information, form                   
              impressions of the candidates, decide what is important, take                  
              positions on campaign issues, and, ultimately, decide how to vote.
