Title       : Patterns of Development in Young Women's Educational Choicesand Experiences in
               Math and Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1992     
File        : a9122802

Award Number: 9122802
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $96996              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sandra L. Hanson Hanson@CUA.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Catholic University
	      620 Michigan Ave.N.E.
	      Washington, DC  200171556    202/635-5000

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Anticipated future labor supply shortages of scientists and               
              engineers have called attention to a national need for greater                 
              understanding of the factors influencing the recruitment and                   
              retention of men and women in careers in mathematics, science, and             
              engineering.  It is particularly important to enhance our knowledge            
              of the barriers to women's participation in these fields.  This                
              project will address the following questions:  What are the                    
              patterns of knowledge, access, and attitudes that lead women to                
              persist in or drop out of mathematics and science?  What                       
              combination of school, family, and personal/psychological resources            
              best explains the patterns of development experienced by young                 
              women in their high school and post-high school mathematics and                
              science careers?  What are the typical paths that men follow in                
              their mathematics and science careers and how and why do these                 
              differ from the paths women take?  Analyses of cross-sectional and             
              longitudinal data from three major nationally representative data              
              sets, High School and Beyond, the National Educational Longitudinal            
              Study, and the Second International Educational Assessment of                  
              Mathematics will be conducted in order to explore patterns of young            
              women's (and young men's) achievement in math and science as well              
              as the explanations for these patterns.                                        
                                                                                             
                   This project, which is jointly supported by the Sociology                 
              Program and the Education and Human Resources Office of Studies,               
              Evaluation and Dissemination, will contribute to a number of areas             
              in the field of sociology, including occupational choice, sociology            
              of education, sex and gender roles, and social stratification.  The            
              results of the project will enhance our understanding of how to                
              recruit more young people, male as well as female, into careers in             
              science, mathematics, and engineering.
