Title       : Modelling Economic Time Series Under A Bayesian Frame of Reference
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 18,  1994     
File        : a9122142

Award Number: 9122142
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229387             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter C. Phillips peter.phillips@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,GLCH,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              New procedures for analyzing economic time series are developed                
              using Bayesian methods of time series analysis and semiparametric              
              specification testing in cointegrated systems.  Empirical                      
              applications of these methods include analysis of data on                      
              macroeconomic time series for the United States economy,                       
              macroeconomic data for Korea, Australia and New Zealand, and some              
              long stock price and dividend series.  Extensive simulation                    
              experiments are conducted to evaluate the performance of the new               
              procedures.  The new estimation methods developed by this project              
              should improve the quality of empirical economic research on a                 
              wide range of problems.  The work is especially timely because of              
              the recent increase in interest in applying Bayesian methods, the              
              framework used by this project, to empirical economic research.                
                                                                                             
              The main activity of the project is concerned with objective                   
              Bayesian methods of time series analysis.  Specific attention is               
              given to economic time series whose behavior indicates possible                
              nonstationary characteristics.  Issues of determining model-based              
              reference priors that accommodate nonstationary will be                        
              considered in detail.  The effects of data conditioning in                     
              Bayesian time series analysis is the major focus of attention.                 
              The conceptual framework developed in the previous grant is                    
              extended to Bayes model likelihood tests, posterior odds tests                 
              and model selection criteria.  The model selection criteria                    
              provides a generalization of a widely used criterion.  All of                  
              these features of Bayesian                                                     
              inference are explored in detail and an asymptotic theory is                   
              developed for a general class of time series problems.                         
                                                                                             
              The work on semiparametric specification testing in cointegration              
              relies on the Lagrange multiplier (LM) principle.  The LM                      
              approach delivers a model specification test for the long-run                  
              elements of a structural system and tests against both                         
              underspecification (too few long-run relations) and                            
              overspecification (too many long-run relations).  The two parts                
              of the project will be related by developing a Bayes model                     
              specification test which, in the case of cointegrated systems,                 
              will be closely related to the LM test procedure.
