Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Law and Social Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 28,  1992  
File        : a9122443

Award Number: 9122443
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1993   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8999               (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine L. Acuff  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              ACUFF                                                                          
              Prenatal substance abuse has generated controversy among public                
              health and legal scholars as well as significant activity in state             
              legislatures and courts.  Since the mid-1980s, states have modified            
              child abuse and neglect statutes to include prenatal drug exposures            
              and have criminally prosecuted women whose newborns have tested                
              positive for drugs.  Others have adopted a services-oriented model             
              of care in which reporting of prenatal drug use is mandated for                
              assessment and provision of services. Some states have adopted both            
              punitive and service assessment approaches.  State laws concerning             
              prenatal substance abuse are necessarily dependent upon the                    
              cooperation of health care providers and social workers in                     
              identifying and reporting prenatal drug use.                                   
                                                                                             
              Despite the central importance of hospitals and their personnel to             
              the impact of legislation on prenatal substance abuse, little is               
              known about their response to legal regulation of prenatal                     
              substance abuse.  This dissertation research will focus on this                
              important, yet neglected issue by surveying key personnel in a 50%             
              random sample of hospitals having more than 500 births per year in             
              New York, New Jersey, Florida, California, Texas, and Minnesota.               
              In addition to describing the range of hospital personnel practices            
              across a range of jurisdictions, the research will also focus on               
              whether the presence of a drug assessment policy is related to such            
              factors as the legal climate in the jurisdiction, hospital size,               
              percentage of medicaid patients, the availabilty of on-site drug               
              treatment facilities, and other sociolegal factors.  Also, for                 
              those hospitals with drug assessment policies, aspects of race and             
              class will be investigated to further understand the mediating                 
              practices of hospitals in influencing the impact of prenatal drug              
              use laws.  Therefore, the study will fill an important empirical               
              gap in knowledge about the impact of legal actions on hospital                 
              policies and practices.  Also, the dissertation research holds                 
              promise for advancing basic knowledge about the social regulation              
              of women and children.
