Title       : A Conference on Intellectual Property Rights and Indigenous Knowledge, October
               5-10, 1993
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1992    
File        : a9122009

Award Number: 9122009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50194              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen B. Brush sbbrush@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 7915      ETHICS AND VALUES STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0103000   Ethical Considerations                  
              91        Science Technology Assess               
Program Ref : 7915,
Abstract    :
              Indigenous people control significant amounts of biological                    
              diversity and knowledge about that biodiversity.  They are                     
              important sources of knowledge and resources.  Deforestration and              
              genetic erosion threaten these sources.  While industrial countries            
              have implemented intellectual property protection through                      
              legislation and regulation, these formulas are not easily extended             
              to indigenous knowledge.  This scholarly conference on the                     
              relations between intellectual property and indigenous knowledge               
              will bring together both advocates and disinterested specialists to            
              discuss topics covering the nature of intellectual property regimes            
              and indigenous knowledge, the benefits and drawbacks of extending              
              intellectual property, the interests involved, and alternative                 
              approaches to protecting the rights, knowledge, and biological                 
              resources of indigenous peoples.  Thorough discussion of these                 
              themes requires participation from specialists on national and                 
              international policies and administration of biological resources,             
              indigenous groups and advocates, users of biological resources,                
              legal scholars familiar with indigenous rights issues and                      
              intellectual property, and ethnobotonists.  The primary criteria in            
              selecting participants are their familiarity with the issues and               
              the expectation that they will contribute a significant scholarly              
              paper on their topic.  Papers commissioned from each of the 25 or              
              so conference participants will be presented and circulated two                
              months prior to the conference.  After each presentation at the                
              conference, two pre-assigned discussants will respond prior to open            
              discussion.  The six days will include three days of presentations             
              and discussions, and two days for work group preparations of                   
              summary reports on the conference themes.  One day will be devoted             
              to a final plenary session and conference closure.  Results will               
              include scholarly publications and reports in the newsletters and              
              journals of appropriate professional, scientific and stakeholder               
              organizations.
