Title       : Improving the Accuracy of Forecasts: A Process InterventionCombining Social
               Judgment Analysis and Group Facilitation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 22,  1994     
File        : a9122447

Award Number: 9122447
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Su-Shing Chen                           
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99693              (Estimated)
Investigator: John Rohrbaugh   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Albany
	      Office for Sponsored Prgms.
	      Albany, NY  12222    518/437-4550

NSF Program : 6850      Digital Society&Technologies
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                Considerable empirical evidence suggests that groups seldom do               
              as well as their best members on judgement tasks.  To address                  
              this problem, a Group Decision Support System (GDSS) has been                  
              developed that incorporates techniques for reducing both the                   
              problems with interaction processes and the problems with                      
              cognitive processing that groups face when making collective                   
              judgements.  A preliminary evaluation of this GDSS demonstrated                
              that the process enabled groups to perform significantly better                
              than their most capable members on cognitive conflict tasks.                   
              However, experimental conditions were not sufficiently                         
              representative of environmental conditions to warrant broad                    
              generalization of the results.  This research extends the                      
              previous work by using judgment tasks frequently faced by                      
              managerial decision makers, improving the quality of the GDSS,                 
              and increasing the motivation of the participants.,  In the                    
              initial phase of the study, two expert forecasting tasks will be               
              developed for use in the experiment and professional facilitators              
              will be hired and trained to apply the process correctly.  Next,               
              an experiment, involving 24 five-member groups, will be                        
              conducted.  To ensure that participants are motivated to perform               
              well, they will be paid differentially according to the quality                
              of their group judgments.  In the final phase of study, the                    
              process intervention will be introduced into several                           
              organizational settings.
