Title       : Feasibility Study of a West Coast Picket Fence Specification of Upstream
               Boundary Conditions for STORM
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 1,  1992   
File        : a9122497

Award Number: 9122497
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Stephan P. Nelson                       
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $94215              (Estimated)
Investigator: Russell L. Elsberry elsberry@nps.navy.mil  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard J. Lind  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul A. Hirschberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Naval Postgraduate School
	      Code 09
	      Monterey, CA  93943    408/656-2099

NSF Program : 1525      MESOSCALE DYNAMIC METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Elsberry has been awarded a grant to support a late entry to              
              STORMFEST observational systems, viz., an upstream "picket fence"              
              of gap-filling rawinsondes and radar wind profilers deployed along             
              the west coast of the U.S. STORMFEST's objectives are to improve               
              the understanding and prediction of mesoscale weather systems over             
              the central U.S. The environmental flow features that trigger some             
              of these sytems form far upstream. Rapidly moving jet streaks and              
              mid-tropospheric short-waves may propagate from the data-sparse                
              east Pacific to the midwest in 24-36 hours. STORMFEST plans include            
              the temporary deployment of drifting buoys and dropsondes from far             
              ranging aircraft over the North Pacific, in a systems test for                 
              major STORM field experiments in the next few years. Elsberry                  
              suggests that a west-coast picket fence might provide an                       
              alternative (in future systems) at much lower cost, or at the                  
              least, cheap supplementary observations. The proposed study is                 
              essentially a feasibility test of the efficacy of the picket fence             
              in either mode.                                                                
                                                                                             
                   The "picket-fence" concept is worthy of further exploration,              
              since it represents a low-risk low-cost addition to STOMFEST with              
              potentially high payoff in both basic and applied atmospheric                  
              science. In fact, Elsberry's proposal has contributed to a recent              
              decision by the Canadian Environmental Service to double the                   
              frequency of its rawinsonde ascents in a northern extension of the             
              picket fence.
