Title       : Industrial Organization, Spatial Organization, and Industrial Competitiveness
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  1995  
File        : a9122778

Award Number: 9122778
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James W. Harrington                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Marshall M. A. Feldman marsh@uri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Rhode Island
	      
	      Kingston, RI  02881    401/792-1000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Since the early 1980s, research on industrial organization                
              has identified a new form of flexibly specialized production in                
              which large vertically integrated firms engaged in mass                        
              production are being superseded by agglomerations of spatially                 
              dense networks of small vertically disintegrated firms.                        
              Empirical support for this thesis comes primarily from case                    
              studies of single industries or isolated regions.  Very little is              
              know about how movement toward vertically disintegrated                        
              industrial structures affects spatial agglomeration and                        
              industrial competitiveness at the national or subregional level.               
              This project will test certain hypotheses relating spatial                     
              agglomeration, industrial organization, firm size, and industrial              
              competitiveness with unique data sets for industries at the                    
              national level, and it should provide systematic statistical                   
              tests of key points of contention in the debate over flexibility               
              in industrial structures.  The project will map spatial patterns               
              of agglomeration and vertical integration for selected                         
              industries, and it will compare agglomeration and vertical                     
              integration across regions by means of statistical tests of                    
              regression and analysis of variance.                                           
                   This research will add new knowledge about the geography of               
              industrial organization in the U.S., and it will test some                     
              critical hypotheses about how changes in industrial structure                  
              affect changes in competitiveness at regional and national                     
              scales.  It should further contribute to the debate about the                  
              impact of industrial restructuring on the agglomeration of                     
              leading edge industries in this country.  At a theoretical level,              
              the project will help settle some important questions about the                
              tendency toward flexibly specialized production systems and their              
              spatial concentration.
