Title       : Dissertation Research: Diet Selection of the North American Pika: The Effects of
               Plant Morphology, Nutrients, and Plant Secondary Compounds
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1992      
File        : a9122579

Award Number: 9122579
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  1992       
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7831               (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Denise Dearing  (Student current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : 1182      ECOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Herbivores confront a food resource base with a complex                   
              assortment of nutrients and toxins.  Because of this complexity,               
                                                                                             
              diet selection in herbivores is poorly understood.  Pikas                      
              (Ochotona princeps) are mammals (related to rabbits) that inhabit              
                                                                                             
              mountainous regions and unlike many other small mammals, remain                
              active all winter. During the winter, pikas survive on stored                  
              vegetation ("haypiles"), collected during the previous summer.                 
              The winter diet stored in the haypile differs considerably from                
              the plants that pikas consume in the summer, although both are                 
              collected simultaneously.  This project focuses on identifying                 
              the factors responsible for these different diet choices.                      
                   Hypotheses that 1) pikas select their summer diet to be                   
              nutrient-rich and toxin-poor, but that their winter diet choice                
              is more intricate than simple avoidance of plant toxins; and that              
                                                                                             
              2) pikas manipulate plant toxins in their winter diet, will be                 
              tested.  Data on nutrients, toxins, and morphologies of available              
                                                                                             
              food plants will be collected and used to test these hypotheses.               
                                                                                             
                   The significance of the research extends beyond                           
                                                                                             
              understanding the question of diet selection in pikas.                         
                                                                                             
              Identifying the factors governing diet selection, may lead to                  
                                                                                             
              better diets for herbivorous animals in zoos.  Moreover, this                  
                                                                                             
              information could be used to exploit plant toxins to naturally                 
                                                                                             
              regulate herbivorous pest populations, especially rodents.
