Title       : Planning Grant on the Comparative Socio-Legal Status of Undocumented Immigrants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  1992      
File        : a9122801

Award Number: 9122801
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan O. White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda S. Bosniak   (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger Dennis  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              87        Law                                     
Program Ref : 9221,
Abstract    :
              The process of undocumented migration raises some of the most                  
              pressing political and social issues of contemporary time, both                
              within many individual countries and at the international level.               
              The unauthorized entry, presence, and employment of increasing                 
              numbers of aliens poses distinct problems of border control and                
              deterrence, and unique concerns of human and democratic rights.                
              This Research Opportunities for Women Planning Grant will enable               
              the investigator to plan for a comparative study of the social and             
              legal status of undocumented immigrants in contemporary France and             
              Spain.  The study will involve examination of each state's                     
              immigration regulatory regime, including formal rules and their                
              enforcement; rules and practices regarding the treatment of                    
              undocumented immigrants in matters not directly related to                     
              immigration regulation; and the interplay between both of these                
              sociolegal spheres within each state.  The planning grant will                 
              enable the investigator to intensively study the European civil law            
              system, establish research contacts and resources, and further                 
              develop the research model and design of the project.                          
                                                                                             
              The study of undocumented immigrants in receiving countries                    
              provides a striking model of the complex interplay between legal               
              status and social relationships in an individual society.  This                
              study will be unique in that it will document the relationship                 
              between the immigrant's status as an object of immigration control             
              and his/her legal and social status in society in the non-                     
              immigration regulatory spheres.  The results of the forthcoming                
              research project will contribute to knowledge about the competing              
              drives toward closure and inclusion and toward national community              
              and universal human rights that often plague democratic nations.               
              As such the study will facilitate the advancement of general                   
              hypotheses about the internal functioning of national political and            
              social systems in an era of significant international population               
              movements.
