Title       : Tests of Expected Utility Theory at the Individual and Market Levels
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1992  
File        : a9122201

Award Number: 9122201
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: N. John Castellan                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49714              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dorla A. Evans evansd@email.uah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Alabama Huntsville
	      301 Sparkman Drive
	      Huntsville, AL  35899    256/824-6120

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Finance and economics theorists assume preferences predicted              
              by expected utility (EU) theory hold at the market level even as               
              evidence mounts that some of those predictions are violated at the             
              individual level.  The objective of this project is to determine               
              the role of markets in disciplining behavior toward EU outcomes.               
              Specifically, is the distribution of EU violations different if                
              subjects participate in market-level decisions before individual-              
              level decisions?  Do market design and gain versus loss payoffs                
              affect the degree of discipline provided by markets?  Without                  
              empirical empirical evidence that EU holds at the market level                 
              while its predictions are violated at the individual level, the                
              disciplines of finance and economics are ignoring possible                     
              weaknesses in the models and opportunities to improve them.                    
                   Proposed laboratory experiments will record subjects'                     
              individual-level preferences for pairs of gambles which are                    
              selected with specific constraints.  Subjects will be given the                
              opportunity to participate in markets for these gambles.                       
              Individual and market preferences will be compared with those                  
              predicted by EU theory.  If the preferences violate EU theory at               
              the individual level but support it at the market level, there is              
              empirical support for the robustness of economic and finance models            
              dependent upon the EU assumption.  If the preferences do not                   
              support EU at the market level, then these models may have to be               
              reformulated independently of the EU assumption.
