Title       : Dissertation Research: Intermittent Locomotion in the Ghost Crab: A Model for
               the Integration of Field and Laboratory Studies of Locomotion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1992      
File        : a9122559

Award Number: 9122559
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vincent P. Gutschick                    
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Randi B. Weinstein  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Recent advances in the study of locomotor performance allow us to              
              integrate the fields of behavior, physiology, and morphology to                
              establish the relationship between performance limits and natural              
              locomotor activity.  The ghost crab, Ocypode quadrata, is                      
              particularly suited for such an integrative study.  Laboratory                 
              studies of ghost crab locomotion have led to specific predictions              
              about the speed and duration of natural movements.  To test these              
              predictions, the coPI will observe ghost crab locomotion in the                
              field.  The coPI will videotape crabs moving in their natural                  
              habitat and perform motion analysis to determine the velocity,                 
              duration and frequency of their movements.  The coPI will test                 
              hypotheses about ghost crab locomotion predicted by continuous and             
              intermittent exercise physiology.  The field data collected in this            
              study will be integrated with laboratory measurements of locomotor             
              performance to determine where ghost crabs operate within their                
              performance limits in nature.  Such studies provide a basic                    
              understanding of the extent to which material conditions of                    
              existence press organisms towards their physiological limits, and              
              therefore a basis for assessing effects of additional stresses due             
              to environmental changes caused by human activities.
