Title       : Sustainable Resource Management and the Depreciation of Environmental Capital:
               Applications to Energy-use and Global Warming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1992     
File        : a9122370

Award Number: 9122370
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $106918             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Roumasset jimr@hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii Manoa
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A recent, widely quoted study has concluded that a five to ten                 
              fold increase in economic activity will be required over the next              
              fifty years in order to meet the needs of a burgeoning world                   
              population, as well as to begin reducing mass poverty.  Continued              
              economic growth of this magnitude portends an ecological dilemma.              
              On the one hand, the requisite growth for poverty reduction will               
              require further depletion of apparently dwindling stocks of                    
              natural resources and deterioration of the environment.  On the                
              other hand, unless poverty is reduced significantly and soon,                  
              pressure on diminishing global stocks of basic resources will                  
              increase rapidly.  The proposed solution to this dilemma is                    
              sustained development which aims at improving living standards,                
              without diminishing natural resource stocks or degrading the                   
              natural environment.  Closely related to the idea of resource                  
              sustainability of a resource is the notion of resource                         
              depreciation, which is analogous the familiar concept of capital               
              depreciation as is applied to an asset like a machine tool.  The               
              purpose of this research is to develop a theory of sustainable                 
              resource management and a consistent measure of resource and                   
              environmental depreciation.                                                    
                                                                                             
              The methodology developed for measuring resource and                           
              environmental depreciation will be applied to the problem of                   
              global energy use and greenhouse warming, with a particular focus              
              on Indonesia whose oil is a major export commodity.  Policies                  
              aimed at effectively dealing with the threat of global warming                 
              must balance energy conservation, against the relative cost                    
              effectiveness of alternative mechanisms for limiting emission of               
              greenhouse gases.  This study will place particular emphasis on                
              carbon dioxide emissions.  The specific modeling problem is to                 
              compute an efficient profile of global energy use, taking in to                
              account the externality costs of carbon dioxide emissions, to                  
              recompute the model after the introduction of projected                        
              distortions, and then to compute the value of environmental                    
              depreciation.
