Title       : Dissertation Research: Development of Object Recognition Memory, Memory for the
               Location of Objects, and Inhibitory Control of Behavior in Preterm and Fullterm
               Infants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 5,  1992      
File        : a9122493

Award Number: 9122493
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joseph L. Young                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11790              (Estimated)
Investigator: Teresa Wilcox  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1180      HUMAN COGNITION & PERCEPTION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This research will investigate the development of various                      
              cognitive abilities in preterm and full-term infants with                      
              uncomplicated medical histories.  It will study the ability of                 
              these infants to regulate their attention and determine how this               
              relates to their performance in recognizing previously seen                    
              objects.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              The particular cognitive abilities to be studied include the                   
              infants recognizing objects, recognizing the locations in which                
              objects are placed, remembering these objects and places over                  
              short intervals, and learning to inhibit certain aspects of their              
              own behavior when such control is required in order to succeed.                
              These abilities have been carefully studied in full-term infants               
              in the past, and the exact brain regions essential for normal                  
              performance have also been identified.  For example, it is known               
              that object and place recognition abilities depend in some way                 
              upon the temporal and parietal lobes of the brain.  Working-                   
              memory and inhibitory-control abilities, on the other hand,                    
              depend upon a specific part of the frontal lobe known as the                   
              dorsolateral prefrontal cortex.  There is relatively precise                   
              information about exactly when in early development these brain                
              regions become fully mature.  Thus, by studying these cognitive                
              abilities it may be possible to determine whether the brain                    
              regions essential to their performance are developing normally in              
              preterm infants.                                                               
                                                                                             
              The working hypothesis is that preterm infants with uncomplicated              
              medical histories will display selective rather than general                   
              cognitive defects during development and that these defects might              
              be related to aberrant attentional patterns.  Given that the                   
              brain regions underlying each of the tasks to be used is known,                
              selective defects on some of the tasks would help identify                     
              exactly which brain regions are most likely to be compromised by               
              premature birth, even when there are minimal medical                           
              complications.  Such results would stimulate further research                  
              concerning the interaction of early experiences (such as                       
              prematurity) and cognitive development, and would have important               
              implications for the creation of effective early intervention                  
              programs aimed at ameliorating any negative effects of premature               
              birth.
