Title       : Reconstructing the late-Holocene hurricane climate of the northern Gulf of
               Mexico coast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 24,  1992  
File        : a9122058

Award Number: 9122058
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Brian Holly                             
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : April 30,  1994      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97879              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kam-biu Liu kliu1@lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : La St U & A&M Coll
	      330 Thomas Boyd Hall
	      Baton Rouge, LA  70803    225/578-3386

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   For centuries, hurricanes have been an important factor in                
              the climate of the Gulf Coast region of the United States, and                 
              they play a major role in causing coastal landform changes, as                 
              ecological agents, and as hazards to life and property.                        
              Hurricane activity in the Gulf of Mexico region may be linked to               
              El Nino-Southern Oscillation events and to sub-Saharan droughts.               
              The short length of the documentary hurricane record together                  
              with the rarity of severe, category 4 and 5, hurricanes make it                
              impossible to estimate the long-term frequency of such events.                 
              Reconstruction of the prehistoric record of hurricanes and the                 
              deciphering of long-term changes in hurricane activity depends on              
              proxy data which can be obtained from coastal lake sediments.                  
              This project seeks to demonstrate that coastal lake sediments                  
              preserve a stratigraphically and chronologically distinct record               
              of major hurricane strikes in the form of sand layers.  The proxy              
              for a number of sites will be correlated to identify temporal and              
              spatial variations in hurricane activity in the northern Gulf of               
              Mexico region, and these will be related to global events such as              
              El Nino and sub-Saharan droughts.                                              
                   This study promises to yield a comprehensive history of the               
              late-Holocene hurricane climate for the northern Gulf of Mexico                
              region by extending previous research from a single site to lakes              
              and marshes across the entire region.  In this way, the                        
              documentary record of hurricanes can be extended back several                  
              millennia, and the frequency of occurrence of severe hurricanes                
              can be estimated.  The research will employ radiometric dating of              
              lake sediment cores to identify hurricane events and to establish              
              a regional climatic signal.  This information will permit a                    
              comparison with other late-Holocene climatic changes from other                
              parts of the world to further an understanding of global                       
              processes and regional linkages in the interdisciplinary study of              
              global change.
