Title       : US-Poland Joint Fund Research on Polymerization of Lactones and Lactides to
               Biodegradable Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  1992       
File        : a9122198

Award Number: 9122198
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : September 1,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Zbigniew Jedlinski   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst of Polymer Chem
	      41800 Zabrze, Ul. M.
	      , PL  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5933      US-POLAND MARIE CURRIE JNT FND
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              12        Chemistry                               
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This US-Polish Joint Fund project between Dr.                                  
              Zbigniew Jedlinski of the Institute of Polymer                                 
              Chemistry and Dr. Robert Lenz of the University                                
              of Massachusetts will focus on the synthesis of                                
              polymers which are both biodegradable and                                      
              bioresorbable.  The researchers' primary                                       
              objective is to investigate and develop new                                    
              polymers.  The type of polymeric materials that                                
              they will study are important for biomedical                                   
              materials in traumatology, surgery  and                                        
              pharmacology.  Biodegradable plastics are                                      
              expected to become increasingly important as                                   
              one solution to the growing problem of the                                     
              waste disposal of plastics.                                                    
                                                                                             
              This project in polymer chemistry fulfills the                                 
              program objectives of advancing scientific                                     
              knowledge by enabling leading experts in the                                   
              U.S. and Poland to combine complementary                                       
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong                                    
              mutual interest and competence on the basis of                                 
              equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of                                        
              benefit.
