Title       : Doctoral Disertation in Studies in Science, Technology, and Society
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  1992     
File        : a9122972

Award Number: 9122972
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rachelle D. Hollander                   
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 1,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1993     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7506               (Estimated)
Investigator: Lynne P. Snyder  (Student current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              83        History                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Doctoral Student, Lynne Snyder; Topic:  "The Federal Government                
              Discovers Air Pollution, 1948-63."                                             
                                                                                             
              The signing into law this year of a new Clean Air Act ends nearly              
              a decade of Congressional and Administration debate over new                   
              steps to be taken to limit air pollution in the US.  Ms. Snyder,               
              in her doctoral research under the direction of Professor                      
              Rosemary Stevens, is examining the origins of national government              
              involvement in the effort to control air-borne pollutants.                     
                                                                                             
              This project comprises the review of papers in Cincinnati, Ohio                
              and University Park, Pennsylvania, of records of the State of                  
              Pennsylvania in Harrisburg, and the recording of oral histories                
              with retired steelworkers and their spouses in Fort Myers,                     
              Florida.  This research promises to contribute to a social                     
              historical dissertation on the emergence of a federal approach to              
              air pollution after World War II, a policy crafted by research                 
              physicians and industrial hygienists informally, by means of                   
              expertise.  Ms. Snyder's dissertation focuses on responses to a                
              premier environmental disaster of the pre-regulatory era, the                  
              deadly smog over the southwestern Pennsylvania steel towns of                  
              Donora and Webster in 1948.  Oral histories with surviving                     
              community members and leaders supply critical perspectives on                  
              local attitudes towards and experiences with outside                           
              investigators.  Review of the papers of Cincinnati's Dr. Robert                
              Kehoe, who led the steel industry's investigation of the smog,                 
              provide an unprecedented view of the evolution of privately-                   
              sponsored environmental health expertise.  Review of United                    
              Steelworkers Secretary David J. McDonald's papers, and those of                
              the Pennsylvania State Departments of Health and Labor and                     
              Industry, contribute key information about the tensions between                
              industrial union, state, and federal government and                            
              administrative responsibilities for public health were                         
              renegotiated in the postwar era.
