Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Problems in Discrete Geometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  1993  
File        : a9122065

Award Number: 9122065
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $54300              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jacob E. Goodman jegcc@cunyvm.cuny.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY City College
	      Convent Ave at 138th St
	      New York, NY  10031    212/690-6741

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,9263,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator, in collaboration with Richard Pollack                   
              (Courant Institute of Mathematical Sciences, New York University),             
              plans to continue his investigation of the interplay between the               
              geometry and the topology of Euclidean spaces by extending recent              
              results on the classification of ordered configurations and their              
              generalizations, and on related geometric and combinatorial                    
              problems.  Building on their past work on allowable sequences and              
              order types of configurations, as well as on ideas coming out of               
              their recent proof of the Grunbaum conjecture on the extendibility             
              of finite arrangements of topological lines to continuous spreads,             
              Goodman and Pollack plan to continue their work on configurations,             
              arrangements of topological flats, and geometric transversal                   
              theory, examining (among other problems) (1) the problem of                    
              generalizing the proof of the Grunbaum conjecture to intermediate-             
              dimensional flats, (2) the problem of finding a compact                        
              representation for configurations and polytopes, as well as a                  
              classification of arrangements of intermediate-dimensional flats               
              which reflects their geometric properties, and (3) the problem of              
              determining the relative frequency of order types (the classical               
              Sylvester problem, generalized) via the identification of the set              
              of simple n-point configurations in real d-dimensional space with              
              an open dense subset of a suitable Grassmann manifold.                         
                   The advent of high-speed computing has brought new life to                
              many of these questions over the past few decades, since it has                
              become possible to investigate non-trivial examples relatively                 
              painlessly.  The size of interesting finite geometric sets tends to            
              increase exponentially with the dimension.  Consider, for the                  
              simplest example, the number of vertices of, in turn, a line                   
              segment, a square, a cube, a tesseract (4-dimensional), and so                 
              forth.  The corresponding numbers are 2, 4, 8, 16, ..., and the                
              regularity here is so pronounced that the numbers are computable               
              and the properties of n-dimensional cubes, as they are called,                 
              remain manageable even for large n.  However, less regular sets                
              with rapidly increasing size become much more difficult to handle              
              without a machine's assistance for computation.  This is one aspect            
              of the relation of this kind of mathematics to computing, but there            
              is another reciprocal relation.  Just as computing facilitates                 
              plausible conjecture and hence proof, so too do some of the proofs             
              lead to improved algorithms for computing.  We have here a very                
              useful symbiosis that is bound to flourish even more in the years              
              to come.
