Title       : Dissertation Research: Pollen Export and the Evolution of Distyly: Tests of a
               Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  1992      
File        : a9122752

Award Number: 9122752
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1994       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $6832               (Estimated)
Investigator: Judy L. Stone  (Student current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              This proposal outlines three experiments designed to test                      
              predictions of a new model of the evolution of distyly.  This model            
              differs from the most widely accepted model by assuming a different            
              ancestral state and by focusing on the efficiency of pollen                    
              donation, as well as receipt.  It also differs in predicting that              
              the morphological features of distyly evolve prior to the                      
              compatibility groups.  The first experiment examines pollen                    
              transfer by bumblebees between plexiglass flowers with varying                 
              anther and stigma heights.  Populations of flowers will be created             
              with the combinations of organ heights outlined in the models, to              
              see whether the purported changes in organ heights bring about the             
              increases in pollen donation predicted.  The other two experiments             
              will take place at the La Selva Biological Station, using                      
              Psychotria suerrensis and one of its butterfly pollinators.  In the            
              individual-level experiment, pollen donation will be observed on               
              controlled sequences of flowers and pollen carryover will be                   
              measured.  In the population-level experiment, the type of pollen              
              available in an isolated population will be controlled by                      
              emasculation of all other flowers of one morph and half of the                 
              flowers of the other morph.  This will allow a direct comparison               
              between pollen donation to like and unlike morphs.  As well as                 
              being among the first designed to test the new model, these                    
              experiments contribute to the study of pollination biology.  In                
              addition, the field work will be conducted on a member of a                    
              distylous genus which has received relatively little study, despite            
              its large size and wide distribution.
