Title       : Nonlinearity and Nonergodicity in Finance and Economics: Theory and Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1994      
File        : a9122344

Award Number: 9122344
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $182532             (Estimated)
Investigator: William A. Brock brock@macc.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This grant continues NSF support of a project to integrate                     
              methods of chaos theory and nonlinear dynamics now used in the                 
              natural and physical sciences with econometrics.  The project                  
              does this in a way that develops useful new tools for                          
              macroeconomics and finance.  The strategy for building tools is                
              to stay close to the realities of actual data, actual econometric              
              practice, and the specific economic applications-- giving up                   
              abstract generality in the process.                                            
                                                                                             
              The major part of this grant is concerned with continuing the                  
              development of a methodology for determining the structure of                  
              heterogeneous agent asset pricing models.  This methodology would              
              be used to test for the relative significance of psychological                 
              noise trading versus information-based behavior in financial                   
              markets.  More specifically, the project finds sufficient                      
              conditions so that a combination of the "cross-sectional" ergodic              
              theorem and/or the central limit theorem for weakly dependent                  
              processes coupled with "smart money" traders playing the noise                 
              traders does not wipe out the effect of noise traders in                       
              equilibrium.  The purpose of this line of research is to develop               
              a rigorous theoretical explanation of abrupt changes in financial              
              markets such as stock market crashes.  In order to empirically                 
              test this theory, the GARCH/EGARCH class of estimators are                     
              modified in order to improve consistency with financial data as                
              measured by trading profits tests including both fundamental and               
              technical strategies.  The information set is enlarged to include              
              volume, dividend/earnings, interest rates, psychological and                   
              sociological variables.  The project also completes work begun                 
              under the previous NSF grant on the development of general tests               
              for nonlinearity and the comparison of the size and power                      
              characteristics of these tests with other nonlinearity tests.                  
              Special attention is paid to moment condition requirements and                 
              the goal of a test for chaos where size equals power.
