Title       : Dissertation Research: Evolutionary Ecology of Life History Variation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  1992      
File        : a9122981

Award Number: 9122981
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $8000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard H. Whiteman  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              The occurrence of facultative paedomorphosis in urodeles has been              
              attributed to both abiotic and biotic conditions in a variety of               
              species, with a few researches supporting one or both of these                 
              effects.  However, no previous study has determined the                        
              evolutionary consequences of paedomorphic individuals in terms of              
              lifetime reproductive success.  Determining the reproductive costs             
              and benefits of paedomorphosis is important to understand the                  
              evolution of complex life cycles such as amphibian metamorphosis.              
              In addition, the environmental causes of paedomorphosis in the                 
              proposed study organism, Ambystoma tigrinum nebulsum, are unknown.             
              The goal of the proposed research is to determine the evolutionary             
              consequences and environmental correlates of paedomorphosis in a               
              high-elevation population of this species.  I will investigate                 
              environmental effects on morph type (metamorph or paedomorph) as               
              well as growth rate, survival, and population density by mark and              
              recapture census and measuring several abiotic and biotic                      
              variables.  By observing breeding behavior under both natural and              
              experimental conditions, I will determine the frequency of                     
              interbreeding and male-male competition/mate choice within and                 
              between morphs, as well as determine if morphs differ in                       
              reproductive success.  The influence of larval density on offspring            
              morph type will be determined by rearing offspring at three                    
              densities.
