Title       : Primary and Secondary Productivity of Arctic Marginal Seas: Collaborative
               Research
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1993     
File        : a9122887

Award Number: 9122887
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Polly A. Penhale                        
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151552             (Estimated)
Investigator: Glenn F. Cota   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Tennessee Knoxville
	      404 Andy Holt Tower
	      Knoxville, TN  379960140    865/974-3466

NSF Program : 5211      POLAR BIO & MEDIC ARCTIC RES
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Modeling and empirical measurements suggest that much of the                   
              ocean's margin is net heterotrophic that is utilizing more                     
              organic matter then is produced by photosynthesis.  Seasonally,                
              however, many continental shelves are dominated by autotrophic                 
              processes and may then export organic matter to the ocean's                    
              interior.  This annual cycle of trophic status is largely the                  
              result of an interactive two factor response by bacteria to low                
              temperature and low substrate concentration.  Bacterial isolates               
              from the Arctic Ocean, the Labrador Current, and the subtropical               
              southeastern continental shelf all indicate greatly reduced rates              
              of growth when cultured at their annual minimum temperature and                
              at low substrate concentrations, comparable to those normally                  
              present in seawater.  Little is known, however, about net                      
              metabolism in arctic marine communities.  Bacterial production is              
              very low during the early spring period when most primary                      
              production is within the sea ice, and it is higher in late summer              
              after the open-water phytoplankton bloom, all based on limited                 
              data, also very limited geographically.  This project will result              
              in an extensive concurrent data set on phytoplankton biomass,                  
              bacterial and microzooplankton abundance, nutrient uptake                      
              (nitrate and ammonium), inorganic nutrients, hydrographic                      
              variables, primary production, microbial secondary production,                 
              and microbial respiration in the Arctic Ocean.  Knowledge of the               
              autotrophy-heterotrophy status of the arctic will be an important              
              consideration for modeling the global carbon cycle and for                     
              predicting the effects of global climate change, as well as for                
              understanding and modeling polar food webs.
