Title       : Computation and Operational Properties of Nonparametric Shape-Restricted
               Estimators
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 19,  1993    
File        : a9122294

Award Number: 9122294
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : July 31,  1995       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $102143             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rosa L. Matzkin   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                     Estimation and testing methods that require parametric                 
              assumptions about the functions in the models being studied have               
              the important drawback that they may yield erroneous results when              
              the parametric restrictions imposed are incorrect.  Recently,                  
              several estimation and testing techniques have been developed that,            
              instead of specifying parametric structures, specify nonparametric             
              restrictions about the functions in the models.  Typical                       
              restrictions used are concavity, monotonicity, and homogenity of               
              degree one, which are properties that economic theory often implies            
              about the shape of utility, production, profit, and cost functions.            
              Using presently available algorithms to estimate and test                      
              nonparametric functions that satisfy shape restrictions requires               
              more computer memory and CPU time than is available to most                    
              researchers.  The major contribution of this project comes from                
              developing algorithms for nonparametric estimating and testing that            
              are within most applied researchers' reach.                                    
                                                                                             
                      This project develops an algorithm that will make it possible          
              (1) to estimate utility, production, profit, and cost functions,               
              without imposing any parametric structure on these functions, and              
              (2) to test whether imperfect data are consistent with a particular            
              economic hypothesis, such as a minimization or maximization                    
              hypothesis.  More generally, the new algorithm will allow                      
              estimation of nonparametric shape-restricted functions and tests               
              of the hypothesis that a regression function belongs to a                      
              particular family of nonparametric functions.  The algorithm will              
              be used with actual and simulated data to study the operational                
              properties of nonparametric methods, to compare the performance of             
              nonparametric methods with that of their parametric counterparts,              
              and to uncover features of estimated functions that could not have             
              been discovered previously using parametric methods.
