Title       : Modelling Unobservable Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 24,  1992      
File        : a9122481

Award Number: 9122481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James H. Blackman                       
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $113283             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cheng Hsiao chsiao@usc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Southern California
	      University Park
	      Los Angeles, CA  900891147    213/740-2934

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
              89        Social Sciences NEC                     
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Models containing unobservable variables arise very                       
              often in economics,  psychology,  and other social sciences.                   
              They may arise because of measurement errors,  or because                      
              behavioral responses are in part determined by unobservable                    
              characteristics of agents.  To obtain meaningful statistical                   
              inferences for models containing unobservable variables                        
              requires either the expansion of existing data bases together                  
              with more precise measurements of variables of interest or                     
              the development of analytical frameworks to extract                            
              information from currently available data sources.                             
                   The aim of this project is to continue developing                         
              analytical frameworks to enhance the reliability and validity                  
              of Federal statistical data. Attention is directed to cases                    
              where the use of latent variable models by researchers                         
              appears appropriate because of measurement errors,  or                         
              because of the lack of measurable counterparts for the                         
              conceptual variables. The investigation centers on three                       
              issues (i) categorical or grouped data,  (ii)  the hedonic                     
              approach to demand analysis, and (iii)  modelling unobserved                   
              heterogeneity in panel data analysis.  The overall objective                   
              is to refine the methodology to establish empirically valid                    
              inferences.                                                                    
                   Professor Hsiao's research on modelling unobservable                      
              variables has been very fruitful.  While his analytical                        
              approach,  often requires the imposition of hypothetical                       
              assumptions,  he has shown that it can yield useful                            
              information when properly conducted.  Not only does the                        
              approach provide a means to take advantage of information                      
              that might otherwise be misused or totally ignored,  it also                   
              can accomplish this desirable goal at relatively low cost.
