Title       : Reinforcement-Based Models of Delayed Matching-to-Sample Performance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 24,  1994     
File        : a9122395

Award Number: 9122395
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George W. Uetz                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : March 31,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196536             (Estimated)
Investigator: John T. Wixted   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1160      ANIMAL BEHAVIOR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Dr. Wixted's research is designed to enhance our understanding of              
              the principles that govern animal memory.  If successful, the                  
              results may help to solve the far more complex puzzle of how                   
              memory operates, and sometimes goes awry, in humans.  The basic                
              procedure used throughout these experiments involves presenting a              
              series of trials, during each of which a color (e.g., red) is                  
              shown to a pigeon in a center window for a few seconds, the color              
              is removed for a period of time, and then the pigeon is given a                
              choice between two colors (red vs. green) in two side windows.  A              
              response to the matching color (in this case, red) is rewarded                 
              with food while a response to the nonmatching color simply ends                
              the trial.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              Dr. Wixted will carry out three sets of experiments that address               
              different, but related, issues.  The first set is concerned with               
              the question of how short-term and long-term memory compete to                 
              determine the pigeon's choice on a given trial.  More                          
              specifically, the choice between red and green may involve a                   
              competition between short-term memory for the previous color                   
              (red) and long-term memory for the choice color that generally                 
              provides the greater number of rewards.  The second set of                     
              experiments is concerned with identifying the psychological                    
              variables that cause a stimulus to become more (or less)                       
              memorable.  The principle under investigation holds that a                     
              stimulus associated with a short delay to a biologically                       
              significant event (e.g., food) is more memorable than one                      
              associated with a long delay.  Finally, the third set of                       
              experiments investigates the variables that influence memory for               
              nonoccurrence.  That is, under what conditions will an animal                  
              remember that no stimulus appeared in the center window on a                   
              particular trial?  Together, the results of these experiments                  
              will help to identify the principles that underlie animal and,                 
              ultimately perhaps, human memory.
