Title       : Inference and Macroeconomic Dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 28,  1992     
File        : a9122355

Award Number: 9122355
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : February 29,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228539             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christopher A. Sims   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              82        Economics                               
Program Ref : 9278,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project aims at improving our ability to understand, predict              
              and control macroeconomic developments at the national and                     
              international level.  Long term trend movements in the economy,                
              at time scales exceeding the span of data we have available,                   
              raise special problems for inference that are just beginning to                
              be addressed by econometricians.  This project will develop ideas              
              for approaching these problems in a Bayesian framework -- making               
              explicit the separate contributions of the data and of                         
              information from other sources (prior beliefs) to knowledge of                 
              long term dynamic behavior.  A special emphasis will be on                     
              extending the recent results in this area for univariate models                
              to more practically relevant multivariate models.                              
                                                                                             
              There is disagreement among macroeconomists on the importance of               
              monetary policy and other forms of aggregate nominal demand                    
              management in generating or offsetting business cycles.                        
              Increasing our understanding in this area is important not only                
              for improving demand management policy, but also in guiding the                
              restructuring our banking system is undergoing.  The                           
              international facts about relations among the main macroeconomics              
              aggregates are only beginning to be documented and understood.                 
              Patterns of responses to innovations (surprise changes) in                     
              monetary variables appear in preliminary work surprisingly robust              
              across countries, time periods, and lists of variables included                
              in the system.  This research will document these regularities.                
              These regularities present difficulties for simple standard                    
              theories.  For example, Keynesian or monetarist theories view                  
              monetary policy as a major independent influence on the business               
              cycle.  Real business cycle theories treat it as passive and                   
              unimportant because of the smooth dynamic functioning of product               
              and asset markets.  This research will explore possible                        
              interpretations of the regularities, using several kinds of new                
              and recently developed modeling strategies.
