Title       : Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Olfaction in Drosphila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1994     
File        : a9122097

Award Number: 9122097
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 15,  1992     
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300072             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen L. Helfand SHelfand@neuron.uchc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Conn Health Center
	      263 Farmington Ave.
	      Farmington, CT  060302806    860/679-3173

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Understanding the development and functional organization of the               
              nervous system has emerged as one of the fundamental issues in                 
              modern biomedical science.  The olfactory system which subserves               
              the sense of smell is as an excellent model for studying these                 
              issues and others which are unique to this sensory system.                     
                                                                                             
              How the olfactory system functions; how is assembled during                    
              development; how it is maintained throughout the life of the                   
              organism; and how it contributes to survival through its effect                
              on an organism's behavior are major objectives. In particular,                 
              the three central problems of olfaction are the molecular and                  
              cellular mechanisms of how we are able to detect and discriminate              
              such a vast number of different odorants, how this information is              
              encoded so that it is able to be interpreted by the brain, and                 
              how genes determine the assembly and maintenance of the olfactory              
              system.  These studies involve isolating and characterizing genes              
              that are important in the functioning of the olfactory system                  
              using the experimentally manipulable animal model, the fruit fly,              
              Drosophila melanogaster. One of the genes, called pentagon, when               
              disrupted leads to a specific defect in the animal's ability to                
              respond to the odorant benzaldehyde (oil of almond), while                     
              preserving the response to a number of other odorants.  The                    
              specificity of this defect suggests that the pentagon gene is                  
              responsible for making a molecule that may be essential in the                 
              initial reception of processing of odorants.  By employing a                   
              multidisciplinary approach which includes behavioral studies, in               
              conjunction with molecular and genetic studies, the pentagon                   
              molecule, is isolated and its role in the functioning of the                   
              olfactory system is determined.  This should provide important                 
              insights into how the sense of smell works and help to explain                 
              one of the major paradoxes of the sense of smell which is: Why do              
              some odorants the appear to be virtually identical, chemically,                
              smell completely different, while odorants with little in common               
              chemically may smell the same.
