Title       : Resource Dilemmas: Simultaneous and Sequential Requests
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  1994      
File        : a9122686

Award Number: 9122686
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Jonathan W. Leland                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155482             (Estimated)
Investigator: Amnon Rapoport amnon@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              David V. Budescu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ramzi Suleiman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
              72        Psychology Social Aspects               
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project examines a class of social dilemmas in which groups               
              of players are asked to share a resource pool whose size is not                
              known.  Rather, the size is sampled randomly from a probability                
              distribution which is common knowledge.  Each member of the group              
              requests a share of the resource; individual requests are granted              
              only if the total group request does not exceed x.  Experimental               
              evidence shows that as the uncertainty about the resource size                 
              increases, people increase their requests thereby increasing the               
              probability that their requests will be denied.                                
                                                                                             
              Six experiments will be conducted to study several variables of                
              interest in such situations including the amount of uncertainty                
              about the resource, the number of iterations (possible requests                
              from one individual), the value of public and secret information,              
              and speed of feedback concerning individual requests.  Several                 
              situation protocols will be considered.  Under one protocol                    
              requests are made independently and simultaneously, under a                    
              second protocol requests are made sequentially, and under third                
              protocol only chronological information is provided.  The                      
              experiments are driven by game theoretical models describing                   
              equilibrium solutions and psychological models involving the                   
              concept of focal points.                                                       
                                                                                             
              This award is to be supplemented under the Research Experiences for            
              Undergraduates (REU) Program.  This project provides a variety of              
              excellent research opportunities for for undergraduate students.               
              There are several components of the research where undergraduates              
              have an opportunity to contribute to the project and to work                   
              closely with the principal investigator.  Specifically, two                    
              undergraduate students will be supported.  These students will be              
              involved in design, conduct, and analysis of a series of                       
              experiments.  The integration of students into all phases of the               
              project should be of significant benefit to the students as they               
              plan career goals.
