Title       : US-Poland Jt. Fund Materials Research on Properties of Semiconductor
               Superlattices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1992      
File        : a9122878

Award Number: 9122878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra Turczak                       
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1992    
Expires     : January 1,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: Czeslaw Jedrzejek   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Jagiellonian University
	      
	      Krakow, PL  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 5933      US-POLAND MARIE CURRIE JNT FND
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              In this project, Dr. Czeslaw Jedrzejek of the                                  
              Institute of the Jagiellonian University,                                      
              Krakow, Poland, will cooperate with Dr. Wiley                                  
              P. Kirk of Texas A&M University under the U.S.-                                
              Poland Marie Sklodowska-Curie Joint Fund to                                    
              research "Transport and Structure Properties of                                
              Semiconductor Superlattices."  The researchers                                 
              propose experimental and theoretical studies of                                
              GaAs/AlxGa1-xAs superlattices and GaAs structures                              
              grown on silicon.  In addition to the theory of                                
              magnetoconductivity, they will do theoretical                                  
              studies of GaAs and CaF2 epitaxial growth on                                   
              silicon, and a calculation of the diagonal                                     
              conductivity for a strictly 2D system and the                                  
              Hall conductivity for a superlattice in the                                    
              quantum Hall regime.                                                           
                                                                                             
              This project in physics fulfills the program                                   
              objectives of advancing scientific knowledge by                                
              enabling leading experts in the U.S. and Poland                                
              to combine complementary efforts and                                           
              capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest                                
              and competence on the basis of equality,                                       
              reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.
