Title       : Relocation, Curation and Improvement of the VIMS Fish Collection
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1992    
File        : a9122585

Award Number: 9122585
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149955             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Musick jmusick@vims.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John E. Olney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William & Mary Marine Inst
	      P.O. Box 1346
	      Gloucester Point, VA  230621346    804/642-7334

NSF Program : 1197      BIOLOGICAL RESEARCH COLLECTION
Fld Applictn: 0208000   Water Resources                         
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1129,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The fish collection housed at the Virginia Institute of Marine                 
              Science of the College of William and Mary provides an important               
              resource for taxonomic, systematic and ecological investigations of            
              freshwater, estuarine and marine fishes.  The uniqueness of the                
              collection is in part due to its historical significance as well as            
              a close coupling with a strong graduate program in ichthyology.  The           
              collection has internationally recognized holdings of Chesapeake               
              Bay, middle Atlantic Bight and deep-water marine fishes, as well as            
              freshwater fishes of the southern Appalachians.  These collections             
              have provided the basis for numerous graduate research projects and            
              investigations by systematists from many institutions.  In addition,           
              rapidly expanding collections of early life history stages of fishes           
              from Chesapeake Bay, middle Atlantic Bight and Caribbean localities            
              offer an important and unique source of material for ontogenetic               
              studies.  The utility of the fish collection has been limited by               
              a lack of space to store and efficiently work with speciments, and             
              the lack of a curatorial staff to manage it properly.  Funds have              
              been committed for the construction of a new building to house the             
              the fish collection permanently.  This project will assist in complet-         
              ing storage capabilities of the new building and in relocating and             
              curating the collection.  Completion of the project will                       
              dramatically enhance this systematic resource and contribute to its            
              long term preservation.  The principal investigators for this work             
              are excellent.  The facilities and working environment provided by             
              the institution will be conducive to successful completion of the              
              efforts.  The product of the work will provide an enduring and                 
              valuable resource for basic biological research as well as for                 
              efforts in conservation biology and fishery management.
