Title       : Oklahoma EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 15,  2002   
File        : a9720651

Award Number: 9720651
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Fae L. Korsmo                           
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : April 30,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Waxman   (Principal Investigator current)
              T.H. Lee Williams  (Principal Investigator former)
              Nancy P. Dixon  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Oklahoma State University
	      
	      Stillwater, OK  74078    405/744-5000

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720651  Williams  The EPSCoR program has served as a major stimulus to
              improvements in  the competitiveness of Oklahoma researchers and the status of 
              university science and technology research in Oklahoma.  The state and  the
              three comprehensive universities (The University of Oklahoma and  its Health
              Sciences Center, Oklahoma State University, and The  University of Tulsa) have
              demonstrated a commitment to develop their  research bases and to improve the
              quality of their science,  mathematics, and engineering research.  Oklahoma
              EPSCoR  will focus on  three Science and Technology Centers:  the Oklahoma
              Biotechnology  Network; the Center for Environmental Applications of the
              Oklahoma  Mesonet; and the Center for Photonic and Electronic Materials and 
              Devices.  The Oklahoma Biotechnology Network will stress technical  support for
              core facilities, technical workshops as a primary outreach  mechanism, and
              selected new initiatives in bioinformatics, mass  spectrometry, and DNA chip
              technology.  The Center for Environmental  Applications of the Oklahoma
              Mesonet, a network of 114 automated  environmental monitoring sites across
              Oklahoma that relay data via  radio links to a central location, will stress
              accessibility and  usability of Mesonet data, add Mesonet stations and sensors
              around the  Norman Landfill, and will develop an aerobiology sensor network in 
              western Oklahoma.  The Center for Photonic and Electronic Materials  and
              Devices will stress pre-competitive applied research projects to  establish
              linkages with private sector companies and will provide  support to research
              facilities and for selected equipment upgrades.   The goal of the Cooperative
              Agreement is to make the three Centers  self-sufficient and to graduate them
              from EPSCoR support by the end of  the award period. This will be accomplished
              by providing support to  the underlying research infrastructure in the Centers,
              through  selective funding for new initiatives, and through support for 
              research outreach and project developme nt. These initiatives will be  directed
              towards securing non-EPSCoR support for the research projects  and research
              infrastructure from federal, state, institution, and  private sources.  A
              co-funding initiative in high capacity computer  networking will support
              ongoing efforts and new initiatives to expand  Oklahoma's capabilities in
              networking.  The Centers and Network goals  are complemented by: support for
              research outreach and proposal  development; technology showcases to bring
              together university  researchers and the private sector; programs to promote
              public and  legislative awareness of university research; a new Faculty Fellows
               program for senior research faculty to interact with state leaders;  and,
              human resources programs including two Women in Science  conferences and an
              entrepreneurship program.
