Title       : Knowledge Based Action Planning and Control Problems in Engineering and Biology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9720357

Award Number: 9720357
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $706400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bijoy K. Ghosh ghosh@netra.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clyde F. Martin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Philip S. Ulinski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Alberto Isidori  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wijesuriya P. Dayawansa  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,6856,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                  9753096   PI : Broadbridge  Institution : Trinity College   
              Microstructural, Optical and Electrical Properties of Thin Film Silica Aerogels
              as a Function of Processing Method    Silica aerogels, prepared by sol-gel
              processing, are highly porous (typically > 75%) materials with unique
              morphology, resulting in exceptional thermal, acoustic, mechanical and
              electrical properties.  While bulk aerogels have been studied extensively, thin
              film aerogels  have not been studied to any significant extent, and promise
              significant impact in a number of electrical and thermal applications.  In this
              study, Prof. Broadbridge will focus on the application of thin-film silica
              aerogels as low-k interlayer dielectrics with potential utilisation in
              intergrated circuit technology.  The PI will engage in a collaborative research
              endeavor at Trinity College and Brown University.  Funding provided will impact
              students at Trinity College, exposing undergraduates to the challenges of
              state-of-the-art engineering research endeavors.  This funding is also expected
              to provide Dr. Broadbridge with opportunity to forge a long-lasting research
              relationship with Brown University, thereby allowing her to establish a
              significant integrated research and education program.    This project is being
              funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS) Initiative, with
              funds partially provided by the MPS/OMA office.
