Title       : The Living Curriculum Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1997 
File        : a9720423

Award Number: 9720423
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $495777             (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Gomez l-gomez@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy D. Pea  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel C. Edelson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Spillane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
                9720423  Gomez    The Living Curriculum Project (LCP) seeks to address the
              problems posed by the enactment of reform in local school communities. In
              particular, it responds to the problem of implementation. Reformers have
              recognized that curricular innovations are "brittle" they are interpreted as
              rigid prescriptions, and are thus likely to break when implemented in local
              contexts. Brittleness arises from a faulty design model which holds that once
              designed correctly, innovations can be adopted by teachers as-is . The goal of
              LCP is to make flexible curricula which stand up to indeed are improved by the
              process of local adaptation.  The contents of the curriculum are living in that
              they are subject to growth and adaptation. School communities will not simply
              "implement" the curriculum in LCP, they will interact with materials, change
              them to fit context, document those changes for others' uses, and contribute
              their own content to the evolving curriculum database. LCP seeks to engage
              school communities in reflective learning and sharing about practice through
              the enactment, adaptation, and redesign of curricular materials. We will begin
              with four reform-oriented, Internet-based science curricula developed by the
              NSF-funded CoVis Project and develop two new units for our research and
              development concerning the "living curriculum" concept.  Work on LCP will begin
              with an examination of local capacity to enact reform curricula such as those
              of the CoVis Project. We begin with the view that local capacity to enact
              reform is a function of a school community's ability to act as a learning
              organization. To reform is to learn, for at the heart of reform lies change,
              and at the heart of change lies learning. The goal of our initial work on LCP
              will thus be to understand how school communities build capacity for reform.
              Then, based on that understanding, we will design an information architecture
              which presents curricula to school communities as artifacts around which they
              can reflect and learn. Our conj ecture is that curricula should be presented to
              school communities as opportunities to learn through enactment, reflection, and
              adaptation. Through this process school communities can learn about the reform
              and build practice suited to their local needs.  We believe that a key resource
              for learning through curriculum enactment is design ratior~ effective
              communication of the rationale that underlies a curriculum's design. LCP will
              emphasize making the design rationale of curriculum apparent to school
              communities. We conjecture that design rationale will provide school
              communities with substance around which to reflect, and enable them to develop
              a generative perspective for local use. As they enact curriculum, they will be
              provided with opportunity to reflect upon, discuss and learn about the design
              rationale of the curriculum. Such understanding should help school communities
              to tailor curricula in useful ways. If they understand the principles of the
              design, their ability to adapt the curricula in ways consistent with the spirit
              of that design will be enhanced.  Built on an understanding of capacity
              building and incorporating design rationale, we will create the Learning
              Communities Knowledge Resource (LCKR); a technological infrastructure around
              which living curricula can be built and through which school communities can
              reflect, learn, and co-construct local practice. LCKR is a curriculum
              media-base of multimedia information indexed around task models of end users.
              Teachers might interact with it around the collection of resources for
              classroom instruction, while administrators interact with it to learning how to
              evaluate teaching practice in project-based classrooms, and parents interact
              with it to understand what their students do in school. The LCKR should provide
              a space for the range of constituents in school communities to interact and
              reflect practice.  The path described for the research and development of the
              capacity framework, as well as flexible curricula with readily accessible 
              design rationale provided to school communities through LCKR will enable us to
              produce truly generative living curricula. Living curricula will be flexibly
              designed to help school communities become co-designers of classroom practice.
              They will adapt and grow through enactment in variable contexts.
