Title       : Idaho EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 17,  2002      
File        : a9720634

Award Number: 9720634
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Martha L. James                         
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3200000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean'ne M. Shreeve jshreeve@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720634     Shreeve  EPSCoR involves Idaho's three universities - University of
              Idaho (UI),  Idaho State University (ISU), and Boise State University (BSU) -
              as  well as all other two and four year institutions in the state working  in
              the research areas of molecular ecology and environmental science  and
              engineering. Project funds will be directed to the research areas  under this
              broad umbrella which have been carefully nurtured and which  will continue to
              be strengthened.  A portion of EPSCoR funds will be  allocated on a competitive
              basis to junior faculty who direct research  in these focus areas of importance
              to Idaho and its research  universities.  Funds will also be used specifically
              to increase the  long-term productivity of Idaho's young research faculty by
              improving  the research tools and human talent available to them for furthering
               their ongoing investigations.  In some instances, this improvement  will be
              achieved by providing startup funds to our newest, tenure  track faculty for
              research program initiation.  In addition, multiuser  instruments that will
              improve the research capabilities of several  investigators or of
              multidisciplinary faculty research teams will be  purchased. A significant
              portion of the available funds will be  reserved to support individual
              researchers including faculty  development positions at Idaho State University
              and Boise State  University that will allow newer, less experienced faculty to
              gain  sufficient research expertise to increase their confidence and their 
              ability to compete.  A least one new joint (UI/ISU) professorship at  the Idaho
              Falls campus will be created.  A competitive seed grant  program to stimulate
              new initiatives by beginning investigators and  undergraduate research
              experience programs to provide top quality  Idaho undergraduates the
              opportunity to work with university  researchers will also be conducted as will
              programs for high quality  undergraduate women and minority students.
