Title       : POWRE: The Measurement of Eye Movements During Sentence Comprehension
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9720473

Award Number: 9720473
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : March 31,  1999      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Julie E. Boland   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1311,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This grant allows the investigator to purchase a system for monitoring
              eye-movements during reading, and to conduct three experiments on sentence
              comprehension.  When people read, their eyes jump from one fixation point to
              the next rather than moving smoothly across the page.  The eye-movement
              monitoring system measures the duration and position of each fixation, as well
              as the direction and length of the jump (saccade).  Eye-tracking is widely
              regarding as the premier measure of processing load during initial syntactic
              processing (in the visual modality) for two reasons.  First, it is a
              naturalistic task that does not interrupt the natural rate of reading nor
              introduce any secondary task.  Second, it yields a multi-dimensional record of
              processing load.  The project is designed to further research on sentence
              comprehension in two ways.  First, it is a study in converging methods.  The
              experiments compare eye movements with several other experimental paradigms,
              some of which are quite new.  These include an on-line sensibility judgment
              task, a cross-modal integration paradigm in which some parts of the sentence
              are presented auditorally and some parts are presented visually, and the
              measurement of event-related potentials using scalp electrodes.  A second goal
              is to identify the range of processing phenomena to which eye-tracking data are
              sensitive, and to determine whether first pass fixations, regressions (backward
              eye movements), and second pass fixations are all indicative of the same
              aspects of processing.  This POWRE award serves professional goals of the
              investigator-adding an eye-tracking system to her lab will enable her to
              explore a new research area and increase the range of experimental
              methodologies at her disposal.  Much of the best work in the field is done
              using the eye movement methodology.  The ability to collect data under this
              paradigm will greatly enhance the investigator's research activities, making it
              easier to publish new research, obtain extramural funding, and compare her own
              research to that of the best researchers in the field.                         
                                   ? ?Á?/?¥_Á>¥ />? ¥? ©Á? >Á?%` ?©?¢Á> Â?Á%?                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                        
