Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Animated Pedagogical Agents for Constructivist
               Learning Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 9,  1997  
File        : a9720395

Award Number: 9720395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $600472             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Lester lester@adm.csc.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hiller A. Spires  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard E. Mayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sharolyn A. Converse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Patrick J. Fitzgerald  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720395    Lester, James C.  North Carolina State University    Learning and
              Intelligent Systems:  Animated Pedagogical Agent for Constructivist Learning
              Environments    Constructivist learning environments facilitate discovery-based
              learning through creative problem-solving experiences.  To do so, they should
              provide scaffolding in the form of highly contextualized problem-solving advice
              that is customized to each learner.  Perhaps the most intriguing vehicle for
              providing such dynamically individualized scaffolding is the technology of
              animated pedagogical agents.  Featured prominently in learning environments,
              they couple key feedback functionalities with a strong, lifelike visual
              presence.    The objectives of the proposed research are two-fold:(1)Creating a
              new generation of intelligent constructivist learning environments with
              animated pedagogical agents; and(2)Providing a comprehensive, data-rich account
              of the cognitive processes and results of interacting with constructivist
              learning environments with animated pedagogical agents.  Employing a broad
              array of quantitative and qualitative measure of learning, the large
              multidisciplinary research team is working closely with students and teachers
              in a local school system to conduct extensive empirical studies of learners'
              interactions with these environments.    This work makes significant
              contributions to the growing body of research that blends technology,cognitive
              science,and learning and teaching. First,it creates a rich constructivist frame
              work for learning-by-designing that couples exploratory learning with strong
              scaffolded support. Second, by focusing on analyses of the cognitive changes
              that learners undergo,it identifies precisely which technologies and conditions
              contribute most to effective learning.Third, because it employs a participatory
              design process that facilitates the technology's incorporation into school
              settings in authentic ways,it is expected that it will have a direct and
              significant impact on classroom experience  well into the 21st century.
