Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Center for Innovative Learning Technologies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2000     
File        : a9720384

Award Number: 9720384
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5800000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Roy D. Pea   (Principal Investigator current)
              Marcia C. Linn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Barbara Means  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert F. Tinker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Bransford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SRI International
	      333 Ravenswood Avenue
	      Menlo Park, CA  940253493    650/859-3571

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720384    SRI International  Roy D. Pea    Learning and Intelligent Systems:
              Center for Innovative Learning Technologies    The Center for Innovative
              Technologies (CILT) stimulates the development and implementation of important,
              technology-enabled solutions to critical problems in K-14 science, mathematics,
              engineering, and technology learning.  Four institutions-SRI International; the
              University of California at Berkeley; Vanderbilt University; and the Concord
              Consortium-provide Center leadership and infrastructure.  "Theme teams" conduct
              the Center's research, development, and implementation activities. 
              Participants drawn both from the founding organizations and from elsewhere will
              represent the best possible mix of expertise.  Theme teams will include
              computer scientists and engineers; experts in science, mathematics and
              engineering instruction, policy, and research; and industry leaders. 
              Participants will work together in national workshops and on-line discussions
              to review their research results, identify critical challenges and potential
              breakthroughs in their theme area, and select prototype collaborative projects
              for CILT sponsorship.  These prototype projects serve as"seed" efforts that,can
              transform the use of learning technologies in education.    The Center's
              initial themes are Virtual Learning Communities; Visualization and Modeling;
              Low-Cost, Ubiquitous Computing; and Assessment.  CILT provides the
              infrastructure for synthesizing learning technology R&D and implementation
              lessons across projects, stimulating multidisciplinary collaboration and rapid
              innovation, and fostering communication among technology supports for
              mathematics and science learning.  CILT will train postdoctoral scholars from
              multiple disciplines to lead the field of learning technologies in the future.
