Title       : POWRE: Optimization and Characterization of Chloroplast Translation In Vitro
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2000     
File        : a9720444

Award Number: 9720444
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : February 15,  1998  
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74939              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret J. Hollingsworth hollings@ubunix.acsu.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1592,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9720444  Hollingsworth    Regulation at the translational level is a key contol
              point in the expression of many choroplast genes. Such regulation is typically
              mediated through RNA-protein interactions at the 5' untranslated region of an
              mRNA. This laboratory has previously shown that specific RNA-protein
              interactions occur at the 5' untranslated regions of chloroplast-encoded ATP
              synthase genes. Proposals to analyze the effects of these interactions on
              translation in vitro have been stymied by reviewers' concerns about the
              technical challenges present by chloroplast translation extracts. The goal of
              this research is to answer those concerns by analyzing and optimizing a
              recently reported protocol for preparing chloroplast translation extracts. The
              project has two primary objectives: The first objective is to optimize the
              translation assay to expand the repertoire of transcripts that can be
              efficiently translated. Two transcripts with several orders of magnitude
              difference in translation efficiencies in vitro will be used as substrates for
              these experiments. Analysis of the effects of cis-acting sequences on
              translation will be initiated using chimerics of the two original substrates.
              The second objective of this research is to expand the applicability of the
              extract preparation of protocol. Experiments will be performed to expand the
              protocol from chloroplasts of tobacco to chloroplasts from other
              research-intensive species, including spinach and Arabidopsis.    This project
              will be supported through the POWRE program. It will determine the feasibility
              of a new line of inquiry that should expand the applicability of the in vitro
              chloroplast translation to inquiries examining translational regulation of
              chloroplast-encoded ATPase genes.    %%%  This project examines the regulation
              of protein synthesis in chloroplasts by using an experimental system in which
              an RNA transcript from a specific chloroplast gene is added to an extract from
              tobacco chloroplasts. The RNA is used as a template for protei n synthesis.
              This allows features of the RNA that might affect the efficiency or regulation 
              of chloroplast protein synthesis to be studied.
