Title       : POWRE: Mathematical Models for Host-Parasite Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9720558

Award Number: 9720558
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : July 31,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhilan Feng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work is funded through the Professional Opportunities for  Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program as a  Research/Educational Enhancement
              Project.    This proposal concerns with  both research and educational 
              activities in mathematical biology. The research project focuses  on the use of
              differential equations and dynamical systems theory   to study the role of
              heterogeneity on the dynamics of infectious  diseases and host-parasite
              interactions.  Two particular  host-parasite systems are used: the
              human-tuberculosis   (microparasitic) and the  human-schistosome-snail 
              (macroparasitic) to highlight the generality of our approaches  in the study of
              host-parasite interactions. This project will  look at:    the impact that the
              host heterogeneity in infectivity has on the  coexistence and coevolution of 
              competing strains of TB --  regular TB and  drug resistant TB strains; the
              effect that the   long and variable latency period of TB has on the evolution
              of  parasite virulence;  and to study how control programs of  macroparasites
              (schistosomiasis) affect parasite genetic  diversity.    In spite of the long
              and lasting connection among many fields of  mathematics and biology, few
              students have sufficient training to  work effectively at the interface of
              these fields. The  educational project centers on introducing courses in 
              mathematical biology at both undergraduate and graduate levels at  my home
              institution. Such courses are currently non-existent at  Purdue University.
              This project consists of developing curricula  for the two courses, preparing
              lecture notes and designing  research projects suitable for Purdue students, as
              well as   teaching these courses.  Both courses will be designed for  students
              majoring in either mathematics or biology. The goal of  these educational
              activities is to give students  experience in  interdisciplinary studies, as
              well as in mathematical biology,  thus strengthening their backgrounds and
              making them more  versatile for employment.    This award  is funded through
              the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary  Activities (OMA).
