Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Developmental Motor Control in Real and
               Artificial Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 12,  1997 
File        : a9720345

Award Number: 9720345
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $624051             (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil E. Berthier berthier@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Barto  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rachel K. Clifton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard S. Sutton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 6856,8888,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
              initiative. A key aim of this initiative is to understand how highly complex
              intelligent systems could arise from simple initial knowledge through
              interactions with the environment. The best real-world example of such a system
              is the human infant who progresses from relatively simple abilities at birth to
              quite sophisticated abilities by two-years-of-age. This research focuses on the
              development of reaching by infants because (a) only rudimentary reaching
              ability is present at birth; (b) older infants use their arms in a
              sophisticated way to exploit and explore the world; and (c) the problems facing
              the infant are similar to those an artificial system would face. The project
              brings together two computer scientists who are experts on learning control
              algorithms and neural networks, and two psychologists who are experts on the
              behavioral and neural aspects of infant reaching, to investigate and test
              various algorithms by which infants might gain control over their arms. The
              proposed research focuses on the control strategies that infants use in
              executing reaches, how infants develop appropriate and adaptive modes of
              reaching, the mechanisms by which infants improve their ability to reach with
              age, the role of sensory information in controlling the reach, and how such
              knowledge might be stored in psychologically appropriate and computationally
              powerful ways. Preliminary results suggest that computational models that are
              appropriate for modeling the development of human reaching are different in
              significant ways from traditional computational models. Understanding the
              mechanisms by which intelligence can develop through learning can have
              significant impact in many scientific and engineering domains because the
              ability to build such systems would be simpler and faster than engineering a
              system with the intelligence specified by the engineer and because systems
              based on interactive learning could rapidly adapt to changing environmental
              conditions.                                                                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                  
