Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: A Next-Generation Intelligent Learning
               Environment for Statistical Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 5,  1998     
File        : a9720354

Award Number: 9720354
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Larry E. Suter                          
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $698404             (Estimated)
Investigator: Marsha C. Lovett lovett@cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Kass  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brian W. Junker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael M. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joel B. Greenhouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720354  Lovett     This project is being funded by the Learning and Intelligent
              Systems (LIS) Initiative, including support from the Office of
              Multidisciplinary Activities of the Directorate for Mathematics and Physical
              Sciences.  This project will develop the three core components of an
              innovative, intelligent learning environment for teaching statistical
              reasoning.  It is aimed at directly facilitating students' ability to transfer
              what they have learned to situations outside the original learning context. 
              The three components are (1) a computer interface that helps students develop a
              general understanding, (2) a detailed specification of the knowledge required
              to apply statistical reasoning effectively, and (3) new computational and
              statistical techniques for assessing the accuracy and generality of students'
              knowledge and then generating appropriate remediation.  This project entails a
              unique collaboration among cognitive psychologists, statisticians, and computer
              scientists.    This project will lead to fundamental advances on several
              fronts. First, the interface provides a new learning tool that will be used by
              every humanities and social sciences student at Carnegie Mellon University and
              will be disseminated to other colleges.  Second, because the interface is
              designed to apply the principles revealed by recent cognitive psychology
              research, it offers a test of these principles' effectiveness in practice. 
              Third, developing a detailed specification of the knowledge required for
              statistical reasoning will yield new insights that can inform statistics
              instruction and cognitive theories.  Fourth, the techniques for assessing
              students' knowledge develop new ways of using the information recorded by
              computerized learning environments.  Fifth, the rich data collected on
              students' transfer throughout this project will lead to a deeper understanding
              of how, when, and why transfer occurs.  Statistical reasoning is the domain for
              this project because (a) effective transfer is critical here--stude nts must
              apply the skills they have learned across a wide range of issues and content
              areas, and (b) students often have great difficulty transferring these skills.
