Title       : POWRE: The Hazardousness of Place: Modeling Risk Vulnerability
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 15,  1997 
File        : a9720541

Award Number: 9720541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Burrell E. Montz bmontz@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1397,1474,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With rare exceptions, hazards research has focused primarily on individual
              hazards at particular locations, an approach that does not fully explain the
              risks that exist in an area.  This project is aimed at moving away from these
              single hazard analyses to a multiple hazard perspective that looks at the
              hazardousness of a place.  Such a perspective will include both linked and
              independent events and will serve to develop an approach based on: 1) an
              examination of the functional relationships that best represent the linkages
              and probabilities of events; and 2) an examination of the functional
              relationships between probability of occurrence and levels of vulnerability as
              they are manifested through damage/loss potentials for discrete areas.  Using
              Tampa Bay, Florida as the research area, data on the spatial extent of events,
              variables on the physical and built environments, as well as social
              characteristics, will be incorporated in a GIS-based model.  Once these data
              are geocoded, models from the literature will be adapted to evaluate
              independent and linked events and to define variations in vulnerability. 
              Specifically, analysis will center on calibrating, testing, and refining these
              models using an integrated assessment approach with embedded submodels,
              influence diagrams, and functional dependencies drawn from the literature, from
              existing models, and from known relationships.  Because of the nature of
              hazards data, sensitivity analyses will be undertaken to determine which
              variables contribute most to the uncertainty inherent in the models.  This
              research breaks new ground by incorporating into the analysis of hazardousness
              those events that are linked to other events and the probability of occurrence
              of one or more events.  As such, this exploratory methodological effort
              represents an important advance in our ability to model the relationships among
              and between hazards.  This POWRE award makes it possible for the investigator
              to build on earlier research that dealt with development and testing of a
              methodology for determining the composite probability of occurrence of several
              independent hazards in a community.  At that time, linked hazards were
              considered conceptually, but there was insufficient time to develop that strand
              of research because of its exploratory nature.  Work by the investigator since
              then has indicated that this line of inquiry holds promise, but a concentrated
              effort is required to carry it out.  This award makes it possible for her to
              move ahead.  The investigator will be developing her technical expertise in
              modeling and methodological development at the University of South Florida. 
              This area of research holds great promise for future research as human
              interventions and climate change add further complexities to our understanding
              of natural hazards.  Thus, the award will serve to enhance the investigator's
              reputation as a leader in the area of natural hazards research.                
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                            
