Title       : POWRE: Statistcs: Research, Education and Application
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9720490

Award Number: 9720490
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah A. Nolan nolan@stat.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work is funded through the Professional Opportunities for  Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program as a  Research/Educational Enhancement
              Project.    The investigator proposes a research and education plan that: 
              draws on the wealth of interdisciplinary applications of  statistics;
              contributes to advances in model selection and  resampling methodologies; and
              utilizes the new capabilities for  developing computing environments and
              courseware.  Statistical applications are making greater use of flexible, 
              computationally--intensive modeling procedures. As a result, the  issue of
              selecting appropriate models is an important one. The  investigator plans to
              extend methods of model selection to robust  regression, including least
              absolute deviation regression. These  alternatives to least squares regression
              are very popular when  the data come from heavy tailed distributions and when
              there are  outliers.    In the area of education, the investigator plans to
              integrate  statistical theory and practice in a way not commonly encountered 
              in undergraduate courses -- through in-depth case studies or  labs. The labs
              raise interesting scientific questions that  highlight the interdisciplinary
              framework in which statistics has  developed; they employ new statistical
              methodologies, such as  resampling methods and model selection techniques; and
              they are  to be presented in an interactive programming environment.    The
              investigator also plans to bring her technical skills in  high--dimensional
              modeling to bear on an area of statistical  application -- modeling growth of
              roots in the study of plants.  Biologists are interested in learning about the
              effects of  various environmental conditions on biosynthesis rates in growing 
              plant tissues.  Developing a model for the velocity of growth and  for the
              elemental growth rate using innovative nonparametric  methodology would be very
              helpful in analyzing experimental  outcomes.
