Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Agile Procedural Learning Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2000   
File        : a9720309

Award Number: 9720309
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: K. P. Rajurkar                          
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $775000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Randall D. Beer beer@alpha.ces.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roy E. Ritzmann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael S. Branicky  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wyatt S. Newman  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1468      MANUFACTURING MACHINES & EQUIP
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,6856,8888,9146,MANU,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Studies of learning indicate that one can define two broad categories:
              declarative learning (e.g., verbal statements of fact) and procedural learning
              (e.g., how to ride a bicycle).  This research aims to clarify principles of
              procedural learning, and thus have an impact on understanding how to train
              people or machines to accomplish complex sensorimotor tasks in changing
              environments.  The researcher's goal is to combine studies on animals and
              robots in order to explore a biologically-inspired architecture for agile
              procedural learning systems (APLS).    Existing agile procedural learning
              systems include humans and animals.  Even simpler animals, such as insects or
              mollusks, show a remarkable agility in solving survival problems.  After
              encountering novel terrain, or novel food, these animals can adjust patterns of
              body or ingestive movements to handle the new situation rapidly.  Example
              engineering systems that would benefit from a theory of agile procedural
              learning include robots and manufacturing workcells.  In particular,
              considering the application domain of agile manufacturing.  The key requirement
              of an agile manufacturing workcell is that it be capable of flexibly and
              rapidly adjusting to changing assembly line demands, perceived errors, and new
              tasks.  Though manipulators have gotten more dextrous and sensors more
              accurate, though processors have gotten faster, memory cheaper, and software
              easier to write and maintain, truly agile engineering systems that learn and
              exhibit intelligent behavior have not been demonstrated.  The substrate is not
              lacking; a theoretical approach yielding engineering principles is needed. 
              Top-down (cognitive) and bottom-up (reactive) approaches to learning and
              intelligent systems (LIS) have yielded successes, but only for highly-complex
              programs performing high-level tasks in highly-structured environments and for
              simple agents performing low-level tasks in mildly-changing environments,
              respectively.  In contrast, agile procedural learning systems possess a 
              middle-level competence between reactive behavior and cognitive skills.  They
              are complex, constrained, and must work in environments whose structure
              changes.  Thus, the problem of agile procedural learning confronts the
              investigators directly with building a theory of LIS that bridges the gap
              between the traditional "top down" and "bottom up" approaches.  The missing
              "middle out" theory the investigators propose will be pursued with the
              following approach: (1) identify principles used in existing agile procedural
              teaming systems; (2) develop models and mathematical tools that bridge the gap
              between "top-down" and "bottom-up" methods; and (3) transfer these findings to
              engineering practice.    More specifically, they will explore the following
              biologically-inspired architecture as a means of solving the problem of agile
              procedural learning: plastic local reflex circuitry coordinated and comodulated
              by higher-level state- and environment-dependent circuits.    The investigators
              research effort has three core thrusts:  (1) they will pursue experimental
              studies in simpler animals that are capable of procedural learning to determine
              how this architecture is actually used for learning tasks; (2) they will
              develop models and mathematical tools that formalize these findings, make an
              integrative symbolic-reactive theory possible, and improve understanding of the
              influence that learning and environment have on the dynamics of intelligent
              autonomous agents; and (3) they will incorporate both into animal-like robots
              and an agile manufacturing workcell the middle-out theory and architecture,
              evaluating their utility in producing learning and intelligent behavior,
              measured by improved performance.    The middle-out approach generates
              overarching scientific questions about low-level sensorimotor learning and
              higher-order learning that can only be answered using an interdisciplinary
              approach. Overlapping task teams interlinking these efforts will
              synergistically improve each of them.
