Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Adaptive Cortical Computation in the Visual
               Domain: Integrated Approach UsingMulti-Unit Recording, Network Theory, &
               Experiments in Obj.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  1997 
File        : a9720320

Award Number: 9720320
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Carol Van Hartesveldt                   
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $722920             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Anderson James_Anderson@Brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Tarr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald S. Guralnik  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael A. Paradiso  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,1180,8888,9107,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              IBN-9720320  PI:  ANDERSON     This project is being funded through the Learning
              & Intelligent Systems Initiative.   This study investigates functional
              interactions among groups of neurons (nerve cells) in the brain.  The cerebral
              cortex of the brain is a dynamic ensemble of groups of neurons with activities
              that coalesce and dissolve in the performance of particular tasks.  A
              computational model called 'network of networks' describes the operation of
              computations based on neurons interacting in intermediate groupings, in the
              size range between single neurons (only one computing element) and entire brain
              regions (to hundreds of millions of computing elements).  In the intermediate
              scale groupings, the model makes predictions about the behavior of both its
              component single neurons and the overall nature of the cortical computation,
              manifested as behavior and perception.  Experimental tests utilize the
              mammalian visual system because so much is known about cortical processing of
              visual information at the level of single neurons, and also there is a large
              body of related experimental results for visual perception.  There are three
              inter-related parts to this project.  1) Computer simulations and mathematical
              analysis further develop the 'network of networks' model itself.  2)
              Simultaneous activity of multiple neurons in visual areas are recorded
              physiologically to examine long-range transfer of information across visual
              cortex, of the type suggested by the model.  3) Analyses of previously obtained
              psychophysical behavioral data from human subjects are combined with computer
              simulations to try to understand the surprising effectiveness of silhouettes in
              object recognition, and to provide a test system for the network model.    
              Results will have an impact because of the importance of linking cognition with
              neuroscience to understand mechanisms that underlie learning and perception,
              and because understanding how the brain handles complex computations will
              provide insights for the design of artificia l recognition and decision-making
              systems.
