Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Learning Minimal Representations for Visual
               Navigation and Recognition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 30,  2001      
File        : a9720327

Award Number: 9720327
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $824996             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Warren Bill_Warren@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Tarr  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie P. Kaelbling  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 6856,8888,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
              initiative. The project is concerned with the intelligence exhibited in
              interactions among sensory-motor activities and cognitive capacities such as
              reasoning, planning and learning, in both organisms and machines.  Such
              interaction is regularly shown in the act of navigation, which is engaged in by
              humans and other animals from an early age, and seems almost effortless in
              normal circumstances thereafter.  Whatever there is in navigation that is
              innate and whatever is learned, it is important to try to understand the
              interaction of the various cognitive, perceptual, and motor systems that are
              involved. The complexity of these interactions becomes clear in the development
              of mobile robots, such as the one recently deployed on Mars, not to mention the
              more autonomous ones planned for the future.  It is still a major and
              imperfectly understood task to create programs that will coordinate sensors,
              keep an internal emapn of the area, and allow the robot to cross a space
              efficiently and without collisions with obstacles.   An interdisciplinary
              approach is being taken in this research project, exploring human capabilities
              through experiments, developing models based on the experimental results and
              what is already known about human navigation, implementing these models in
              programs for robot control, then testing these programs in robotic navigation
              experiments for their efficacy and their reasonableness as models of human
              navigation.  The goals are both to understand the phenomena in humans and
              machines and to develop robust algorithms to be used in mobile robots. This
              alliance of researchers studying psychophysics, cognition, computation, and
              robotics will lead to gains in knowledge across many disciplines and will
              enhance our understanding of spatial cognition and visual navigation in agents,
              both artificial and natural.                                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
