Title       : How Do Diversity, Distribution and Behavior of Attached Bacteria Influence
               Detrital Poc Degradation?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 12,  2000   
File        : a9720151

Award Number: 9720151
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158023             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gill G. Geesey gill g@erc.montana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Montana State University
	      
	      Bozeman, MT  597172470    406/994-0211

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                The goal of this research is to determine how the diversity, distribution, and
              behavior of attached bacteria influences the pathway of particulate chitin
              degradation and the fate of chitin degradation products in a seawater
              environment.  This research involves fundamental studies on how relationships
              and interactions of particle-associated bacteria influence the path by which
              detrital particulate organic carbon (POC) and particulate organic nitrogen
              (PON), as solid chitin, are degraded and the fate of the degradation products
              in the marine environment.  The research will explore the patterns and causes
              of diversity within and among populations of bacteria that commonly associate
              with particulate organic material in the ocean.  A molecular approach is
              proposed, not to reveal phylogenetic diversity among bacteria, but rather to
              explore functional diversity in terms of an important bacterial biodegradative
              process in the sea-the solubilization of particulate chitin.  Variations in
              chitinase gene expression (mRNA synthesis) and chitinase activity (protein
              synthesis) within and among bacterial populations will be studied during
              bacterial cell attachment to and growth on solid chitin.  The results will
              contribute significantly to our rudimentary understanding of the molecular,
              physiological and behavioral adaptations of marine bacteria as they pass from a
              free-living state to a particle-associated existence and back to a free-living
              state again.  Through this micro-scale investigation of individual cells within
              distinguishable, mixed populations we anticipate the discovery of new microbial
              associations and processes that will influence the way we view
              microbial-mediated carbon and nitrogen flux in the water column of the ocean.  
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                  
