Title       : Nebraska EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 1,  2001   
File        : a9720643

Award Number: 9720643
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Karen L. Sandberg                       
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Royce E. Ballinger rballinger1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720643  Ballinger  The Nebraska EPSCoR program will focus new infrastructure
              developments  in three targeted research areas as well as maintain existing
              efforts  supporting the statewide office to promote research competitiveness 
              through S&T planning, outreach and education, technology transfer, and  faculty
              development.  The targeted areas include development of  computational capacity
              and computer networking for scientists and  engineers at the University of
              Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) and the  University of Nebraska at Omaha (UNO) and
              enhancement of research in  peptide-based bioorganic chemistry at Creighton
              University (CU).   Infrastructure enhancement in these areas builds on
              strengths of the  participating research universities, is consistent with
              on-going  program development and strategic plans, and seeks to improve the 
              state's R&D competitiveness in specifically identified areas.   Infrastructure
              developments in the three targeted areas will involve  up-grading computational
              facilities and computer networking  environments at UNL and UNO and obtaining
              state-of-the-art laboratory  equipment at CU.  Mechanisms, including training
              and maintenance, to  assist faculty and student researchers in the use of these
               improvements will enhance research competitiveness in a broad range of 
              disciplines that require computational and analytical capabilities.   The
              infrastructure improvements will greatly enhance the range and  depth of
              research projects that are not presently possible with the  existing
              infrastructure. Nebraska EPSCoR will continue to provide  opportunities for
              planning and development of the state's science and  engineering research
              capacity as well as assist the Nebraska  Technology Development Corporation in
              enhancing private sector  interactions and development of SBIR/STTR grant
              proposals.
