Title       : Program to Foster the Development of SBIR Businesses in South Dakota
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2000       
File        : a9720148

Award Number: 9720148
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: B. Jane Harrington                      
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1997      
Expires     : June 30,  1999       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181498             (Estimated)
Investigator: G. Melvin Ustad   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dakota State Univ
	      
	      Madison, SD  57042    605/256-5111

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                      9720148  USTAD  This project will expand the activities and capabilities
              of  the South Dakota Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)  Center. Dr.
              Ustad has several years of experience and has  been very effective in assisting
              SBIR researchers and  entrepreneurs in South Dakota with preparation of
              successful  Phase I SBIR proposals.  He also has a an impressive track  record
              in the conversion of Phase I to Phsae II SBIR awards.     This award will
              provide funds for establishing a  Phase O   program of small awards to
              industry/university partnerships;  these awards will support research to
              strengthen anticipated  Phase I SBIR proposals.  A series of seminars will be 
              presented throughout South Dakota to increase awareness of  SBIR programs and
              the center will provide direct assistance  with Phase I and Phase II SBIR
              proposal preparation and  submission.  Graduate students from the School of
              Business  will be involved in helping to solve problems relating to  the
              commercialization process.  To increase the prospects of  business successes an
              SBIR support network will be developed  that includes accountants, lawyers, and
              venture capital  firms.  Overall this award is anticipated to develop a 
              stronger entrepreneurial environment and awareness of SBIR  opportunities in
              South Dakota.  Such strengthened awareness  and capabilities will be important
              in the state s transition  from an economy based on extractive industries
              depending on  natural resources to one including high technology  industries
              which utilize the intellectual resources of  university researchers and SBIR
              entrepreneurs to foster  economic growth and development in South Dakota.
