Title       : Louisiana EPSCoR Cooperative Agreement
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EPS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 13,  2002  
File        : a9720652

Award Number: 9720652
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Julio E. Lopez-Ferrao                   
	      EPS  OFFICE OF EXPER PROG TO STIM COMP RSCH  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $3000000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Doris L. Carver carver@bit.csc.lsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert L. Ford  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gene A. D'Amour  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry P. Draayer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kerry Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Louisiana Brd of Regents
	      150 Third Street, Suite 129
	      Baton Rouge, LA  708011302    504/342-4253

NSF Program : 9150      EXP PROG TO STIM COMP RES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720652  Draayer  The objectives of Louisiana EPSCoR are to become:  (1) more 
              competitive in gaining national research and development (R&D)  support, (2)
              more actively engaged in science and technology (S&T)  transfer activities with
              business and industry, and (3) more effective  in educating larger numbers of
              S&E students, especially minorities, at  both the undergraduate and graduate
              levels.  The cornerstone of the  State's plan is the Louisiana Education
              Quality Support Fund.   Combining Support Fund money with EPSCoR support, the
              Louisiana Board  of Regents (BoR) co-sponsors statewide programs with federal
              agencies  that focus on stimulating systemic and sustainable S&T improvements, 
              facilitating collaboration and sharing of resources, and on improving  student
              teaching and opportunities. Targeted are R&D areas that help  develop and
              strengthen the economy of both the State and Nation.  A  major objective will
              be expansion and strengthening of an innovative  program that received a
              10-year BoR commitment:  the Joint Faculty  Appointments Program (JFAP).  The
              JFAP establishments nationally  competitive S&E research teams between the
              state's Historically Black  (HB) and Majority White (MW) Colleges and
              Universities (CUs).  Six  additional JFAP/Research Excellence (RE) teams and
              two annual  JFAP/Science Education (SE) awards for educational enhancement 
              activities will be initiated.  In addition, to bring researchers from 
              different campuses together to focus on issues of common S&E interest,  a
              "Planning Grants for Major Initiatives" program will award annually  two $60K
              grants to build constituencies and prepare NSF major  initiative proposals. 
              Another form of collaboration - researchers and  industry - is scheduled for
              significant expansion, with plans to  assess and alleviate barriers to the
              state's commercialization  process, review university commercialization
              policies and develop a  statewide commercialization plan and higher education
              S&E  commercialization curriculum.  Collaborativ e efforts will be 
              strengthened by placing existing or planned statewide communication  avenues at
              the disposal of faculty and students.  These include:  (1)  an Audio/ Video
              Research Network, soon to be at 13 sites; (2) an ATM  Internet Backbone; (3) a
              Faculty Expertise Database, ultimately to  include a listing of Louisiana's
              major research facilities and  instruments; and (4) an Electronic Research
              Administration project to  automate grant and contract administration
              activities.
