Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Neurophysiological, Computational, and
               Educational Studies of Sequence Learning and Cognitive Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  2001      
File        : a9720333

Award Number: 9720333
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $624979             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen Grossberg steve@bu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Earl K. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Elizabeth S. Spelke  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Howard B. Eichenbaum  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Judith A. Schickedanz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston University
	      881 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021182394    617/353-2000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
Program Ref : 6856,8888,9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
              Initiative. The project aims to advance understanding of how the brain
              generates intelligent behavior by examining the capacity to think about
              sequences of events. Whether cooking an elaborate meal or merely dialing a
              phone number, multiple events in a specific temporal order must be kept in
              mind, in a form of working memory that helps in planning complex thoughts and
              actions. This problem will be studied in the project through an
              interdisciplinary approach. To directly probe brain mechanisms,
              neurophysiological experiments will be performed on awake behaving animals.
              Computer-based experiments with young children will be used to discover how
              children learn sequential behaviors and to test how to optimize such learning.
              Behavioral studies will be done on how human infants learn sequences. Cognitive
              and neural modeling will be used to discover brain designs and mechanisms to
              link the animal neurophysiological data to the human cognitive data.  This
              interdisciplinary approach promises to produce insights that are beyond the
              scope of any single approach. Conducting experiments in two different animal
              species (monkeys and rats), in human infants, and in young children will permit
              identification of intelligent mechanisms that are preserved across different
              species. The animal studies will analyse the activity of large groups of single
              neurons to study how multiple neurons interact to generate intelligent
              behaviors. Neural modeling will probe the laws that govern these behaviors, and
              will make predictions that link brain to behavior. Through these analyses of
              how we learn and remember sequences of events, a foundation will be built for
              studying the neural basis of high-level cognitive operations such as planning
              and reasoning; for developing better educational software; and for applying
              models towards the solution of outstanding technological problems that require
              algorithms which emulate human intelligence.                                   
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                           
