Title       : Interdisciplinary Research and Education in Nonlinear Optics, Mathematics and
               Electrical Engineering
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1998     
File        : a9720699

Award Number: 9720699
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : June 1,  1998       
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74998              (Estimated)
Investigator: John K. Shaw shaw@math.vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frederick W. Stephenson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This is a research proposal with an educational emphasis under  the
              Interdisciplinary Grants in the Mathematical Sciences  program. The principle
              investigator will spend the 1998-99  academic year (and summer, 1998) in the
              Electrical Engineering  department at Virginia Tech University learning the
              fundamentals  of communications network theory and building a research program 
              in nonlinear fiber optics for communications.    The PI plans specifically to
              study spectral approaches to the  nonlinear Schrodinger equation, which models
              pulse propagation in  communications fibers. He proposes consideration of the
              equation  both numerically and through extended multiple scales methods,  both
              of which are in the spectral domain rather than the time  domain. The resulting
              asymptotic analysis, with accompanying  numerical component, would be extremely
              valuable to  communications engineers in their efforts to simulate pulse 
              transmission in fibers where nonlinear effects are significant.  The resulting
              analysis would also be of keen interest to  researchers and teachers of
              mathematics.  The PI therefore  expects to be involved in the creation of new
              mathematical ideas  to meet the needs of emerging technology.    The
              investigator plans to share his findings with his  mathematical colleagues
              through seminars, colloquia, conferences  and publications.  He proposes to
              involve students in his  findings through masters thesis level work and through
               undergraduate research projects.    In addition to faculty colleagues and
              graduate students, the PI  also plans  to make the mathematical aspects of
              fiber  communications more accessible to undergraduate mathematics major 
              through his department's Undergraduate Research Program.  This is  an active
              program in undergraduate research in mathematics which  has been in existence
              since the spring semester of 1995.  (see  the web site at  
              http://www.math.vt.edu/UR_brochure/URbrochure.html)    This IGMS project is
              jointly supported by the MPS Office of  Multidisciplinary A ctivities (OMA) and
              the Division of  Mathematical Sciences (DMS).
