Title       : POWRE: Integration of Artificial Intelligence Techniques into a Global Cloud
               Mask Generation System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  1997 
File        : a9720574

Award Number: 9720574
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roddy R. Rogers                         
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1999   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Antonette M. Logar alogar@silver.sdsmt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SD Sch of Mines and Tech
	      501 East Saint Joseph Street
	      Rapid City, SD  577013995    605/394-1205

NSF Program : 1522      PHYSICAL METEOROLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720574  Logar     In this project, artificial intelligence techniques,
              specifically neural networks and fuzzy logic, will be applied to the problem of
              generating a global cloud mask. This system will be able to distinguish cloud
              from non-cloud pixels in satellite imagery and will be used by the EOS project
              located in Huntsville, Alabama. The presence of clouds, which is an important
              factor in studying global climate shifts, must be correlated over time, for the
              entire earth, on a daily basis. The amount of data which must be analyzed
              precludes the use of a human expert to determine the percentage of cloud cover
              in these scenes. The method for accomplishing this task will be to improve upon
              and extend previous work in four areas: feature selection, the use of
              thresholds, the impact of adding layers to the structure, and pixel unmixing.  
               Initial efforts have been made to incorporate a fuzzy logic component into the
              selection criteria, but a larger data set is needed to adequately test the
              effectiveness of the method. One of the difficulties faced when classifying
              satellite data is that of mixed pixels, that is, a single pixel which contains
              multiple classes. The possibility of using a neural network for this type of
              problem has recently been suggested and will be investigated both for the cloud
              classification project and on data supplied by remote sensing groups working on
              the ocean color problem.    This project is supported by the POWRE program,
              which will allow the PI to spend a sabbatical at the University of Alabama,
              Huntsville, where she will be able to interact with experts in the area of
              remote sensing and will have easy access to satellite data. This will provide a
              new research direction for the PI and her students, and increase the visibility
              of women at the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology.
