Title       : A vBNS Connection for the University of Missouri- Columbia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 6,  2001       
File        : a9720668

Award Number: 9720668
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $406800             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gordon K. Springer springer@cecs.missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Mitchell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1072,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                    This award is made under the high performance connections portion  of
              NCRI's "Connections to the Internet" announcement, NSF 96-64.  It provides
              partial support for a connection to enhance and  accommodate the research needs
              for the University of  Missouri-Columbia (MU) by establishing a connection to
              the Very High  Performance Backbone Network Service (vBNS) via the MCI POP in 
              Downers Grove, IL.  Projects in this proposal include:  Missouri  Intelligent
              Networked Information System (MINIS), MU/NASA Regional  Applications Center
              (MURAC), The Classroom of the 21st Century (Class21),  Collaborative
              Information Spreadsheet of Geospatial Information (CISS),  Interactive Shared
              Journal System (ISJS), Distributed Genome Database  Browsing and Analysis
              Facility (DGDB), and Intelligent Multiagent Systems  for Networked Scientific
              Computing (IMSN). MINIS explores the integration  of computational intelligence
              methodologies and networked information.  MURAC involves the realtime
              collection and processing of GEOS-8/9 remote  sensing satellite hyper-image
              data data for distributed access by  researchers in weather, environmental and
              agribusiness joint projects.  Class21 involves the construction of a learning
              environment to permit  project oriented collaboration by students in a shared
              information space.  CISS involves the access and manipulation of geospatial
              information in a  collaborative environment by widely dispersed researchers.
              ISJS involves  the development of software to support new forms of teaching and
              learning.  DGDB provides a seamless integration of genome databases to
              facilitate  access and analysis by biomedical researchers. IMSN involves the
              creation  of a problem solving environment for scientific computing
              applications.  With this high performance network capability, MU will expand
              current  research and collaboration with both academic institutions and federal
               laboratories. Collaborating institutions for this project include:  University
              of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, NCSA, NAS A Goddard, NASA Ames,  JPL,
              Washington University-St. Louis, Monsanto Corporation, Ohio State  University,
              Pittsburgh Supercomputer Center, San Diego Supercomputer  Center, National
              Institutes of Health, and Purdue University.
