Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Optimization in Language and Language Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 30,  2002    
File        : a9720412

Award Number: 9720412
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William Bainbridge                      
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $825270             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Smolensky smolensky@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert E. Frank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael R. Brent  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter W. Jusczyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Geraldine Legendre  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 6856      KNOWLEDGE & COGNITIVE SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
              initiative. It is interdisciplinary research in the knowledge, processing, and
              learning of language. It proceeds from a framework utilizing results from
              mathematical statistics, adaptive systems, and formal learning theory which
              provide a means of treating language as a kind of statistical optimization. 
              Previous work by the principal investigator on the integration of linguistic
              theory with optimization principles in neural networks has led to this new
              grammar formalism, optimality theory, which has had considerable impact on many
              aspects of the study of human language, including learning. Recently developed
              methods of psychological experimentation now provide reliable data on the
              process of language learning, even in infants.  This research brings together
              these experimental methods for observing real-time processing and learning of
              language, computational methods of research on optimization and automatic
              language processing, and linguistic methods for studying the structure of the
              representations essential for human language.  The investigators bring not only
              expertise in the contributing disciplines, but also considerable experience in
              interdisciplinary collaboration.  The results of this research will help us to
              explain the mystery of how humans - and possibly artificial systems - can learn
              to use and understand languages.                                               
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                         
