Title       : CISE Research Instrumentation: A High-Performance Computing Facility for
               Experimental Algorithms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  1997   
File        : a9720676

Award Number: 9720676
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Rita V. Rodriguez                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : December 1,  1997   
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sanjoy K. Baruah   (Principal Investigator current)
              Guoliang Xue  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert R. Snapp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yuanyuan Yang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Charles J. Colbourn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Vermont & St Agr Coll
	      340 Waterman Building
	      Burlington, VT  05405    802/656-3660

NSF Program : 2890      CISE INSTRUMENTATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              9720676  Baruah, Sanjoy K.  University of Vermont and State Agricultural College
                  CISE Research Instrumentation: A High-performance Computing Facility for
              Experimental Algorithmics    This research instrumentation grant enables
              research in several projects:   - Computing Euclidean Steiner Minimum Trees,-
              Research on Blocking Behavior of Multicast Networks,- Feasibility Analysis via
              Computation-Intensive Simulations,   - Finite Sample Analyses of Nearest
              Neighbor Algorithms, and - Reliability of Large Scale Disk Arrays.  To support
              the aforementioned projects, the newly-formed Department of Computer Science at
              the University of Vermont will purchase high-performance computing equipment.
              The equipment will be used in particular for:  - Developing efficient
              algorithms for generating the shortest network interconnecting a given set of
              points.- Investigating the blocking behavior of multicast networks.- Developing
              simulation algorithms for the feasibility analysis of hard-real-time
              application systems.- Developing and evaluating nearest-neighbor algorithms for
              pattern recognition.- Exploring techniques for enhancing the reliability of
              disk arrays.  Each project will explore the impact of the recent dramatic
              advances in computing technology upon algorithm design issues in a particular
              application domain.  New techniques, methodologies, and algorithms will be
              designed which make extensive use of large-scale simulation and/ or
              combinatorial search.  The equipment made available through this grant will be
              used to both perform the computational experiments necessary to guide the
              research, and to validate the findings thus obtained.
