Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: CIRCLE: Center for Interdisciplinary Research
               on Constructive Learning Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EIA 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 10,  2003   
File        : a9720359

Award Number: 9720359
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Darleen L. Fisher                       
	      EIA  DIVISION OF EXPERIMENTAL & INTEG ACTIVIT
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4997797            (Estimated)
Investigator: Kurt A. VanLehn vanlehn@cs.pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin D. Ashley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michelene Chi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory F. Cooper  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 2885      CISE RESEARCH INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9217,9218,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720359    Kurt Van Lehn  University of Pittsburgh    CIRCLE:  Center for
              Interdisciplinary Research on Constructive Learning Environments    The Center
              has three main goals.  First, the Center seeks to understand an extremely
              effective pedagogy, human tutoring.  This will be achieved by using protocol
              analysis, eye tracking and controlled experiments to study human tutors and
              contrast them to existing computer tutors.  The overarching hypothesis is that
              students learn best when they construct knowledge for themselves.  The second
              goal of the Center is to build and test new generation of computer tutoring
              systems that encourage students to construct the target knowledge instead of
              telling it to them.  The student's self-construction may need to be delicately
              guided via prompting, Socratic questioning or other means,  This goal will be
              achieved by adding advanced planning and natural language components to
              existing intelligent tutoring systems and testing the new tutors in
              collaborating schools.  The Center's third goal is to help integrate this new
              technology into existing educational practices.  This goal will be achieved by
              working with practitioners and schools throughout the development process, by
              upgrading tutors that are already in use by thousands of students, and by
              forming partnerships with other projects, centers and industries.  Achieving
              the three Center goals will impact multiple disciplines.  Understanding why
              human tutors are so effective should have a significant impact on the
              psychology of learning.  Computer science will be advanced by developing
              systems that can reactively plan natural language hints and questions that get
              a student to learn.  Education will be improved as the Center's constructivist
              technology and instructional methods prove to be effective in actual use and
              become widely available.
