Title       : POWRE: Global Gaze: Earth Observing Satellites and the Changing International
               Knowledge Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9720475

Award Number: 9720475
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonney Sheahan                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $44427              (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen T. Litfin litfin@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1397      CROSS-DIRECTORATE  ACTIV PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1371,1397,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigator will undertake qualitative empirical research into the impact
              of remote-sensing satellites on the global knowledge structure, defined in
              terms of the distribution of power, rule-making, and authority.  For some,
              globalization and the so-called information revolution are propelling the world
              into a `post-internationalist` era in which `sovereignty-free` non-state actors
              challenge the state's power and authority.  For others, recent technological
              changes present no constitutive threat to the state-centric international
              system.  This project will address the question of whether  technological
              revolutions are precipitating a transformation in the structures of world
              politics by focusing on a difficult case: Earth observing satellites.  Earth
              observing satellites, representing both a primary medium for surveillance and a
              key information technology, offer an excellent arena for exploring the global
              knowledge structure.  They offer if not a least-likely case, then a
              not-so-obvious test case for the post-internationalist thesis since, to a
              greater extent than other information technologies, their roots are solidly in
              the domain of the scientific state.  The proposed hypothesis is that the
              information revolution is precipitating political transformation, and that
              developments in satellite remote sensing will provide confirming evidence for
              this shift.  Confirmation of the post-internationalist thesis for the strong
              case of earth-observing satellites would be especially compelling.  This POWRE
              grant will provide support for a Visiting Professorship at The George
              Washington University's Space Policy Institute.  The Institute is unique for
              its interdisciplinary research and teaching faculty devoted entirely to issues
              of space policy and technology, including satellite-based remote sensing.   NSF
              funding will do a great deal to enhance the investigator's overall research
              agenda and specific standing in her upcoming tenure review.   Her project has
              the potential for an important impact both in academia and in wider audiences. 
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                            
