Title       : POWRE: Novel Spectroscopic Methods for Assessing Peptide-Lipid Interactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1998       
File        : a9720606

Award Number: 9720606
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Fred G. Heineken                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : December 31,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $80000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Regina M. Murphy murphy@che.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1491      BIOTECHNOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0300000   Problem-Oriented                        
Program Ref : 1472,1592,9120,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9720606  Murphy  There are several compelling medical and biotechnological 
              reasons motivating the  development of new methods to probe the mechanisms and 
              kinetics of complex systems involving self-associating  peptides and lipid
              bilayers.  Key questions include: how  many peptides associate together to form
              a pore? does  peptide-peptide association occur prior to, coincident with,  or
              subsequent to peptide-lipid association? must the peptide  be in a specific
              aggregational state in order to interact  with the lipid bilayer?    This
              research plan proposes to investigate the feasibility  of developing two new
              methods to probe these kinds of  questions.  Research objective 1 is to
              establish whether  static light scattering methods can be applied to evaluate 
              the number and association state of peptides embedded in  membranes.  The
              pH-sensitive pore-forming peptide GALA and  an antibody-GALA derivative, mixed
              with phosphatidylcholine  large unilamellar vesicles, was chosen as the model
              system  for this investigation.  Standard static light scattering  methods
              yield information on molecular weight and size of  particles in solution, and
              requires that scattering data be  collected on both the sample of interest and
              the buffer.  This approach will be modified by collecting four sets of 
              scattering data: peptide alone, liposomes alone, buffer  alone, and
              peptide-liposome mixture.  By subtracting out in  turn the scattering from
              peptide alone, liposomes alone, or  buffer alone from the scattering of the
              peptide-liposome  mixture, it may be possible to infer the extent of peptide 
              association in the liposome and the total number of peptides  per liposome. 
              Research objective 2 is to investigate the  feasibility of using surface
              plasmon resonance (SPR)  spectroscopy to explore the importance of peptide 
              association state in modulating peptide-lipid association.  The model system
              for this investigation will be beta-amyloid  peptide monomer and fibrils
              associating with monolayers of  negatively-charged pho spholipids and
              phospholipid-  ganglioside mixtures, SPR is used most frequently to measure 
              binding kinetics of ligands to immobilized receptors.  In a  modification of
              this, the immobilized receptors can be  replaced by a self-assembled oriented
              lipid monolayer.  A  commonly cited difficulty with SPR is that the rates of 
              association can be mass transport, rather than kinetically,  limited.  The
              feasibility of turning this difficulty into an  asset will be investigated. 
              Since fibrils have  significantly slower diffusivities than monomeric peptides,
               measurement of the mass transport rate should indicate  whether the
              predominant species associating with the lipid  layer is monomeric or
              aggregated.  ***
