Title       : (WEAVE) Changing Seasons? Detecting and Understanding Climate Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 1,  2002      
File        : a9720134

Award Number: 9720134
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $261211             (Estimated)
Investigator: Upmanu Lall   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark A. Cane  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey J. Park  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael E. Mann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rajagopalan Balaji  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Utah State University
	      Sponsored Programs Office
	      Logan, UT  843221415    435/797-1226

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,1579,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720134  Lall    Recent research suggests that the seasonal patterns of
              continental   U.S. temperature, precipitation and streamflow have been changing
              over the last century.  The  peak temperature and precipitation may have
              shifted forward by 10 to 90 days in a calendar year in high latitudes.  Snow
              melt runoff may also be occurring earlier in the year.  At interannual or
              interdecadal time scales, there is evidence of delay/advance of seasons related
              to El Nino events.  Such trends have  implications for projections of the
              timing and magnitude of regional agrarian and urban water and energy demand,
              water supply, reservoir operation, agricultural practice, ecologic
              productivity, critical periods and risks of environmental impacts on surface
              waters and air quality and the consequent economic impacts.  The interpretation
              of warming or rainfall trends attributed to particular months or seasons is
              also called into question. The objectives of the proposed research are to:   
              Identify spatially coherent patterns for changes in the seasonality of
              precipitation, temperature and streamflow in N. America using nearly century
              long instrumental hydroclimate records.    Relate shifts in seasonality to
              anthropogenic factors (e.g., greenhouse gases, urbanization), latitude,
              continentality (i.e., distance from ocean), and orography.  Explore connections
              between the seasonality trends and trends in atmospheric circulation (as
              indicated by sea level pressure changes) for a dynamical understanding of the
              changing climate.  Explore the use of General Circulation Models to explain the
              trends in terms of natural variability of the climate system or greenhouse
              forcing.    These objectives will be addressed by assembling a comprehensive
              data base of daily/monthly precipitation, temperature, streamflow and sea level
              pressure data for regions ranging  from the continental U.S. to the N.
              Hemisphere and the analysis of these data using nonparametric statistical
              methods to assess seasonality and its shifts, spatial coherenc e and space-time
              structure of the variations, and to develop and explore empirical hypotheses
              relating ocean-atmosphere circulation to the trends in precipitation,
              temperature and streamflow.
