Title       : Development of High-Quality Molecular and Engineering Models for Hydrogen
               Fluoride and its Mixtures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  1999     
File        : a9720705

Award Number: 9720705
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 29,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $155003             (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Kofke kofke@eng.buffalo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Buffalo
	      501 Capen Hall
	      Buffalo, NY  14260    716/645-2977

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT  CTS-9720705   David A Kofke /SUNY     Hydrogen fluoride (HF) plays a
              key role in many industries, but the study of HF via experiment is greatly
              hampered by its highly toxic and corrosive nature.  Consequently there exists
              very little published experimental data on which to base the design of
              processes that use HF.  The objective of this work is to improve our
              understanding of the molecular-level behavior of HF, and thereby develop
              engineering models that reliably predict the properties of HF and its mixtures
              from the few experimental data that are  available.  The approach synthesizes
              computational chemistry, molecular simulation, and state-of-the-art engineering
              modeling. Thermodynamic properties of particular interest include vapor-liquid
              phase equilibria, heat effects, and surface tension.    Bulk hydrogen fluoride
              is a complex substance, and in fact has been described as "the most imperfect
              gas so far studied".  The origin of HF nonideality is in its very strong nature
              to associate, forming chains of HF molecules.  Chain formation manifests itself
              in (among other things) anomalously large vapor-phase heat capacity, an unusual
              vapor-pressure curve, and very small surface tension.  Experiment has not
              provided  conclusive information about the nature of these chains (i.e., the
              distribution of chain lengths, and the degree to which they form rings and
              branched structures), and this ignorance has hampered the formulation of
              engineering models that can predict HF behavior over a wide range of
              conditions.  Although bulk HF is a complicated substance, the HF molecule
              itself is a very simple one (unlike, say, polymer molecules, which also  form
              complex substances), and it has been studied very intensively by sophisticated
              theoretical means.  These studies are the source of almost all of our detailed
              understanding of HF association;  however this fundamental progress has not yet
              been applied in the formulation of engineering models and, moreover, the
              results pertain mostly to the vapor phase , so they do not provide a suitable
              basis for understanding  vapor-liquid equilibria or surface tension. Our
              preliminary studies have found none of the existing molecular models to be
              suitably robust to warrant their use as a basis for constructing engineering
              models.  Exploiting the molecular simplicity to systematically develop accurate
              molecular and engineering models of the complex bulk phase is the central
              component of this work.  This effort is timely because of the convergence  of
              several recent developments:  the formulation of a good understanding of the HF
              molecule; the greatly advanced state of computation hardware;  the development
              of sophisticated molecular simulation algorithms to aid  the engineering-model
              development; and the formulation of appropriate,  theoretically sound
              engineering methods for associating fluids, methods  with which an HF model may
              be constructed.    HF is a key ingredient in the production of
              hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs),  which see application as environmentally benign
              blowing agents, solvents,  refrigerants, and as ingredients in fluoropolymer
              manufacture; by  international agreement entire industries are now switching
              from  ozone-depleting chlorofluorocarbon to HFC technologies.  HF is also 
              important to the steel, petroleum, glass, electronic, aluminum and energy 
              industries, and it is central to the continually growing field of fluorine 
              chemistry.  Safety is a major concern in HF processing, as accidental  releases
              from production facilities can have disastrous consequences.  Particularly
              troublesome is the ability of HF clouds to persist while  traveling over long
              distances, without being dispersed, diluted, and  thereby rendered harmless. 
              This persistence is related to the anomalously  low surface tension of HF, and
              its ability to form small droplets, or  aerosols. Improved understanding of HF
              surface tension would enable the  formulation of additives that promote
              dispersion of dangerous HF clouds.  The complete quantitative synthesis of
              computational  chemistry, molecular  simulation, and engineering modeling has
              never before been completed to  the extent in this study.  HF is a logical
              starting point for this attempt  because it is complex at the bulk scale but
              relatively simple at the  molecular level.  Success in this effort would guide
              the development of  first-principles models for other complex materials.
