Title       : Late Cenozoic Volcanism in Marie Byrd Land: Assessing Petrogenetic and Eruptive
               Mechanisms by Comparitive Studies of Analogs
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 5,  1997   
File        : a9720411

Award Number: 9720411
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Scott Borg                              
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : December 15,  1997  
Expires     : November 30,  1998   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45745              (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley E. LeMasurier wlemasur@carbon.cudenver.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Denver
	      Campus Box 129 PO Box 173364
	      Denver, CO  802173364    303/556-4060

NSF Program : 5112      ANTARCTIC GEOLOGY & GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0311000   Polar Programs-Related                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720411  LeMasurier  The volcanoes of Marie Byrd Land lie along the Pacific
              coast  of Antarctica between 110 degrees and 140 degrees west  longitude, and
              are part of the circum-Pacific ORing of  Fire.O  They have formed during the
              past 30 million years  (Ma); but each has had an individual lifetime of less
              than 3  Ma, and they are made up of a wide variety of rock types.  Unlike
              volcanoes elsewhere in the Ring of Fire, which have  formed as a result of
              plate collision, Marie Byrd Land  volcanoes have formed in a OriftO environment
              where the  earthOs crust has been stretching, fracturing, and slowly  rising to
              form a large dome that is now about 300 miles in  diameter and 9,000 feet above
              sea level at its crest.  Older  volcanoes are found near the center of the
              dome, and as the  dome grew, volcanic activity shifted toward the edge of the 
              dome, where the now active volcanoes are located.  The  origin of these
              volcanoes thus appears to involve an  interplay between melting, that produces
              the original lava  far below the crust, and deformation within the crust, that 
              seems to control what happens to the lava on its way to the  surface.  When the
              lava reaches the surface, and is erupted  under the West Antarctic ice sheet,
              it produces  hydrovolcanic deposits that provide a record of how the size  of
              the ice sheet varied before climate was influenced by  human activity.  At Mt.
              Takahe these rocks appear to record  multiple fluctuations in ice level,
              through a range of at  least 1,000 ft. within the past 300,000 years,
              suggesting  that the ice sheet responds readily to climatic change.  A  similar
              response to greenhouse warming could, conceivably,  lead to a 20 foot rise in
              sea level.    This award, funded by the Office of Polar Programs at the 
              National Science Foundation, supports work that will focus  on the following
              questions:  (1)  What has caused melting at  roughly 70-90 miles depth to
              produce basalt lava, and how  have uplift and stretching been related to this
              process?  (2) What processes h ave caused the basalt to change  composition as
              it rises to the surface, producing the  variety among volcanoes in Marie Byrd
              Land?  (3)  What can  we learn from hydrovolcanic deposits about the history of
               the ice sheet and its vulnerability to greenhouse warming?    This award
              supports a comparative petrological study to  understand the volcanic rocks of
              Marie Byrd Land in the  context of similar volcanic provinces elsewhere in the
              world  that exhibit different styles or stages of development.  This award
              supports comparative studies of three such  regions:  (1) The volcanoes of
              Victoria Land, about 1000  miles west of Marie Byrd Land, in a part of the West
               Antarctic rift that has had a somewhat different history of  deformation and
              volcanism.  (2)  The 60-65 million year old  volcanoes in NW Scotland, which
              have been eroded deeply  enough to expose subsurface volcanic conduits.  (3) 
              Volcanoes produced by subglacial eruptions in Iceland,  including the active
              volcano Grimsvotn, which has produced  hydrovolcanic deposits like those at Mt.
              Takahe during its  recent eruptions under the glacier Vatanajokull.  These 
              studies are important because they will contribute to an  understanding of (1)
              how the interplay between deep internal  processes and crustal deformation
              within Earth can control  the development of volcanoes in a rift environment,
              and (2)  how the past behavior of the West Antarctic ice sheet can be  used as
              a key to its future stability.
