Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Center for Learning Technologies in Urban
               Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 4,  2000     
File        : a9720383

Award Number: 9720383
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4999315            (Estimated)
Investigator: Louis M. Gomez l-gomez@nwu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ronald Marx  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger C. Schank  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Clifton D. Burgess  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Juanita Clay-Chambers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 7256      RSCH IN EDUCATION, POLICY, PRA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9177,OTHR,SMET,
Abstract    :
              9720383  Gomez    This project is being funded through the Learning and
              Intelligent Systems (LIS) Initiative.  The Center for Learning Technologies in
              Urban Schools will help urban school communities integrate advanced
              technologies for teaching and learning with their education reform plans.  The
              goal of the Center is to help these technologies become pervasive in science
              curricula and routine components of the learning experience.  The Center is a
              partnership among the Chicago and Detroit Public Schools, and education and
              technology researchers at Northwestern University and the University of
              Michigan.  The Center's premise is that urban schools represent a challenging
              and important setting for shaping and assessing new organizational and teaching
              practices supported by technology, and the technologies that optimize such
              support.    Schools in Chicago and Detroit are currently developing and
              implementing new curriculum frameworks, new standards and practices for
              professional development, and new community-based structures that support
              teaching and learning in classrooms.  The Center will capitalize on these
              efforts and on research at Northwestern University and the University of
              Michigan to develop models of science learning based on science practice,
              modeling and simulation, scientific visualization, and tools for
              computer-supported collaboration that can enrich urban schools.    The Center
              will encourage schools to create challenging implementations for learning
              technologies, and support the schools in such endeavors..  Teams of teachers
              and researchers will work to understand how to make new technologies work in
              urban and non-urban communities across the nation.  The result of the Center's
              efforts will be new technologies, and improved school organizations that are
              better structured to facilitate the adoption of new technology and rigorous,
              new science curricula.
