Title       : Learning and Adaptation in the Primate Oculomotor System: A Neuromorphic Analog
               VLSI Model
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 30,  1997 
File        : a9720353

Award Number: 9720353
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gilbert B. Devey                        
	      BES  DIV OF BIOENGINEERING & ENVIRON SYSTEMS 
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $724187             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ernst Niebur null  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christof Koch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy K. Horiuchi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Diorio  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5345      BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720353  Niebur  The ability to learn and to adapt to a changing environment is
              one of the fundamental characteristics of life itself.  The purpose of the
              proposed work is to develop, implement and test adaptation mechanisms which are
              modeled after their biological counterparts.  The centerpoint of the project is
              the development of adaptive "neuromorphic" VLSI (Very-Large-Scale-Integrated)
              devices.  Neuromorphic devices are similar to common computer chips but they
              are designed and operated in somewhat different regimes (analog variables
              instead of digital, subthreshold voltages instead of suprathreshold, and
              parallel processing instead of serial) which gives them properties much more
              similar to those of nerve cells than can be claimed of standard computer chips.
              While neuromorphic circuits have been designed and fabricated for about a
              decade, this work is one of the first to systematically incorporate learning
              and adaptation into that technology.  This is accomplished by making use of
              recently developed design techniques (''floating gates'') which for the first
              time allow storage of learned values for periods of time (years) similar to the
              lifetimes of retention mechanisms encountered in animals and humans. 
              Furthermore, while most of the previous work was concerned with the processing
              of sensory information (good examples being the "silicon retina" and "silicon
              cochlea"), this project also includes motor control and thus closes the
              behavioral loop, from sensory input to motor output which then again influences
              sensory input.  The adaptive neuromorphic devices are integrated in a realistic
              model of the eye-movement control of primates (monkeys and humans), which is
              one of the best understood biological sensorimotor systems.  Different
              mechanisms of adaptation and learning have been studied in monkeys and humans
              and the performance of the adaptive control system is evaluated by comparing
              with experimental data.  The development of a hardware model for eye movements
              promises significant insights  into the function of an important sensorimotor
              control system.  Understanding human (and primate) eye control in the real
              world and how it adapts to changing situations may lead to the development of
              practical tools, for instance, for target detection and pursuit.  More
              importantly, however, synthesizing a complex behavior will help us understand
              this and other behavioral patterns to a degree which is impossible to achieve
              with analytical methods alone.
