Title       : Obesity and Reproduction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 24,  2002   
File        : a9720633

Award Number: 9720633
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : March 1,  1998      
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Aaron Ettenberg ettenber@psych.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Deborah H. Olster  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              9720633  Olster  The energetic costs of reproduction for a female mammal are
              enormous.  Thus, it is not surprising that in many animals, reproduction is
              influenced by factors related to energy balance, such as food intake, body
              weight, energy expenditure, and metabolism.  Animals that are undernourished or
              obese often suffer from reproductive abnormalities.  The experiments described
              by Dr. Olster will use the genetically obese Zucker rat to explore the
              interaction between obesity and abnormal reproductive function.  Females of
              this strain overeat, expend less energy than normal and are obese.  These
              animals exhibit many other abnormalities, including overproduction of insulin
              and corticosterone (hormones related to the use and storage of nutrients
              obtained from the diet), insulin resistance, and higher than normal
              concentrations of neuropeptide Y, a hypothalamic neurochemical that stimulates
              food intake.  Finally, obese Zucker females are infertile.  Previous research
              from this laboratory has demonstrated that these animals have delayed puberty,
              do not ovulate regularly, and show minimal mating behavior with males.  When
              normal (i.e., lean) rats are experimentally given extra neuropeptide Y, they
              exhibit a syndrome that is very similar to the abnormal metabolic and
              reproductive physiology of obese Zucker rats, namely overeating, obesity,
              oversecretion of insulin and corticosterone, insulin resistance, aberrant
              reproductive cyclicity and impaired sexual behaviors.  The experiments in this
              proposal are designed to explore the roles of neuropeptide Y, insulin and
              corticosterone in reproductive dysfunction in obese Zucker rats, with an
              emphasis on sexual behaviors.  These substances will be experimentally
              manipulated in an effort to improve the reproductive capacity of obese Zucker
              rats and/or induce reproductive abnormalities in lean females.  The knowledge
              gained from these studies will provide new, exciting information about the
              signals (of brain, endocrine and/or metabolic origin) that convey i nformation
              regarding energy balance to the systems regulating reproduction.  This
              cross-talk is of critical importance in allowing animals to reproduce only when
              it is energetically appropriate to do so.
