Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Modeling Learning to Reason with Cases in
               Engineering Ethics: A Test Domain for Intelligent Assistance
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2002     
File        : a9720341

Award Number: 9720341
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $524916             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin D. Ashley ashley+@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Johanna D. Moore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michelene Chi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rosa Lynn B. Pinkus  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720341  Ashley                 A clinical ethicist, cognitive psychologist, law
              professor/computer scientist, and computer  scientist/linguist team up to
              examine how students reason with and learn from case-based texts in  the
              context of a two-term required graduate engineering ethics course. Taught by
              the clinical  ethicist, the course is structured so that students regularly
              discuss and resolve cases as they are  introduced to ethical reasoning and a
              set of methodological tools developed to aid in the resolution  of ethical
              dilemmas.               The overall goal of this research is to help students
              learn to identify ethical components in  practical engineering problems and to
              enhance their ability to apply the methodological tools and  justifications as
              they resolve the dilemmas. More specifically, the project goals are to (1)
              examine  how engineering students adapt conceptual tools for ethical reasoning
              as they are introduced to,  discuss, and resolve dilemmas presented in the
              case-based texts; (2) descriptively model this  process using a
              Web-browser-compatible automated drafting environment (ADE) as a data 
              gathering tool; (3) examine how ADE's on-line data base of case-based texts,
              conveniently  accessible in ADE's Web-browser-like drafting environment, can
              assist this process; (4) explore  how to use computational models of the
              underlying case-based reasoning to enable ADE to  provide intelligent
              assistance in aspects of the process; and (S) evaluate how having access to ADE
               compliments or interferes with students' developing ability to identify,
              articulate, analyze and  resolve ethical problems.               The resulting
              methodological tool, ADE provides convenient access, for both teacher and 
              student, to an on-line database of textual materials such as methodologies and
              cases outlined in the  required course texts, mid-level principles,
              professional codes of engineering ethics, decisions of a  professional
              association ethics review board and an existing on-line repository of engi
              neering  ethics cases and commentary. ADE acts like an intelligent assistant
              engaging students in a  dialectical process. It provides an "argument
              worksheet", a checklist to help the student analyze  an ethical problem,
              case-based access to information for constructing the arguments, and feedback. 
              ADE is evaluated empirically in terms of a cognitive model to be developed in
              an empirical  investigation of case-based learning to solve ill-defined
              problems. Building ADE also contributes  to three main research areas in
              Artificial Intelligence, Case-Based Reasoning, and Intelligent  Tutoring: 1.
              Case representation and relevance assessment, 2. Planning ethical arguments and
               explaining those plans, and 3. Recognizing students' solution plans.
