Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: Simulating Tutors with Natural Dialog and
               Pedagogical Strategies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1997 
File        : a9720314

Award Number: 9720314
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1997 
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $900000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur C. Graesser a-graesser@memphis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Max H. Garzon  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Roger J. Kreuz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Marks  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stanley P. Franklin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Memphis
	      Administration 315
	      Memphis, TN  38152    901/678-2533

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,1311,1332,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
              Initiative.  The long-term practical objective of the research is to develop a
              fully automated computer tutor. The tutor would be able to (a) extract meaning
              from the contributions that the student types into a keyboard and (b) formulate
              dialog contributions with pedagogical value and conversational appropriateness.
              The tutor's discourse moves include: pumping, prompting, hinting, questioning,
              answering, summarizing, splicing in correct information, providing immediate
              feedback, and rewording student contributions. The dialog contributions of the
              tutor would be in different formats and media: printed text, synthesized
              speech, simulated facial movements, graphic displays, and animation. Such an
              achievement will require an interdisciplinary integration of theory and
              empirical research from the fields of cognitive psychology, discourse
              processing, computational linguistics, artificial intelligence, human-computer
              interaction, and education. The tutoring topics will be in the domains of
              computer literacy and introductory medicine.  Previous attempts to develop a
              fully automated tutor have been seriously challenged by some technical and
              theoretical barriers. These include (a) the problem of interpreting natural
              language when it is not well-formed semantically and grammatically, (b) the
              problem of world knowledge being immense, open-ended and incomplete, and (c)
              the lack of research on human tutorial dialog. Recent advances have
              dramatically reduced these barriers, so it is time to revisit the mission of
              developing an automated tutor. According to the recent research on human
              tutoring, a key feature of effective tutoring lies in generating discourse
              contributions that assist learners in actively constructing explanations,
              elaborations, and mental models of the material. The proposed research will
              advance scientific understanding of how a tutor can manage a smooth, polite
              dialog that promotes deep learning of the material.                            
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                    
