Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems: An Integrated Approach to Concept Learning in
               Humans and Machines
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2001     
File        : a9720304

Award Number: 9720304
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $775000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian H. Ross bross@s.psych.uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Leonard Pitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald F. DeJong  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Gregory L. Murphy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Karl S. Rosengren  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1180,6856,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
              Initiative.  Concepts are essential for intelligent thought and action. The
              goal of the project is an integrated view of concept learning in humans and
              machines. The primary focus will be combining psychological experimentation
              with artificial intelligence modeling to examine the interaction of world
              knowledge and empirical information during concept learning. The representation
              of concepts consists of feature regularities observed in the instances and of
              features inferred from world knowledge. However, current theories focus on only
              one type of feature and do not consider how learning each might affect the
              other. Additional work will examine how the use of concepts (such as those used
              for problem solving) may affect learning, how prior knowledge may be
              restructured to accommodate new information, and how concepts may change with
              age and experience. Computational learning theory will be adapted to provide a
              mathematical characterization of the learning process.  The view of concept
              learning that results from this work will be integrated in that it will (a)
              investigate and account for a wide variety of concept learning results that are
              often studied separately, and (b) pool the research strengths of psychology,
              artificial intelligence machine learning, and computational learning theory.
              The first goal will place greater constraints on theoretical accounts, suggest
              new possibilities, and help to decide among competing explanations. The second
              goal will lead to a theory that is psychologically and computationally
              plausible, yet sufficiently rigorous to be analyzed with the mathematical tools
              of computational learning theory. Such a theory will contribute to the
              generation of new knowledge by broadening the understanding of concept learning
              in each of the fields, and by promoting new research issues and approaches in
              each field through interdisciplinary work.                                     
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                         
