Title       : Galanin in the Neuroendocrine Reproductive Axis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 2,  1999       
File        : a9720143

Award Number: 9720143
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt, Ph.D.                
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1997  
Expires     : August 31,  2000     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283174             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Steiner steiner@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Donald K. Clifton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              PI: Robert A. Steiner  IBN:  9720143  Reproduction in mammals is governed by a
              hormonal communication system linking the brain and pituitary gland to the
              gonads. The brain is responsible for integrating hormonal signals (e.g.,
              estrogen) from the ovaries and testes and directing the secretion of
              gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) from cells in the brain. These cells, in
              turn, serve as the final common pathway for the control of gonadotropin
              secretion from the pituitary gland. The overall goal of our research is to
              understand how these brain cells work to coordinate the functions of the
              reproductive system. The specific objective of this proposal is to learn more
              about the physiological significance of a small molecule, called galanin, and
              its receptor in the regulation of reproduction in the female rat. It has been
              shown by previous research that galanin plays a crucial role in the regulation
              of hormone secretion from the brain and pituitary; however, we have only a
              limited understanding of precise mechanisms by which galanin actually works.
              Galanin-containing cells are widely dispersed throughout the brain, including
              the forebrain and hindbrain, and galanin works together with other important
              signaling molecules (e.g., norepinephrine, NE, and GnRH) to exert its action.
              With probes that allow detection of messenger RNAs coding for galanin and its
              receptors coupled with a precise chemical analysis of the brain,  experiments
              have been designed first, to identify the target cells for galanin's action in
              the brain; second, to reveal the functional significance of galanin produced in
              the hindbrain for the control of reproductive hormone secretion from the
              pituitary gland; and third, to learn more about the interactions of galanin and
              other important molecules in mice bearing genetically altered brain chemistry.
              The results of the studies outlined in this proposal should help us to
              understand more about the basic cellular and molecular mechanisms governing
              reproduction and other important physiologi cal functions in mammals.
