Title       : The Biological Basis of Incremental Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1998     
File        : a9720350

Award Number: 9720350
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Vladimir J. Lumelsky                    
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $775000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Touretzky dst@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Julie A. Fiez  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Tai Sing Lee  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              William Skaggs  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James L. McClelland  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 6840      ROBOTICS AND HUMAN AUGMENTATIO
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent   Systems
              (LIS) initiative. It is concerned with learning that is   incremental in
              nature, resulting in skills that improve over time.  Such   learning is
              responsible for the development of perceptual   discriminations, stimulus
              associations, and motor skills, and is seen in   both humans and animals.  The
              goal of the research is a systems-level   neural theory of incremental
              learning.  The project combines computer   simulations with neurophysiological
              recording from the brains of   behaving rats and monkeys, functional magnetic
              resonance imaging in   humans, and robotic implementation. It is known that
              many parts of the   mammalian brain contribute to incremental learning. 
              Although the cortex   may play a central role, other brain areas known to make
              vital   contributions include the basal ganglia, hippocampus, amygdala, and  
              cerebellum.  It is important to understand the roles of these various   areas
              and their interactions with each other during learning.   Experimental work to
              be performed includes recording from various areas   of the brains of rats and
              monkeys during learning and imaging the brains   of humans performing analogous
              tasks.  Models of neural function will be   developed based on the monkey
              experiments and will be implemented on a   mobile robot.  These implemented
              models will allow the training of the   robot, and a comparison of the learning
              that takes place with that   observed in humans and animals.  The development
              of theories of   incremental learning will provide a better understanding of
              how the   process occurs and may result in improved approaches to the
              development   of skills in both humans and machines.                           
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
               
