Title       : Miracle, An Environment for Teaching Programming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 24,  1997  
File        : a9720433

Award Number: 9720433
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ernest L. McDuffie                      
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : September 30,  1999  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55043              (Estimated)
Investigator: George Springer springer¦cs.indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Raymond C. Y. Chin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 7410      DUE COURSE & CURRICULUM PROG
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 7419,9178,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Programming is problem solving! The essence of solving a problem on the computer
               is the production of a viable solution algorithm. This is then followed by a
              routine and  often tedious translation of the algorithm into machine
              recognizable instructions.  The project goal is to teach students to program in
              some popular languages, without becoming entangled in a web of syntactic
              complications. The project will develop a programming environment called
              "Miracle," in which high-level goal-oriented tools circumvent the unnecessary
              tedium of translation. Students can then focus on developing problem-solving
              skills and programming logic, while Miracle will generate the desired code for
              them once they have produced the algorithm. Although syntax is a useful skill
              for professional programmers, it is not the most important skill for most
              students who only need some idea about programming as part of their general
              "computer fluency."  A prototype of the programming environment Miracle has
              been built, which translates the student's pseudocode into a JavaScript code
              and allows the student to get his/her results. This prototype is not nearly
              powerful enough nor general enough. In this project, the prototype will be
              enhanced (1) to handle more sophisticated programming logic and (2) to offer,
              in addition to JavaScript, a variety of target languages, such as Visual Basic
              and Java. The advantages of this approach to teaching programming to students
              not majoring in computer science are (1) the problem-solving and analytic
              reasoning skills of students are sharpened because more time can be spent on
              these aspects of the course than on syntactic structure, and (2) students have
              the satisfaction of knowing that they can solve their problems and produce code
              in many popular programming languages using Miracle.
