Title       : Learning, Visualization, and the Analysis of Large-scale Multiple-media Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 23,  1997 
File        : a9720374

Award Number: 9720374
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $825000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tom M. Mitchell Tom.Mitchell@cs.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen E. Fienberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1321,1333,8888,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is being funded through the Learning and Intelligent Systems (LIS)
              Initiative, with funds partially provided by the MPS/OMA office.  Scientific
              and engineering data now come in large amounts and in new forms. Although the
              problem of analyzing and learning from purely numerical data has been heavily
              studied, we currently lack principled methods for analyzing the multiple-media
              data sets that form the basis of many modern empirical studies. These modern
              data sets contain a mixture of numerical features, symbolic logic descriptions,
              images, text, sound, and other media. This project offers an interdisciplinary
              research effort to create the statistical foundations and practical machine
              learning algorithms needed to take advantage of the growing number of such
              multiple-media data sets. The research plan is to develop new approaches to
              this problem by working with several large-scale multiple-media databases of
              significant scientific and societal importance.  This research will provide the
              theoretical foundations and practical algorithms for analyzing multiple-media
              data in a broad range of application domains. For example, many medical
              institutions now collect detailed patient records that can be analyzed to
              predict treatment outcomes for future patients. These medical records are
              typically multiple-media records consisting of numerical features (e.g.,
              temperature), symbolic features (e.g., gender), images (e.g., x-rays), other
              instrument data (e.g., EKG), text (e.g., physicians' notes), and other data.
              Current data analysis algorithms simply ignore most of these available
              features, because we lack well-understood methods for analyzing such
              multiple-media data. The current research seeks to develop new approaches that
              will be able to utilize the full information collected in such data sets. The
              goal is to extend the foundations of data interpretation that form the basis
              for many experimental sciences and engineering disciplines.                    
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                                                                                             
                       
