Title       : POWRE: New Numerical Algorithms for Particle Transport and Integral Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  1997 
File        : a9720607

Award Number: 9720607
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Lloyd E. Douglas                        
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  1998    
Expires     : May 31,  1999        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $48572              (Estimated)
Investigator: Suely P. Oliveira   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Engineering Exp Sta
	      332 Wisenbaker Engr. Res. Ctr.
	      College Station, TX  778433000    979/862-1696

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1592,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This work is funded through the Professional Opportunities for  Women in
              Research and Education (POWRE) program as a Visiting  Professorship Activity.  
               This proposal is for a visiting assistant professor position at  the
              University of Iowa. Under this award, the PI will spend six  months at the
              University of Iowa next Spring and Summer. The host  institution will provide
              financial support for some of the PI's  salary, and she is requesting half of
              her current salary from NSF  POWRE funds.  The invitation for this visit is
              important for the  PI because there she can extend her current research through
               collaboration and discussions with well-known scientists in the  areas of
              numerical analysis, computer science, and astronomy.  The PI's areas of
              research are Numerical Methods for  Particle Transport Problems and Numerical
              Methods for  Large-Scale Eigenvalue Problems.  Particle and radiation 
              transport problems arise in many astronomical phenomena, such as  the solar
              wind, radiation in the outer layers of the sun, and the  behavior of dust
              clouds and nebulae illuminated by stars.  (Dust clouds are considered to be the
              birth-place of stars.)  Eigenvalue problems enter into particle transport
              problems as a  way of solving criticality problems; that is, determining for 
              what parameters there can be a self-sustaining reaction.  This is of crucial
              importance in the areas of nuclear reactor  design, and also in the initiation
              of nuclear activity in stars.    The PI has developed new algorithms
              (sequential and parallel)  for solving transport equations and eigenvalue
              problems.  Transport equations are integro-differential equations, and the 
              study of these equations can be fruitfully extended by deeper  understanding of
              how the integral and differential terms  interact.  However, the new
              applications areas will lead to new  equations, and to significantly new
              methods and ideas.  The astronomical applications incorporate a number of new 
              phenomena such as reaction terms, and strong interactions between   the
              particles (or radiation) and the medium through which the  particles move.   
              The anticipated outcome from this project will be a deeper  understanding of
              the mathematics arising in differential-integral  equations which are related
              to transport phenoma, better  sequential and parallel algorithms for equations
              in the related  applications areas, and improvement of techniques  available to
              astronomers for simulating and studying the activity  of stars and the sun.
