Title       : Learning and Intelligent Systems:Inquiry-Based Science Education: Cognitive
               Measures and Systems Support
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  1999       
File        : a9720363

Award Number: 9720363
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth C. Whang                        
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : August 31,  2001     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1092499            (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil A. Stillings nstillings@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Lee Spector  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Beverly P. Woolf  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas J. Murray  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven Weisler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence J. Winship  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 8888      LEARNING & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                9720363  Stillings    This project is being funded through the Learning and
              Intelligent Systems (LIS) Initiative.  to study tutorial interaction and
              learning outcomes in a feasible   model of college-level inquiry-oriented
              instruction, as it is implemented   in the Hampshire College science
              curriculum. This research will occur   during the first two years. It will be
              conducted by Neil Stillings,   Lawrence Winship, and a post-doctoral fellow in
              cognition and education,   with the assistance of undergraduate research
              assistants and an outside   educational research consultant.    We will extend
              current intelligent multimedia tutoring technology to   support college-level
              inquiry-oriented instruction. This research will   involve the development of
              new software architectures to support inquiry   in simulation environments and
              in integrated, computer-controlled   laboratory environments. It will be
              conducted by Lee Spector, Beverly   Woolf, Steven Weisler, and a post-doctoral
              fellow in computer science,   with some additional involvement from Neil
              Stillings and Lawrence Winship.    We will demonstrate our extensions of
              educational software technology by   developing three college-level 
              inquiry-oriented software packages in the   biological and cognitive  sciences.
              Our plan is to produce one    application in the language sciences, one in the
              environmental sciences,    and one in human biology. These applications will be
              classroom-ready and    suitable for use outside the research context. The
              primary developers   will be Lee Spector, Steven Weisler, a post-doctoral
              fellow in computer   science, a professional programmer, and graduate
              assistants in computer   science. They will work with faculty members in the
              appropriate   disciplines. The original plan was to develop six applications
              rather   than three. The budget has been reduced accordingly.    At least two
              of the software applications will be tested at  Hampshire,   and at least one
              of them will be revised to reflect the testing results.    The  classroom
              testing involves an important feature of the proposed    software
              architectures, which will have built-in educational and    psychological
              measurement capabilities. The primary researchers for the   software testing
              phase of the project are  Neil Stillings, Beverly Woolf,   the post- doctoral
              fellow in cognition and education, and an outside    educational consultant.
              The original proposal also involved the   introduction and testing of  software
              at the University of Massachusetts.   That aspect of the proposal has been
              dropped and the budget reduced   accordingly.
