Title       : Efficient In-Situ and Reduced Chemistry Algorithms for Chemical Process Flow
               Simulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 20,  1998      
File        : a9720205

Award Number: 9720205
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Geoffrey A. Prentice                    
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1997    
Expires     : September 30,  2000  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $170484             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rodney O. Fox   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1403      PROCESS & REACTION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal objectives of this project are the development and implementation
              of efficient in-situ and reduced chemistry algorithms for detailed chemical
              process flow simulation.  The current trend in flow simulation in the chemical
              process industries is towards the application of computational fluid dynamics
              (CFD) to obtain a more complete descriptions of the flow field and chemical
              species distribution inside chemical reactors.  For chemically reacting flows,
              treatment of the chemical source terms resulting from complex kinetic schemes
              (i.e. greater than 10 to 20 species) is often the most computationally
              intensive part of a flow simulation.  Considerable gains in computational
              efficiency are thus possible by exploiting two common features of complex
              kinetic schemes, namely, the large separation in chemical time scales (relative
              to flow time scales), and the compactness of the "accessed region" (i.e., the
              compositions that actually occur in a particular simulation).  Two
              methodologies that make use of these features will be investigated.  The first,
              in-situ adaptive tabulation (ISAT), is applicable to moderately large kinetic
              schemes (around 20 chemical species) and, due to its flexibility of
              implementation, should be powerful for chemical process flow simulations.  The
              second, intrinsic low-dimensional manifold (ILDM) method, is applicable to
              larger kinetic schemes (provided that the majority of the chemical time scales
              are smaller than the flow time scales), but computationally more difficult to
              implement since it requires retabulation after each change in the kinetic
              scheme or flow parameters.  In order to overcome the shortcomings of each
              individual algorithm, implementations of a combined ILDM-ISAT algorithm will be
              explored.    The algorithms will be implemented in an existing full probability
              density function (PDF) code designed for turbulent reacting flow simulation. 
              Full pdf simulations of two industrial chemical reaction schemes
              (thermochlorination of methane and free-radical poly merization of ethylene)
              will be carried out in order to validate and document the efficiency of the
              algorithms under a wide range of actual plant reactor conditions.
