Title       : US-South Africa Workshop: Intelligent Systems in Power Electronics, Pretoria,
               South Africa, July 1998
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  1998   
File        : a9720708

Award Number: 9720708
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia Jones Tsuchitani               
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1998   
Expires     : January 31,  1999    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas G. Habetler thabetler@ee.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1066,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9720708  Habetler    This award provides support for eight US investigators to
              participate in a US-South Africa Workshop on Intelligent Systems in Power
              Electronics, Pretoria, South Africa, July 1998.  The US organizer is Professor
              Thomas G. Habetler of the School of Electrical Engineering, Georgia Institute
              of Technology, and Professor Ron Harley, Department of Electrical Engineering,
              University of Natal, Durban, South Africa.  The workshop will be held during
              and immediately following the FEPPCON (IEEE Future of Electronic Power
              Processing and Conversion) conference, which itself follows the IEEE
              International Symposium on Industrial Electronics.  The US-South Africa
              workshop will focus on trends in intelligent systems, algorithms and their
              implementation, hardware considerations, applications of artificial
              intelligence (AI) in power electronics (PE), and future applications.  The
              purpose of the workshop is to bring together US and South African researchers
              in the AI and PE fields to plot out a map of the important steps to take in
              this evolving technology.    Intelligent systems incorporating AI allows one to
              transfer human knowledge and skills to computers or other types of hardware. 
              AI also enables a hardware or computer system to use algorithms to train itself
              to a level that a human cannot achieve in terms of complexity and speed of
              decision making.  AI researchers traditionally study new algorithms and often
              have expertise in mathematics and the theory of algorithm development and
              performance.  AI has been successfully applied to pattern recognition, time
              series prediction, and system identification and control.  All of these
              functions are crucial in the operation of advanced PE system controllers.  PE
              researchers traditionally study the devices, circuit topologies, and control
              algorithms that make up power processing equipment.    The award is supported
              jointly by the Division of International Programs and the Division of
              Electrical and Communications Systems.  ***
