Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Domains of Holomorphy and Their Automorphisms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  1992    
File        : a9201019

Award Number: 9201019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John V. Ryff                            
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kang-Tae Kim ktkim@gauss.math.brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1261      CLASSICAL ANALYSIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns mathematical research on problems                   
              arising in the area of several complex variables.  It involves                 
              the function-theoretic and geometric properties of bounded                     
              pseudoconvex domains in n-dimensional complex space and their                  
              automorphism groups.  The first goal of the research is to                     
              identify domains with noncompact automorphism groups by the local              
              geometry of their boundaries. Particular interest is placed on                 
              boundaries which are not entirely smooth.  The second component                
              of the work is the extension of studies on the asymptotic                      
              behavior of the intrinsic invariant metrics defined on the                     
              bounded pseudoconvex domains.  The research relates the boundary               
              behavior of the automorphisms and the compactness of the                       
              automorphism groups.  Finally, work will be done identifying                   
              the bounded symmetric domains by their boundary geometry                       
              among domains with noncompact automorphism groups.  The projects               
              are connected by the theme that the size of the automorphism                   
              groups and the boundary geometry of bounded domains are tied                   
              together.                                                                      
                   The study of several complex variables arose at the                       
              beginning of the century initially to examine those properties of              
              classical function theory which generalize to several variables.               
              It turned out that most properties do not generalize and research              
              turned instead toward some of the more intriguing geometric and                
              analytic questions which arise only when the domains are of                    
              dimension two or greater.  This project continues that tradition.
