Title       : Ultrafast Processes & Optoelectronic Properties of Ultrafast Processes & Optf
               Semiconductor Microstructures, Award in Indian Currency
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  1994       
File        : a9201350

Award Number: 9201350
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : December 1,  1991   
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $0                  (Estimated)
Investigator: B. M. Arora   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tata Inst of Fund Res
	      
	      Bombay, IN  00000    /   -

NSF Program : 6124      INDIA (SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH)
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Technical Narrative: The research project "Ultrafast Processes                 
              and Optoelectronic Properties of Semiconductor Microstructures"                
              will be a collaboration between Dr. Arora of the Tata Institute                
              of Fundamental Research, Bombay, India and Dr. Jagdeep                         
              Shah at the AT&T Bell Laboratories, Holmdel, N.J.  The specific                
              aims of this proposal are: (1) to facilitate cooperation between               
              TIFR scientists and Dr. Shah and his group at the AT&T Bell                    
              Laboratories in setting up material and device structure                       
              preparation systems and time resolved measurement laboratory                   
              required for the study of the ultrafast phenomena in novel                     
              semiconductor heterostructure and superlattice systems, and (2)                
              to collaborate in the research programs related to the                         
              optoelectronic properties of the above materials.                              
                                                                                             
              Scope: This proposal is for funds to cover the travel and the per              
              diem expenses of the Principal Investigator and other U.S.                     
              scientists participating in this collaboration.  The                           
              investigation is of great importance from the basic science point              
              of view as the studies will provide fundamental understanding of               
              nonequilibrium carrier dynamics and new optoelectronic phenomena               
              in the above structures.  Furthermore, the study is of great                   
              practical relevance in understanding the operation of novel                    
              devices which have been made from very special thin film                       
              heterostructures.  This proposal meets the objectives of the U.S.              
              -India Cooperative Science Program.  ***
