Title       : In Memory Database Recovery Issues
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IIS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  1994      
File        : a9201643

Award Number: 9201643
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Y. T. Chien                             
	      IIS  DIV OF INFORMATION & INTELLIGENT SYSTEMS
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : August 31,  1996     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $202998             (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret H. Dunham mhd@engr.smu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Southern Methodist Univ
	      
	      Dallas, TX  75275    214/692-2000

NSF Program : 6855      INFORMATION & DATA MANAGEMENT
Fld Applictn: 0104000   Information Systems                     
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This is the first of a three year continuing award.  The                       
              increasing size and decreasing cost of semiconductor memory has                
              prompted research into databases which are memory resident.                    
              These Main Memory DataBase (MMDB) systems are aimed at high                    
              throughput applications such as airline reservation systems,                   
              phone switching databases, and other real time systems where the               
              availability of the memory resident data is crucial.  To achieve               
              this high availability with volatile RAM requires a backup                     
              archive database on disk as well as efficient algorithms to                    
              checkpoint the database to the archive and to recover it from the              
              archive to main memory after a system failure.  It has been shown              
              that MMDB systems often perform better with deferred update                    
              techniques where data to be updated is first placed in a special               
              nonvolatile shadow area and only at transaction commit time is                 
              placed in main memory.  The authors are investigating both                     
              checkpointing and reloading of MMDB databases with the use of                  
              more conventional immediate update (IU) techniques as well as                  
              deferred update (DU) strategies.  The best checkpointing                       
              approaches are to be determined as are partial reloading                       
              strategies.  A partial reload allows the database to be brought                
              online after a system failure faster because not all of the MMDB               
              is reloaded prior to bringing the system up.  This research                    
              represents the first examination of techniques for partial                     
              reloading of MMDB systems.  Due to the volatility of RAM, the                  
              high throughput needs of MMDB applications, and the potential for              
              partial reloading to dramatically increase the uptime of database              
              systems, the results and impact of this research are both                      
              widespread and significant.
