Title       : Benthic Mineralization of Organic Matter on the Continental Rise and the
               Dissolution of CaCO 3 at the Deep Sea Floor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 17,  1995   
File        : a9201896

Award Number: 9201896
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : January 1,  1993    
Expires     : December 31,  1996   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285808             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard A. Jahnke rick@skio.peachnet.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Skidaway Inst of Ocngrphy
	      10 Ocean Science Circle
	      Savannah, GA  31411    912/598-2453

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 9189,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project is a continuation of a study of the cycling and                   
              diagenesis of organic matter at the sea floor.  Knowledge of the               
              deposition flux, cycling rate and burial rate of biogenic elements             
              in sediments is required to assess the influence of ocean processes            
              on global climate and to properly interpret the sedimentary record.            
              Recent results from this project have raised questions about the               
              dissolution of CaCO3 from sea floor sediments as a result of CO2               
              metabolically released in the pore water.  Models of the alkalinity            
              change in benthic flux chambers predict an alkalinity flux from the            
              sediments, but the chamber data show little if any alkalinity flux             
              during sea floor deployments.  The goals of the present research               
              are 1.  To determine the influence of metabolically released CO2 on            
              the dissolution of CaCO3 in deep sea sediments; 2. To determine the            
              kinetic expression that accurately represents CaCO3 dissolution on             
              the dea floor.  The first part of the project consists of a short              
              cruise to the continental slope off North Carolina to test a new               
              High Pressure Sediment Sampler and some alterations to the benthic             
              chambers by the P.I.   The project is being coordinated with work              
              on the same topic by Sayles and Martin (using a wire-line in situ              
              whole core squeezer) and by Reimers (using PCO2 microelectrodes.               
              The short test cruise provides an opportunity to test all the                  
              equipment and in addition may provide date on carbonate dissolution            
              in an area where flux of organic carbon to the sea floor is                    
              predicted to be high, but bottom waters are saturated with CaCO3.              
              The major portion of the work will be focussed on the Ceara Rise-              
              guiana Basin region where the presence of Antarctic Bottom Water               
              undersaturated with CaCO3 should cause significant measurable                  
              dissolution.  The sea floor fluxes of carbonate system parameters              
              measured by the in situ benthic flux chambers (this project) will              
              be compared to the results from the other techniques.
