Title       : Geographic Population Structure and Species Difference in Ahermatypic
               Scleractinian Corals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9201712

Award Number: 9201712
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine A. Beauchamp   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1175,
Abstract    :
                   Life history patterns in benthic marine invertebrates                     
              display tremendous diversity.  This diversity can be found among               
              species living in different habitats or within the same habitat.               
              In this research project the P.I. will study the influence of                  
              life-history patterns, environment, and phylogeny on the genetic               
              structure of ahermatypic (lacking symbiotic algae and non-reef                 
              building) scleractinian corals from the west coast of North                    
              America and the Pacific and Caribbean coasts of Panama by                      
              examining: 1) population-genetic structure of co-occurring                     
              species with different life-history traits, 2) effects of larval               
              behavior and dispersal on genetic variation and population                     
              relatedness (local gene flow), 3) genetic affinities of closely                
              related species (congenerics) from contrasting environments.                   
                   The goal of this project is to adapt molecular techniques                 
              for studies of coral population genetics, evolutionary ecology,                
              and systematics.  This study will use a series of molecular                    
              techniques (restriction endonuclease patterns of nuclear                       
              ribosomal and mitochondrial DNA, polymerase chain reaction, DNA                
              sequencing and DNA fingerprinting) to examine relatedness at                   
              several phylogenetic levels.  Three genera/ten species of                      
              ahermatypic corals have been chosen because they are diverse and               
              abundant in temperate and tropical oceans (from shallow to deep                
              water), and they display different patterns of growth (solitary                
              and colonial) and reproduction (free spawning with pelagic larvae              
              and brooding with benthic larvae).  The results of this study                  
              will provide information on the selective forces acting on life                
              history patterns, gene flow within and among populations, and                  
              models of speciation in the sea.
