Title       : PRF: Assessing the Nestmate Relatedness and Sperm Precedence in a Communal Bee,
               Perdita portalis, Using DNA Fingerprnting
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9201921

Award Number: 9201921
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Bryan N. Danforth   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1175,
Abstract    :
                   This research will involve two interrelated projects, (1)                 
              calculating nestmate relatedness and (2) assessing the extent of               
              sperm precedence in a communal, ground-nesting bee, Perdita                    
              portalis.  These two goals can be achieved most effectively using              
              methods of DNA fingerprinting.  Estimating average relatedness                 
              among nestmates is of interest because female P. portalis nest                 
              communally, with from 3 to 29 adult females per nest.  Communal                
              nesting, the sharing of a single nest by more than one                         
              reproductively active female, is an evolutionary stable form of                
              social interaction which is widespread in bees, but which has                  
              received little attention by students of social evolution.  While              
              many relatedness estimates exist for eusocial species, few data                
              exist for communal species.  All behavioral evidence suggests                  
              that nestmates in P. portalis are closely related, both because                
              nests are re-used for generations and because flightless males                 
              mate with their female nestmates.  In order to understand the                  
              role of kin selection, and other factors, in shaping communal                  
              societies, it is essential to accurately assess within nest                    
              relatedness.  Part two of the project focuses on the selective                 
              factors underlying the origin of maintenance of dimorphic males                
              in P. portalis.   Males in this species occur in two non-                      
              overlapping morphs: a large-headed, flightless morph and a small-              
              headed, flight capable morph.  Large-headed males mate with their              
              female nestmates immediately prior to oviposition and engage in                
              male-male battles which often lead to death of one combatant.                  
              These observations suggest that the large-headed morph has arisen              
              as a result of sperm precedence that confers a last male mating                
              advantage.  In order to test this hypotheses it will be necessary              
              to assess paternity of eggs produced in observation nests.  The                
              two projects are related in that the female social behavior                    
              establishes selective pressures on male mating behavior, and                   
              intra-nest mating should lead to elevated levels to nestmate                   
              relatedness.
