Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology of Foliations and Foliated Knot Complements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  1994      
File        : a9201723

Award Number: 9201723
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121200             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence W. Conlon lc@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project concerns a long-standing collaboration with John             
              Cantwell into the structure of foliations of codimension-1,                    
              especially on closed 3-manifolds.  It grows directly out of their              
              theory of levels (1978), which has influenced not only their own               
              work, but that of the French and Japanese schools as well.  The                
              main direction will be to explore the deep relations between the               
              topology of knot complements and taut, finite depth foliations.  A             
              major tool in this investigation will be the "generalized Poincare-            
              Bendixson" theory developed by the investigator and Cantwell as                
              part of the theory of levels.  The lowest level of complexity is               
              that of a fibered knot, here called a "depth-zero knot."  These                
              knots are relatively rare, have been studied classically, and are              
              relatively well understood.  The next level of complexity is                   
              exhibited by the depth-one knots, which are very numerous (as shown            
              in David Gabai's thesis) and present many interesting questions.               
              Depth-one knots are currently the focus of this project, and                   
              results already obtained confirm their interest.  Other questions              
              to be studied relate the degree of smoothability of taut foliations            
              to topology.  Although smoothness questions have not particularly              
              concerned 3-manifold topologists, a strong case can be made that               
              their relevance to topology is deep.  In a rather different                    
              direction, the proposer remains interested in the ergodic theory of            
              foliations, especially of exceptional minimal sets, and the related            
              question of whether the Godbillon-Vey invariant detects such                   
              minimal sets (almost certainly not).                                           
                   A foliation of a manifold is a way of filling the manifold                
              with lower dimensional pieces.  In the case of a codimension-one               
              foliation, these pieces are of dimension one less than that of the             
              given manifold.  Think of an onion or an artichoke.  The topology              
              of a manifold is strongly related to the kind of foliation which it            
              will support, and in skillful hands this relation has been forged              
              into a powerful tool for investigating the topology of manifolds.              
              It is an unintuitive fact that the major algebraic tools for                   
              investigating the topology of manifolds work best in the case of               
              high dimensional manifolds.  The geometric tool afforded by                    
              foliations is thus particularly welcome in the case of low                     
              dimensional manifolds.  A major instance of this is the                        
              investigation of the complement of a knot in the three-dimensional             
              sphere, which turns out to be an important way to gain information             
              about the knot itself.
