Title       : Investigation of the Mechanism of Nucleosome Removal from the PH05 Promoter
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  1992      
File        : a9201615

Award Number: 9201615
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : October 31,  1993    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $41464              (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Svaren CHALKLR@VUCTRVAX  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1116,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Long & Medium-Term Research:  Investigation of the Mechanism                   
              of Nucleosome Removal from the PHO5 Promoter                                   
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. John P. Svaren to go to the University of Munich to work                
              with Dr. Wolfram Horz.  Their project is designed to explore the               
              ability of eukaryotic trans-activators to modulate chromatin                   
              structure.  Numerous in vitro studies have shown that nucleosomes              
              can block binding of critical transcription factors to a DNA                   
              template.  In addition, the promoters of most actively transcribing            
              genes appear to be at least partially nucleosome-free.  Therefore,             
              since virtually all eukaryotic DNA is normally packaged into                   
              nucleosomes, there must be some mechanism to keep nucleosomes                  
              from occupying critical promoter elements of active genes.  Study              
              of the PHO5 gene in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae should                  
              give more insight into this process.  Upon induction of PHO5                   
              transcription (by phosphate starvation), four nucleosomes are                  
              removed from the promoter region.  Several experiments by Dr.                  
              Wolfram Horz's lab suggest that the trans-activator, PHO4, is                  
              responsible for triggering the nucleosome loss.  Drs. Svaren and               
              Horz's project is designed to map the protein domain of PHO4 that              
              is involved in nucleosome dissolution.  In particular, the acidic              
              domain of PHO4 will be investigated to see whether it is necessary             
              or sufficient for this transformation.  These experiments could                
              potentially reveal another mechanism whereby trans-acting factors              
              regulate transcription.                                                        
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel, a stipend for twelve months and a dependents' allowance.
