Title       : Internet Related Registration Services
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  1992      
File        : a9201059

Award Number: 9201059
Award Instr.: Interagency Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: William Decker                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : March 10,  1993      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $564948             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dale D. Dyson   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dept of Def-Infor Sys Agen
	      8th & South Courthouse Rd.
	      Washington, DC  203050004    /   -

NSF Program : 4090      ADVANCED NET INFRA & RSCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 4090,
Abstract    :
                   The NSFNET, a nationwide computer network sponsored by the                
              National Science Foundation for use by the academic research and               
              education community, has used the Defense Data Network (DDN)                   
              system for assigning and registering electronic addresses for                  
              authorized host computers.  These unique addresses were assigned               
              by SRI International, Inc. as part of long term contract that DCA              
              had with SRI and through an Interagency Agreement the Defense                  
              Advance Research Projects Agency (DARPA) had with NSF.                         
                   The National Science Foundation's mounting responsibility to              
              provide the communications infrastructure, including information               
              services for the scientific community and for the pending High                 
              Performance Computing and Communications initiative (HPCC), has                
              made it necessary for NSF to assume responsibilty for provision                
              of its own registration services for the user community.                       
                   As a result of a recompetition for services, GSI has                      
              replaced SRI as the contractor to DCA for provision of                         
              registration services and network and host machine address                     
              assignment.  Accordingly, the DCA agrees to provide address                    
              registration services for the NSF community of users on an                     
              interim basis while the NSF implements its own soliciation for                 
              long term registration and information services.  This will                    
              insure continuity of this critical operation for the entire                    
              Internet community.
