Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Studies of the Effect of Polymer/Solvent
               Self-Diffusion and Thermodynamics Coupling on Mutual-Diffusion
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 21,  1992    
File        : a9201234

Award Number: 9201234
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : August 31,  1994     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16200              (Estimated)
Investigator: John M. Zielinski   (Principal Investigator current)
              John L. Duda  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0510302   Energetics & Thermodynamc               
              53        Engineering-Chemical                    
Program Ref : 1506,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at                       
              Foreign Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S.                      
              scientists and engineers to conduct three to twelve months of                  
              research abroad at research centers of proven excellence.  The                 
              program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the             
              use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and                       
              experimental conditions abroad.                                                
                                                                                             
              This award will support a twelve-month postdoctoral research visit             
              by Dr. John M. Zielinski of Pennsylvania State University to work              
              with Professor Doctor Hans Sillescu at the Institut fur                        
              Physikalische Chemie der Universitat Mainz.                                    
                                                                                             
              Knowledge of the diffusion rate is essential in designing adequate             
              products for numerous applications including: (1) devolatilization,            
              (2) medicinal time-controlled release, (3) drying of paints and                
              coatings, (4) packaging or barrier membranes and (5) separation                
              processes.  Despite the importance of polymer/solvent diffusion                
              coefficients, however, proportionately little data of this type are            
              available in the literature, particularly at varying solvent                   
              concentrations.  Due to the escalating emphasis on reducing                    
              emissions from commercial processes, diffusion studies of                      
              penetrant molecules in polymer systems at this time are warranted              
              if not essential.                                                              
                                                                                             
              Mutual-diffusion processes are inherently coupled to polymer and               
              solvent self-diffusion and their thermodynamic interaction.  The               
              Pulsed Gradient Spin Echo (PGSE) nuclear magnetic resonance                    
              (NMR) technique and holographic grating have previously been                   
              employed to measure solvent self-diffusion coefficients.  Only                 
              recently, however, have advances in instrumentation rendered these             
              techniques viable for addressing polymer self-diffusion as well.               
                                                                                             
              Although acquiring data directly is extremely important,                       
              complementary theoretical studies are also required so that                    
              diffusional characteristics for polymer/solvent systems can be                 
              predicted a priori.  The coupling of the self-and mutual coefficients          
              is the weakest link in existing diffusion theories.  Consequently, an          
              indepth experimental and theoretical study of the relationship                 
              between the individual self-diffusion coefficients and the                     
              polymer/solvent mutual-diffusion coefficient is proposed.                      
                                                                                             
              This award recommendation provides funds for a stipend for twelve              
              months.
