Title       : The Limits to Copepod Growth: Resolving the Malthusian Dilemma
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 15,  1994     
File        : a9201476

Award Number: 9201476
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : December 31,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200673             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark E. Huntley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              43        Biological Oceanography                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                  Zooplankton are the major pathway for carbon transfer to                  
              higher trophic levels, and to deeper water and the sediments.                  
              Estimates of zooplankton production are critical in understanding              
              how short and long term variations in primary production affect                
              these rates of carbon transfer.  Drs. Huntley and Lopez have                   
              hypothesized that copepod growth is predictable with first-order               
              precision from habitat temperature alone.  If this relationship                
              proves to be robust, we will have a powerful tool for estimating               
              zooplankton production.  However, the apparent simplicity of this              
              relation raises major issues about plankton dynamics since it                  
              denies the usual assumption that zooplankton are food-limited.                 
                   These investigators from the Universities of California and               
              Hawaii will investigate the thesis that, at the population level,              
              food limitation of copepods operates mainly through changes in                 
              mortality rate.  They suggest that there is strong evidence for                
              this in fish populations where density dependence operates on the              
              mortality of the early life stages.  Thus, the general solution of             
              the Malthusian dilemma for marine populations is to die young                  
              rather than starve later.  They will address these key questions in            
              the following ways:                                                            
              -    (1) Direct measurements of the generation times of a variety              
              of warm-water copepod species, to fill a critical gap in the                   
              database;                                                                      
              -    (2) Experimental testing of the hypothesis that size-specific             
              predation pressure can compensate for the effects of food-limited              
              growth rate by increasing apparent development rate at the                     
              population level.
