Title       : Materials Synthesis and Processing: Modeling and Control ofMacro-Phenomena and
               Micro-Structure in Steel Rolling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  1995      
File        : a9201831

Award Number: 9201831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kesh S. Narayanan                       
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  1992    
Expires     : September 30,  1996  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $174080             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ampere A. Tseng   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      32 and Chestnut Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              57        Engineering-Metallurgy & Material       
Program Ref : 9146,9161,9162,9295,AMPP,MANU,
Abstract    :
                   A combined numerical and experimental research program will               
              be developed to study the hot rolling process with emphasis on the             
              understanding of the thermomechanical behavior and its associated              
              microstructure development.  In the numerical approach, macro-heat             
              transfer and mechanical models will be integrated into a                       
              metallurgical- or micro-model to simulate the process considered.              
              With this integrated model, the relationship between the process               
              parameters and microstructure of the workpiece can be established.             
              In the experimental approach, the thermomechanical characteristics             
              of the rolling process will be simulated by a hot deformation                  
              tester.  The temperature and time dependent changes of                         
              microstructure during and after deformation will be examined.  The             
              testing data will be utilized to determine the flow behavior for               
              macro-modeling and the material parameters needed in the micro-                
              modeling.  The kinetic theories associated with statistical                    
              techniques will be adopted to form the governing equations for the             
              researched micro-models.  As a result, the needed boundary                     
              conditions for solving these equations will be provided by the                 
              experimental data.  The experimental study will also be used to                
              verify the modeling predictions to further refine the micro- and               
              macro-models developed.  Then the strategy to have better control              
              of the microstructure and mechanical properties can be developed.              
              Further understanding of the thermomechanical and metallurgical                
              phenomena should certainly make for operating the process more                 
              effectively cost-wise.  The research may also serve as a catalyst              
              to the development of a new rolling technology for new                         
              applications.                                                                  
                   The study may allow the production of steel shapes of improved            
              quality at higher speeds.
