Title       : Phynotypic and Genetic Evolution of Primate Locomotor Morphology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  1992       
File        : a9201501

Award Number: 9201501
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luci Ann P. Kohn   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This project will test the critical assumption held in quantitative            
              genetics that heritable covariation remains stable over                        
              evolutionary time.  This assumption will be tested by examining the            
              locomotor morphology of three Primate genera,  specifically                    
              tamarins (Saguinus fuscicollis, Saguinus oedipus),  marmosets                  
              (Callithrix jacchus) and macaques (Macaca mulatta).  With these                
              three genera,  the stability of heritable covariation will be                  
              examined over short evolutionary time with comparisons among                   
              tamarins and marmosets.  Patterns will also be examined over long              
              evolutionary time,  with tamarins and marmosets compared to                    
              macaques.  Linear measurements of the appendicular skeleton and                
              girdles will be analyzed to examine covariation of traits between              
              appendages within each species,  and within appendages between                 
              species.  The samples used in this study contain individuals of                
              known family relationship.  Mixed-model analytical techniques                  
              allows the use of all known relatives in the estimation of the                 
              genetic,  environmental and phenotypic covariance structure.  The              
              study taxa include two arboreal quadrupeds (S. oedipus, C.                     
              jacchus),  a terrestrial quadruped (C. jacchus) and a primate which            
              frequently locomotes by vertical clinging and leaping (S.                      
              fuscicollis).  In addition,  this study will contrast different                
              phenotypic and locomotor groups to provide insight into the                    
              evolution of primate locomotor morphology.
