Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Research in Partial Differential Equations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 23,  1996  
File        : a9201980

Award Number: 9201980
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joe W. Jenkins                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 15,  1992       
Expires     : April 30,  1996      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Francois J. Treves treves@math.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   This project continues mathematical research on the                       
              existence and smoothness of solutions of overdetermined systems                
              of first-order partial differential equations, both linear and                 
              nonlinear.  It is striking that, in contrast to ordinary                       
              differential equations, there are simple linear partial                        
              differential equations possessing no solution.  The analysis of                
              this, and related basic questions, lies at the heart of this                   
              research.  The work, phrased in terms of transformed equations                 
              known as pseudodifferential operators, seeks to obtain                         
              information about local solvability of systems of equations.                   
              Related work is going forward on the microlocal solvability of                 
              first order nonlinear equations through study of the                           
              singularities of the equations known as the analytic wave-front                
              set.  What has been discovered so far is that the singularities                
              propagate exactly as in the linear case. A new line of                         
              investigation has also begun.  This considers studies of systems               
              of complex vector fields on a manifold.  It mixes classical ideas              
              of differential operators with cohomology theory on the manifold               
              which can be used to define generalized characteristic classes.                
              The first objective will be to examine the implications of the                 
              nonvanishing of those classes.  Also to be considered are the                  
              geometrical properties absence of due to this nonvanishing.                    
                   Partial differential equations form the backbone of                       
              mathematical modeling in the physical sciences.  Phenomena which               
              involve continuous change such as that seen in motion, materials               
              and energy are known to obey certain general laws which are                    
              expressible in terms of the interactions and relationships                     
              between partial derivatives.  The key role of mathematics is not               
              to state the relationships, but rather, to extract qualitative                 
              and quantitative meaning from them.
