Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Topology and Geometry of Algebraic Varieties
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1994     
File        : a9201940

Award Number: 9201940
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $207900             (Estimated)
Investigator: William L. Pardon wlp@math.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard M. Hain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Pardon will study the topological and geometric properties of             
              an algebraic variety (the set of solutions of some polynomial                  
              equations), particularly when the variety is singular (not smooth).            
              On the geometric side, he will study the spectrum of the Laplace               
              operator on such spaces in order to obtain information about their             
              singularities.  Of particular interest are spectral invariants                 
              which turn out to be rational, since they are most likely to be                
              topological invariants.  Hain, with the help of his students, plans            
              to continue his study of the topology of spaces that parameterize              
              compact riemann surfaces and configurations of points on them.  The            
              main objectives of the project are to compute and/or gain                      
              qualitative information about the cohomology of these moduli and               
              configuration spaces, both with trivial and twisted coefficients.              
              These results should yield geometric results in algebraic geometry,            
              and may have applications to particle physics via conformal field              
              theory.  The main tools to be used are Hodge theory and                        
              representation theory combined with traditional geometric methods.             
                   The topology and geometry of spaces defined as solution sets              
              of systems of polynomial equations is a surprisingly rich subject,             
              having applications in many diverse areas of mathematics and                   
              mathematical physics.  The investigators and their graduate                    
              students are bringing to bear a marvelously varied arsenal of                  
              techniques.  Of particular interest are constructions that depend              
              explicitly upon features of the geometry of a space, area,                     
              distance, curvature, and so forth, and yet combine them in such a              
              way as to be provably dependent only on the topology of the space,             
              that is on features of the space so basic as to be unaffected by               
              stretching and distorting its shape, short of cutting or tearing.
