Title       : Seismic Strengthening of Unreinforced Masonry Structures with Fiber Composite
               Fabrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1992   
File        : a9201110

Award Number: 9201110
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Shih-Chi Liu                            
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mohammad R. Ehsani ehsani@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Hamid Saadatmanesh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1637      STRUCT SYS & HAZ MIT OF STRUCT
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This project is supported under the Small                                      
              Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER,                                         
              Brochure NSF-89-85) Program.                                                   
                                                                                             
              Due to their high tensile strength, durability,                                
              and superior fatigue behavior, composite                                       
              materials have been increasingly applied in civil                              
              engineering constructions.  One of such                                        
              applications involves the use of fiber-glass                                   
              reinforcement, sheets, or wires for seismic                                    
              repair or strengthening of existing structures.                                
              Some success of such techniques has been                                       
              demonstrated in several case applications                                      
              around the world.                                                              
                                                                                             
              The use of glass-fiber reinforced techniques                                   
              have been successfully tested in strengthening                                 
              of reinforced concrete structural members such                                 
              as beams and bridge-column piers.  However,                                    
              the feasibility of such similar applications to                                
              unreinforced masonry (URM) buildings--one of                                   
              the nation's most vulnerable existing building                                 
              stocks to seismic hazard--has not been seriously                               
              explored.  This project ventures into such a                                   
              new research area where there is a potential to                                
              develop a technically-sound and cost-effective                                 
              engineering measure to strengthen existing                                     
              URM buildings in the nation's seismic regions.                                 
                                                                                             
              The objective of this exploratory research                                     
              project is to demonstrate the feasibility of                                   
              seismic strengthening of URM structures by                                     
              epoxy-bonding composite fibers to the exterior                                 
              surfaces of the structure.  The focus of the                                   
              study are:  (a) to determine the bond behavior                                 
              of composite fabrics to masonry, and (b) to                                    
              study the effectiveness of glass fibers as low-                                
              cost reinforcement materials.
