Title       : Mathematical Sciences: The Numerical Analysis of Evolution Equations Over Long
               Time Intervals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 20,  1994      
File        : a9201727

Award Number: 9201727
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1992    
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $98918              (Estimated)
Investigator: Andrew M. Stuart stuart@cs.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra St.
	      Stanford, CA  94305    415/723-2300

NSF Program : 1271      COMPUTATIONAL MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,1303,9216,9218,9263,GLCH,HPCC,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The investigator will analyse and design numerical methods                
              for initial value problems whose solutions are required over long              
              time intervals.  Two classes of equations will be studied: those               
              possessing an absorbing set, where the long-time dynamics may be               
              extremely complex (chaotic) but remain in a bounded set; and with              
              those a gradient structure, so that solutions approach the set of              
              (typically multiple) steady states for large time.  For fixed                  
              time-stepping strategies, the proposed area of research is a                   
              generalisation of the classical theories of A, B and G stability.              
              These classical theories apply to classes of problems with simple              
              dynamics and it is of interest to determine how the theories can               
              be used and modified to cope with more complicated dynamical                   
              problems.  For variable time-stepping strategies some existing                 
              work on linear problems will be generalised to nonlinear                       
              problems. Work will also be directed towards the approximation of              
              homoclinic and heteroclinic orbits, which play an important role               
              in the long-time dynamics of the two classes of equation under                 
              consideration.                                                                 
                   Many phenomena of interest in the physical sciences and                   
              engineering require the understanding of dynamical phenomena that              
              evolve over very long time scales.  Examples include turbulence                
              in fluids, phase separation in solids, and planetary motions.                  
              Often these phenomena are modelled by differential equations and               
              it is necessary to approximate these equations by computational                
              techniques to obtain information about the underlying problem                  
              being modelled.  A question of fundamental importance is to                    
              ascertain the validity of the computer-generated output and, in                
              particular, it is important to understand fully the relationship               
              between the computer-generated approximations of the model and                 
              the behavior of the model itself.  The study of this problem is                
              well understood in many simple situations but these do not                     
              include situations where long time scales are present.  The                    
              object of the research is to study this problem, using the                     
              underlying theory of the differential equation models to guide                 
              the study of the computer-generated approximations.
