Title       : Direct Mass Spectrometric Profiling of Water Column Particulate Organic Matter
               Composition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  1993      
File        : a9201189

Award Number: 9201189
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil R. Andersen                        
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : May 1,  1992        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $247075             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy I. Eglinton teglinton@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
              44        Physical & Chemical Oceanography        
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              This research involves the application of novel "in -source" mass              
              spectrometric (MS) techniques for the molecular-level                          
              characterization of (sub)-microgram quantities of particulate                  
              organic matter (POM).  The overall objective is to relate changes              
              in POM composition to water column-based biogeochemical processes              
              and to assess the importance of these processes in determining the             
              chemical characteristics of sedimentary organic matter.  Observed              
              variations in POM composition will be interpreted in the context of            
              current concepts for organic matter preservation.  This objective              
              will be pursued by investigating the composition of organic matter             
              in samples of phytoplankton populations, particulate matter and                
              surface sediments from high productivity (Peru Upwelling region)               
              and oligotrophic (Sargasso Sea) Oceanic environments.                          
                                                                                             
              The analytical approach adopted seeks to overcome several                      
              limitations which currently prevent the application of molecular               
              markers as routine tools in marine geochemistry.  Specifically, in-            
              source MS offers advantages as a rapid, high sensitivity method                
              which can be used to study compositional features of complex                   
              mixtures over a wide range of molecular sizes and polarities.  The             
              major focus is placed upon structural aspects of macromolecular                
              constituents of POM, however, an assessment of lipid composition               
              will also be made in an attempt to provide a more holistic                     
              perspective of POM transformation.  The inherent sensitivity of in-            
              source MS will be exploited by studying compositional variations in            
              sub-factions of POM separated by flow cytometry.  In this way,                 
              chemical variations can be related to well-defined particle                    
              characteristics (size, shape, chlorophyll content), enabling                   
              systematic relationships to be established between the composition             
              of phytoplankton and POM.
