Title       : Regulation of the Pyruvate Dehydrogenase Complex in Photosynthetic and
               Developing Plant Tissue
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 10,  1992      
File        : a9201292

Award Number: 9201292
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Machi F. Dilworth                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1996    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $160000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas D. Randall Randalld@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan A. Miernyk  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1145      INTEGRATIVE PLANT BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A major control point for the interaction among photosynthesis,                
              photorespiration and mitochondrial respiration is the pyruvate                 
              dehydrogenase complex (PDC).  The objectives of this research are              
              to characterize events, mechanisms and modulators of PDC activity              
              during development and photosynthesis in C3, C4, and CAM plants;               
              extend biochemical characterization of PDC; establish in vitro and             
              in situ regulatory mechanisms; examine the long term regulation of             
              PDC; and study the expression of PDC's component enzymes, their                
              import and complex assembly.  We seek to establish conditions and              
              metabolites that affect reversible phosphorylation of the                      
              mitochondrial PDC using purified, functional mitochondria coupled              
              with inhibitors, altered metabolite levels and physiological                   
              environments.  Antibodies, isotope labeling and enzyme activity                
              measurements will be used to quantitate enzyme forms.  Standard                
              techniques will be used to clone to PDH components of PDC.  Import             
              and assembly studies will utilize our knowledge of a model protein             
              and an Hsc70 chaperone system.  This project will facilitate                   
              evaluation of the following concepts: 1) that reversible                       
              phosphorylation of PDC is a primary control mechanism for carbon               
              entry into the Krebs cycle; 2) that PDC regulatory mechanisms                  
              differ during development and between photosynthetic and                       
              nonphotosynthetic tissues; 3) that the in vitro and in situ                    
              regulatory mechanisms function in vivo; 4) that import and assembly            
              of PDC requires chaperones.
