Title       : NSF/AID: Moss Flora of Colombia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1996    
File        : a9201281

Award Number: 9201281
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James K. Martin                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : February 28,  1997   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $317600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven P. Churchill   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : N Y Botanical Garden
	      200th Street & Kazimiroff Blvd
	      Bronx, NY  10458    /   -

NSF Program : 1198      BIOTIC SURVEYS AND INVENTORIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1198,
Abstract    :
                   This proposal represents the highest ideal in biodiversity                
              research in a developing country.  Relatively few scientists work              
              with the bryophytes, yet the group has a significant function in               
              tropical ecosystems.  The PI has already devoted considerable                  
              time and expertise in the development of moss herbaria throughout              
              the country.  In addition, he regularly teaches courses on the                 
              mosses at those institutions, and has inspired Colombian                       
              scientists and students to work with and publish on the mosses of              
              the country.  Churchill deposits the first set of each accession               
              in the largest moss herbarium in Columbia, to which he already                 
              has given personal collections.  Although funds were not                       
              requested for development of a database in the proposal, he has                
              initiated such a project and has already begun to enter data.                  
              The materials are collected so that nucleic acids can be                       
              extracted at a later date.  If A.I.D. funds become available then              
              this aspect of his work will also be supported.  The moss flora                
              of Colombia is exceptionally rich and diverse primarily because                
              of the diverse topography and climate.  The PI is making                       
              excellent progress toward the treatment of the mosses of Colombia              
              ?in Spanish! for Flora de Colombia, for which he is cooperating                
              with Colombian botanists, and an English manual of the mosses.                 
              Thus, this proposal fully satisfies, and exceeds, all the                      
              criteria for the Biotic Survey & Inventory competition.
