Title       : US-USSR Seminar on Social Science Research on Mitigation forand Recovery from
               Disasters and Large Scale Hazards (Moscow,Russia; June 13-22, 1992)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 15,  1992      
File        : a9201063

Award Number: 9201063
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerson Sher                             
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  1992      
Expires     : May 31,  1993        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18642              (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrico L. Quarantelli   (Principal Investigator current)
              Joanne M. Nigg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Delaware
	      
	      Newark, DE  19716    302/831-2136

NSF Program : 5939      US/USSR ACTIVITIES
Fld Applictn: 0304000   Disaster & Natural Hazard               
              86        Sociology                               
Program Ref : 1499,5939,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Drs. Enrico Quarantelli and Joanne Nigg, University of                         
              Delaware, and Academician Konstantin Popov, Institute for                      
              System Studies, Moscow  will cooperate in a seminar on                         
              social science research on mitigation and recovery from                        
              disasters and large Scale Hazards in Moscow in June 1992.                      
              Ten American scientists will travel to Moscow to join the                      
              ten Russian scientists in discussing, comparing and                            
              evaluating existing knowledge and research findings  as                        
              developed by both groups with the idea of developing a                         
              research agenda for mutually beneficial future study                           
              collaboration.   The meeting will have the immediate                           
              effect of strengthening the disaster research tradition                        
              within the two countries which are already among the                           
              leaders in the area.  Indirectly, it should accelerate the                     
              development of an international network of disaster                            
              researchers which has started to come into being in the                        
              last decade.  American participants drawn from nine                            
              universities around the country will represent six                             
              different disciplines; the Soviet participants are from                        
              different research divisions in different parts of the                         
              country.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              Recent changes in the political climate allow a freer                          
              exchange of information about research results and the                         
              initiation of collaborative research projects which could                      
              contribute significantly to the development of social                          
              science knowledge about disasters and its application to                       
              the practical planning for and managing of hazardous                           
              occasions.                                                                     
                                                                                             
              This project fulfills the program objective of advancing                       
              scientific knowledge by enabling leading researchers in                        
              the United States and Russia to combine complementary                          
              efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual                             
              interest and competence in the field of basic scientific                       
              research on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and                            
              mutuality of benefit.
