Title       : Evaluation of Satellite Magnetic Field Data: Currents and Waves
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ATM 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 12,  1994   
File        : a9201088

Award Number: 9201088
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Robinson                      
	      ATM  DIVISION OF ATMOSPHERIC SCIENCES        
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460845             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence J. Zanetti   (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian J. Anderson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas A. Potemra  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kazue Takahashi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 5750      MAGNETOSPHERIC PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0205000   Space                                   
              41        Atmospheric Sciences                    
Program Ref : 9196,ENVI,
Abstract    :
                   The proposed research program involves the analysis of                    
              magnetic field data acquired by the Swedish Viking and FREJA                   
              satellites and by the DoD HILAT, Polar BEAR, DMSP-F7, and TRIAD                
              satellites.  We intend to use these data in correlation with                   
              magnetic field observations from the NASA AMPTE/CCE and MAGSAT                 
              satellites in studies of the earth's magnetospheric and ionospheric            
              current systems, both large and small scale, as well as magnetic               
              wave phenomena.                                                                
                   We propose to contrast the global current systems during                  
              active storm times vs. magnetically quiet times.  A remote sensing,            
              two-dimensional, horizontal current analysis has been performed on             
              the MAGSAT data and matched to equatorial CCE results.  These                  
              results are preliminary and we propose to complete, improve and                
              apply this analysis technique to other cases involving dynamic                 
              circuits.  We propose to determine the full three-dimensional                  
              ionospheric-magnetospheric current system during northward                     
              interplanetary magnetic field conditions as well.  The most                    
              significant result and, also, remaining question is the confinement            
              of the northward Bz (NBZ) currents to above 80 degrees in the case             
              studied and the connection (or lack of connection) of the polar                
              currents to the auroral zone current system for other cases.  We               
              intend to study the fine scale Birkeland currents involved in                  
              auroral acceleration processes, especially in the context of the               
              storm and substorm circuit.                                                    
                   We propose to continue our analysis of shorter time scale                 
              disturbances involved in the transition to wave phenomena.  Some of            
              the wave field subjects to be studied include: global MHD resonant             
              and/or driven pulsations; local and remote particle-field cyclotron            
              interactions; multi-satellite MFE data analysis to study global                
              perturbations caused by solar wind pressure variations; statistical            
              analysis of ULF waves from ground and spacecraft data; ULF wave                
              propagation, including incoherent pulsation activity; and GOES and             
              CCE spacecraft conjunction studies of ULF events.                              
                   We intend to disseminate data and information by way of                   
              scientific journal publication, presentations, and collaborative               
              efforts with individual scientists and agency program as we have               
              done in the past.  We propose to incorporate the upcoming FREJA                
              mission data into this analysis effort as we have done with                    
              previous magnetic field data sets.  The expanded FREJA data                    
              coverage will coordinate well with other programs, especially GEM              
              and the internation STEP programs, as well as provide a maore                  
              complete MFE data base.  The high resolution realtime data will                
              advance our fine-scale as well as large-scale current studies and              
              the dedicated wave channels will improve our ability to evaluate               
              wave disturbance fields.
