Title       : PRF: Comparative Method/Phylogenetic Analysis Techniques and Methods for
               Estimating Expected Amounts of Phenotypic Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9201925

Award Number: 9201925
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1992       
Expires     : December 31,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $69600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Emilia P. Martins   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 1171,
Abstract    :
              Recently, several issues have been raised concerning the use of                
              comparative or interspecific data with standard statistical                    
              analyses.  Trait values measured in phylogenetically related                   
              groups of organisms are not statistically independent of each                  
              other, and must be corrected for degree of relatedness.  In                    
              addition, there is still much debate concerning which type of                  
              evolutionary relationships (and thus, evolutionary statistics)                 
              are of greatest interest to comparative biologists.  Although                  
              several solutions to these problems have been proposed, little is              
              known about how the proposed solutions relate to one another.                  
              All of the proposed methods require that the phylogeny of the                  
              organisms and an estimate of the expected amount of change for                 
              each trait be available.  As it is often difficult to obtain                   
              accurate estimates of expected amounts of character change,                    
              several techniques have been proposed to infer this information                
              using independent estimates of time or by using the comparative                
              data themselves.  Again, little is known about the relative                    
              abilities of the various techniques.  During this study the P.I.               
              will use a combination of mathematical and computer simulation                 
              techniques to compare the available methods for both analyzing                 
              comparative data and estimating expected amounts of change in                  
              terms of both their biological and statistical properties.
