Title       : Dissertation Research: Tracing Hohokam Ceramic Exchange in the Lower Salt River
               Valley, Arizona
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 17,  1992   
File        : a9201161

Award Number: 9201161
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 1,  1992   
Expires     : July 31,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4658               (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Abbott  (Student current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              81        Anthropology                            
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Mr. David Abbott will                
              collect data for his doctoral dissertation.  He will analyze a                 
              series of ceramic sherds collected from a number of Hohokan                    
              archaeological sites located in the Lower Salt River Valley of                 
              Arizona.  These materials will be examined by electron microprobe              
              analysis to analyze the nature of the clay and temper material.                
              Previous work by Mr. Abbott has shown that Hohokam manufactured                
              pottery from raw materials which were available in the immediate               
              vicinity of production sites.  It has also demonstrated that                   
              substantial variation of both clay and sand used for temper                    
              occurs across this region and therefore it is possible to                      
              determine the general location in which individual ceramics were               
              manufactured.  Given these data it is then possible to use                     
              archaeological materials to reconstruct prehistoric Hohokam trade              
              patterns and, in a more indirect fashion, determine exchange                   
              networks and spheres of social interaction.                                    
                                                                                             
              The Hohokam are typical of many Southwestern U.S. prehistoric                  
              groups because they developed a complex, highly organized society              
              which both emerged and declined well before the arrival of                     
              Europeans in the New World.  Because they lived in an arid desert              
              environment, the Hohokam constructed complex irrigation systems                
              and archaeologists have speculated that the need to distribute                 
              water and maintain control over these systems led to the rise of               
              this complex society.  However, it is unclear how villages                     
              related to each other or how different sections or compounds                   
              within single settlements interacted.  Given changing settlement               
              patterns over time, archaeologists have also speculated on how                 
              social organization concomitantly varied.  Through an examination              
              of ceramic exchange, Mr. Abbott hopes to gain insight into this                
              process.                                                                       
                                                                                             
              This research is important for several reasons.  It will provide               
              new data on the Hohokam which will interest a number of                        
              archaeologists.  It will help to pioneer the development of new                
              analytic techniques and assist in the training of an extremely                 
              promising young scientist.
