Title       : FASEB Conference: Viral Assembly July 26-32, 1992, Saxtons River, VT
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 24,  1992     
File        : a9201408

Award Number: 9201408
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marcia Steinberg                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 15,  1992     
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9000               (Estimated)
Investigator: Roger M. Burnett   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fed of Amer Soc Exp Biol
	      
	      Bethesda, MD  20814    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              A conference entitled "Virus Assembly"  will be held under the                 
              auspices of the Federation of American Societies of Experimental               
              Biology (FASEB) from July 26 to July 31, 1992, at the Vermont                  
              Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont.  This will be the second such                 
              conference, the first being held in 1990.  Although considerable               
              progress has been made in defining the mature structure of animal              
              and plant virions, much less is known of the intracellular                     
              processes directing the assembly of newly synthesized                          
              macromolecules into infectious highly organized virion particles.              
              These processes are likely to be virus specific and so targets for             
              therapeutic intervention.  Some recent findings have included the              
              role of chaperonins in structural protein maturation,                          
              phosphorylation of viral structural subunits, non-conservation of              
              symmetry in polyoma, and interference of the products of cloned                
              genes with virus infection.  Such results led to the organization              
              of the first FASEB conference on "Viral Assembly" in 1990 as it was            
              realized there was and urgent need to examine and integrate the                
              current knowledge of intracellular assembly of infectious virions.             
               The urgency arose from the fact that the last relevant conference             
              was held over seven years previously (EMBL, 1982).  The 1992 FASEB             
              conference will be build on the success of the 1990 conference in              
              bringing together leading investigators in the fields of assembly              
              and maturation of animal, plant and bacterial viruses.  A                      
              particularly important and well-received feature of the 1990                   
              conference was its organizations of sessions around specific                   
              processes and problems in virus assembly, rather than around                   
              particular viruses.  This led to an interchange and merging of                 
              knowledge from research workers in the fields of animal viruses and            
              bacteriophages.  Until the advent of the FASEB meetings, these                 
              communities had grown apart and so had no common forum.  Poster                
              sessions, in addition to the oral sessions, will ensure an even                
              wider communication of results among attendees and guarantee that              
              late-breaking or newly-developing investigations will be adequately            
              covered.  A new feature, suggested by many 1990 participants, will             
              be the availability of abstracts for the posters.
