Title       : Coevolution in Complex Adaptive Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 30,  1992   
File        : a9201536

Award Number: 9201536
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Peter W. Arzberger                      
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 15,  1992   
Expires     : June 30,  1993       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stuart A. Kauffman stu@santafe.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Santa Fe Institute
	      1399 Hyde Park Road
	      Santa Fe, NM  875016188    505/984-8800

NSF Program : 1107      COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY ACTIVITI
Fld Applictn: 0000912   Computer Science                        
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 9237,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will support an                      
              investigation that will pursue the underpinnings and implications              
              of the coevolution to the edge of chaos, based on entirely novel               
              models of molecules or goods as symbol strings which act on one                
              another to produce new symbol strings according to a "random                   
              grammar".  The principal investigator seeks new insights into how              
              complex adaptive systems collaborate, compete, and coevolve. In                
              particular, the investigator expects to find new models of                     
              economic take-off based on achieving a sufficient diversity of                 
              goods and services in an economy. Similar concepts will apply to               
              ecosystem structure. Most broadly, it is hoped that investigation              
              of random grammars will yield insight into the self organized                  
              behaviors of far from equilibrium systems.                                     
                                                                                             
              Among the fundamental phenomena in biology and beyond, in                      
              economic and cultural systems, is the coevolution of complex                   
              adaptive systems. In the past few years, work carried out on                   
              diverse fronts by a small number of physicists, biologists,                    
              mathematicians, and economists, has begun to suggest a broad new               
              conceptual framework and candidate universal features of such                  
              coevolution: Complex coevolving systems may evolve the the edge                
              of chaos.  The new theory is built upon the recognition that such              
              coevolving systems, whether symbionts or interlocked firms,                    
              mutually build the world they jointly inhabit. Such                            
              coevolutionary systems can behave in three regimes. The first is               
              a chaotic regime, where each adaptive agent struggles to improve               
              on multipeaked "fitness landscapes" which deform so rapidly due                
              to moves of other agents that no agent comes to rest. This regime              
              is called the Arms Race in evolutionary biology. The ordered                   
              regime occurs when all agents climb to local fitness peaks that                
              are mutually consistent. Adaptive chance ceases. The third regime              
              is the boundary between order and chaos. Two new facts have                    
              emerged: 1) Mean fitness, or "payoff" is low in both the chaotic               
              regime and in the ordered regime and is optimal at the edge of                 
              chaos. 2) A kind of "invisible hand" can act such that each agent              
              tunes the structure of its own landscape and couplings to other                
              landscapes to its own advantage, and by doing so the entire                    
              system coevolves to the phase transition between order and chaos.              
              If generally true, the implications are broad. We must consider                
              that adaptive agents mutually alter the games we play with one                 
              another, in evolution, in economies, and perhaps elsewhere, to a               
              characteristic poised state between order and disorder.                        
              Signatures of this poised state include a power law distribution               
              of avalanches of change initiated by small perturbations. Just                 
              such a distribution of sizes of extinction events in the                       
              evolutionary Record are known. Similar avalanches may occur in                 
              technological evolution.
