Title       : Optimum Configurations of Three-Dimensional Mechanical Components with Behavior
               and Geometry Constraints
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  1992     
File        : a9201882

Award Number: 9201882
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: F. Hank Grant                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : April 1,  1992      
Expires     : March 31,  1995      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $97350              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alejandro R. Diaz diaz@egr.msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1463      INTEGRATION ENGINEERING
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
              56        Engineering-Mechanical                  
Program Ref : 1463,9146,
Abstract    :
                                                                                              
                                                                                            
              The goal of this research is to develop formulations and                       
              solution strategies to generate the shape and topology of                      
              mechanical components that are optimal with respect to measures of             
              performance that include functional as well as geometric criteria.             
              The research will emphasize the following: mathematically                      
              rigorous formulations, which are posed formally as optimization                
              problems in which the design space includes different topological              
              descriptions of the structure, as well as different structural                 
              idealizations of two and three dimensional components; optimization            
              problems that incorporate geometry and topology constraints;                   
              formulations that include local functional constraints on the                  
              mechanical behavior of the structure, such as measures of stress,              
              deformation, and buckling; and the development of computational                
              procedures suitable for the solution of problems cast in the form              
              outlined above.                                                                
              The investigation seeks to facilitate a systematic search in                   
              a space of design configurations that includes shape and topology.             
              The goal of such exploration is not only the generation of                     
              improved, optimal or near optimal designs, but also the generation             
              of  understanding of this complex design space and of the effect               
              that a meaningful class of design restrictions has on admissible               
              solutions to the design problem.  The investigation will produce               
              tools for design capable of suggesting near-optimal configurations             
              for a reasonably large class of mechanical design problems.  There             
              are many possible applications of these ideas in industries such               
              as automotive or aerospace.  These tools will, if successful,                  
              provide one of only a handful of methods that are applicable in the            
              early stages of design.
