Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Limit Sets of Foliations in Hyperbolic 3-Manifolds and
               Anosov Flows
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  1992 
File        : a9201744

Award Number: 9201744
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43600              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergio R. Fenley fenley@math.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   A codimension-one foliation F in a hyperbolic 3-manifold lifts            
              to a foliation F' in the universal cover, which is hyperbolic 3-               
              space.  The investigator will study the asymptotic behavior of                 
              leaves of F' and how fast they approach their limit sets.  He will             
              also analyze to what extent the topological structure of F                     
              determines the geometry of the manifold.  Finally, a non-singular              
              flow is Anosov if it induces hyperbolic behavior transversally to              
              the flow direction, so that in dimension 3 it determines two                   
              transverse codimension-one foliations.  The investigator plans to              
              examine the structure of the induced foliations in the universal               
              cover.  This is strongly related to homotopic properties of closed             
              orbits of the flow.  He also plans to study metric properties of               
              flow lines, for example, whether all flow lines can be                         
              quasigeodesic.                                                                 
                   A foliation of a manifold is a way of filling the manifold                
              with lower dimensional pieces.  In the case of a codimension-one               
              foliation, these pieces are of dimension one less than that of the             
              given manifold.  Think of an onion or an artichoke.  The topology              
              of a manifold is strongly related to the kind of foliation which it            
              will support, and in skillful hands this relation has been forged              
              into a powerful tool for investigating the topology of manifolds.              
              Foliations are also intimately related to the types of flows                   
              possible on a manifold.  Particularly in low dimensions, where the             
              standard algebraic techniques of topology work less well, using                
              foliations to investigate manifolds and the possible flows on them             
              is a very welcome addition to the arsenal.
