Title       : Long and Medium-Term Research: Information-Based Approachesto Learning
               Relational Concepts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 23,  1992  
File        : a9201842

Award Number: 9201842
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Parris                            
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  1992 
Expires     : September 30,  1993  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9550               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael J. Pazzani pazzani@ics.uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      160 Administration Building
	      Irvine, CA  926971875    949/824-7106

NSF Program : 5956      INTL RESEARCH FELLOWS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0522400   Information Systems                     
              30        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 6840,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award is under the Long and Medium-Term Research at Foreign               
              Centers of Excellence Program, which enables U.S. scientists and               
              engineers to conduct three to twelve months of research abroad at              
              research centers of proven excellence.  The program's awards                   
              provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique                
              or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental                        
              conditions abroad.                                                             
                                                                                             
              This award will support a three-month postdoctoral research visit              
              by Dr. Michael Pazzani of the University of California, Irvine to              
              work with Dr. J. Ross Quinlan of the University of Sydney.                     
              Dr. Pazzani will collaborate with Dr. Quinlan on the following                 
              topics involving information-based approaches to relational                    
              concept learning:                                                              
                                                                                             
              A.  Investigating approaches to dealing with noise in training                 
              data.  He will investigate refinements of a Minimum Description                
              Length approach, as well as alternative approaches to dealing                  
              with noisy training data.  One alternative that will be explored               
              is the technique of averaging multiple models.                                 
                                                                                             
              B.  Applying relational concept learning to larger problems on                 
              naturally occurring data sets, identifying additional research                 
              issues, and examining how well the complexity analysis in Pazzani              
              & Kibler (in press) predicts how the learning methods will scale               
              to larger problems.                                                            
                                                                                             
              The award recommendation provides funds to cover international                 
              travel and a stipend for three months.
