Title       : MCF: Measuring the Cost of Resistance in Transgenic and Wild Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1992      
File        : a9201976

Award Number: 9201976
Award Instr.: Fellowship                                   
Prgm Manager: Mark W. Courtney                        
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : November 1,  1992   
Expires     : February 28,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $51549              (Estimated)
Investigator: Johanna M. Schmitt   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Individual Award
	      
	      Baltimore, MD  21201    /   -

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              45        Ecology                                 
Program Ref : 1175,
Abstract    :
                   Measuring the intrinsic cost of herbivore resistance in                   
              plants is important both for assessing the potential for                       
              engineered genes to escape and persist in the environment, and                 
              for understanding how natural selection acts on defense resource               
              allocation in natural plant populations.  This study will apply                
              two genetic approaches to testing the cost of resistance                       
              hypothesis.  First, the impact of resistance gene on plant growth              
              and resource allocation will be examined by comparing the                      
              performance of plants genetically  transformed for herbivore                   
              resistance with that of control plants of similar genetic                      
              backgrounds.  This work will be done in collaboration with the                 
              PROSAMO research group at Imperial College (Silkwood Park),                    
              headed by Dr. Michael J. Crawley.  Second, the principal                       
              investigator will test for negative genetic correlations among                 
              chemical defenses, growth, and reproduction in the absence of                  
              herbivores, and examine selection effects on defense production                
              in natural populations of a common weed (Plantago lanceolata).                 
              This work, to be done in collaboration with Dr. Deane Bowers at                
              the University of Colorado, will be one of the first studies to                
              apply quantitative genetic analysis to chemical assays of plants               
              from natural populations.
