Title       : Survey of Scientists Engineers and Technicians in Manufacturing Industries, 1992
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SRS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  1992     
File        : a9201351

Award Number: 9201351
Award Instr.: Contract Interagency Agreement               
Prgm Manager: Carolyn F. Shettle                      
	      SRS  Division of Science Resources Statistics
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 24,  1992  
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $310000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian MacDonald   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bureau of Labor Stat
	      
	      Washington, DC  20212    /   -

NSF Program : 8803      SCIENCE & ENGINEERING PERSONNL
Fld Applictn: 0111000   Science Policy                          
              99        Other Sciences NEC                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   This project will provide information on scientist,                       
              engineer, and technician (SET) employment in industry.  It will                
              develop national estimates from the ongoing Occupational                       
              Employment Statistics Survey of the Bureau of Labor Statistics                 
              (BLS) which provides annual information on employment in detailed              
              occupations by industry.  The OES is a Federal-State cooperative               
              program in which State Employment Security Agencies collect data               
              following BLS specifications.  Data collection occurs on a                     
              three-year cycle, sequentially covering manufacturing,                         
              nonmanufacturing, and trade and regulated (communications, public              
              utilities, and transportation) industries and colleges and                     
              universities.  The OES data help NSF meet its mandate under the                
              National Science Foundation Act to develop and maintain a data                 
              base of demographic, educational, and employment information on                
              SET. The OES surveys are a key part of the system for developing               
              such information.  Thus, the survey data:                                      
                  a) help in developing an accurate profile of U. S. SET                     
                     personnel;                                                              
                  b) are used in projecting supply and demand for scientists                 
                     and engineers;                                                          
                  c) are used to develop current estimates of SET employment in              
                     total and by detailed SET field and industry; and                       
                  d) allow identification of SET growth fields, and those in                 
                     decline or otherwise changing.                                          
                                                                                             
               //
