Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Low Dimensional Manifolds, Transformation Groups, and
               Cohomology of Discrete Groups
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 17,  1994      
File        : a9201935

Award Number: 9201935
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154784             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ronnie Lee math@loml.mathe.yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   The common theme of this differential topology project is to              
              study invariants of 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds, their relations            
              to the theory of transformation groups, geometry of submanifolds,              
              quantum physics, moduli spaces of instantons, and related questions            
              on cohomology of discrete groups.  The investigator will continue              
              his work with Sylvain Cappell and E. Y. Miller on the theory of                
              generalized Casson flows, on Witten-Reshetikhin-Turaev invariants,             
              on spectral flow invariants of 3-manifolds, and on the application             
              of symplectic geometry techniques in Atiyah-Patodi-Singer index                
              theory.  Jointly with Dariusz Wilczynski, he intends to investigate            
              representing homology classes of 4-manifolds by surfaces of minimal            
              genus.  A related topic is the joint work of I. Hambleton and the              
              investigator on the theory of smooth transformation groups on 4-               
              manifolds, equivariant moduli spaces of instantons, and the                    
              equivariant Donaldson invariant.  Together with Steven Weintraub,              
              he plans to continue their work on the cohomology of arithmetic                
              subgroups of Sp4 and also on an invariant of ramified covering                 
              spaces originating from the work of J.-P. Serre.  Finally, with                
              Alan Brownstein, the investigator plans to study the motion group              
              of n-strings in 3-space, its cohomology, and related moduli spaces.            
                   Traditionally, differential topology has provided a means of              
              analyzing certain questions about the world we live in, its                    
              geometry and its physics, but in recent years the situation has                
              become much more fluid, with physics often providing useful                    
              geometric notions as much as vice versa.  The latest such foreign              
              imports so to speak have been the Donaldson invariant of 4-                    
              manifolds and related invariants discovered since but along the                
              same lines.  There is, of course, a long history of mathematicians             
              involving themselves in the problems of physics, often to the                  
              mutual enrichment of both subjects.  Tools are developed to solve              
              physical problems, and these tools then turn out to have much                  
              greater generality and become widely used in mathematics.  The                 
              story of the new quantum invariants of 3-manifolds is a variation              
              on this theme.  Mathematicians interesting themselves in problems              
              of quantum field theory were led to a certain geometric                        
              construction.  The construction led in turn to an invariant that               
              depended only on the topological character and not the full                    
              geometric character of the underlying manifold.  There are now                 
              modifications of the original construction and numerous resulting              
              quantum invariants.  Their origin is sufficiently different from               
              that of other previously known invariants that they can be expected            
              to detect things the traditional invariants cannot.  It now                    
              behooves topologists to demonstrate this as well as to sort out the            
              different quantum invariants and their relationships to more                   
              traditional invariants.  Work along these lines will be among the              
              projects undertaken by the investigator with some of his legion of             
              collaborators.
