Title       : Symbiotic Association of Aphids: Biochemical Role of the Procaryotic
               Endosymbiont
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1992     
File        : a9201285

Award Number: 9201285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharon Emerson                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : November 30,  1994   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Baumann pabaumann@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0201000   Agriculture                             
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              Aphids are small syringe-like insects which penetrate plants and               
              suck up plant juices for nutrients.  Acting like unsterilized                  
              needles these insects transmit a variety of agriculturally                     
              important plant diseases.  Within the body cavity of aphids are                
              specialized cells which contain gram-negative bacteria                         
              (endosymbionts) which cannot be cultured outside the host cells.               
              The aphid is dependent on the endosymbionts,  their elimination by             
              treatment with antibiotics results in sterility or death of the                
              host.  Plant sap is deficient in a variety of amino acids which                
              insects cannot synthesize and evidence suggests that the                       
              endosymbionts supply these amino acids for the aphid host.  Perhaps            
              the best available evidence is for the overproduction of tryptophan            
              by the endosymbiont;  there is also evidence that some                         
              endosymbionts may overproduce cysteine.  Our study involves the                
              cloning and sequencing of genes coding for enzymes of tryptophan               
              and cysteine biosynthesis,  the overproduction of selected key                 
              enzymes and a study of their kinetic properties.  These results may            
              indicate that the two key amino acids,  tryptophan and cysteine are            
              overproduced by the endosymbiont and utilized by the aphid host.               
              This information will establish a function for the endosymbiont and            
              may suggest approaches for the controlling of aphid pests by the               
              elimination of their endosymbionts.
