Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Homotopy Theory and Its Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  1994   
File        : a9201012

Award Number: 9201012
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ralph M. Krause                         
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 15,  1992      
Expires     : June 30,  1996       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240900             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen A. Mitchell mitchell@math.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jill Dietz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Paul G. Goerss  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ethan S. Devinatz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1267      TOPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
                   Mitchell plans to continue his investigation of homotopy-                 
              theoretic aspects of algebraic K-theory, focusing on questions                 
              related to the Lichtenbaum-Quillen conjectures for rings of                    
              algebraic integers.  Goerss will continue his work on unstable                 
              homotopy theory.  In particular, he plans to pursue Michael                    
              Barratt's program for analyzing Hopf invariants, to continue an                
              ongoing study of Hopf algebras, and to study some of the algebraic             
              aspects of p-local homotopy theory.  Devinatz' research continues              
              his study of the generating hypothesis and his exposition of                   
              Morava's work.  He also plans to examine the consequences of the               
              telescope conjecture, particularly to Bousfield classes of                     
              suspension spectra.                                                            
                   The details of these three parts vary, but all are concerned              
              either with reducing geometric information to a subject for                    
              calculation or to perfecting one of the principal algebraic tools              
              used for this purpose.  The nature of the geometric information                
              involved is the crux of the difficulty.  While questions about                 
              lengths, areas, angles, volumes, and so forth virtually cry out to             
              be reduced to calculations, it is far different with what are known            
              as topological properties of geometric objects.  These are                     
              properties such as connectedness (being all in one piece),                     
              knottedness, having no holes, and so forth.  All systematic study              
              of such properties, for example, how to tell whether two geometric             
              objects really differ in respect to one of these properties or are             
              only superficially different, or how to classify the variety of                
              differences that can occur, all these have only truly been                     
              comprehended and mastered when they have been reduced to matters of            
              calculation.  Homotopy theory and algebraic K-theory have been                 
              developed into major tools for this purpose, and the interplay                 
              between the algebra and the topology involved remains a fascinating            
              subject.
