Title       : Japan Long-Term Research Visit: Techniques for Evaluating the Impact of Demand
               Side Management in the Japanese Electric Utility Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 3,  1992  
File        : a9201904

Award Number: 9201904
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alexander DeAngelis                     
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1992  
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $118169             (Estimated)
Investigator: Saifur Rahman Srahman@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 8271      LONG TERM VISITORS
Fld Applictn: 0306000   Energy Research & Resources             
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 1452,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              This award will support a ten month long-term                                  
              visit by Professor Saifur Rahman, Department of                                
              Electrical Engineering, Virginia Polytechnic                                   
              Institute, to Japan for a cooperative research                                 
              project with researchers at the Tokyo Electric                                 
              Power Company, (TEPCO).  His co-hosts will be                                  
              Mr. Toshiaki Ohashi, AI Technology Department,                                 
              Computer and Communication Research Center and                                 
              Mr. Akira Maeda, Technology Research Group,                                    
              Research and Development Planning Department.                                  
              The research will include a study of the                                       
              techniques for evaluating the impact of demand                                 
              side management (DSM) in the Japanese Electric                                 
              Utility Industry.  They will be dealing with                                   
              the modeling of uncertainty related to demand                                  
              side management activities.  These                                             
              uncertainties originate from the unknown                                       
              customer response to the DSM programs, and                                     
              their willingness or unwillingness to maintain                                 
              interest in the program under less than ideal                                  
              conditions.  An attempt will be made to model                                  
              such uncertainty using the "pairwise                                           
              comparison" technique that Professor Rahman has                                
              applied in other fields of electric power                                      
              engineering.  Once such quantitative measures                                  
              of uncertainty are available, they will be                                     
              applied to a generation expansion model to                                     
              examine the impacts of DSM on capacity needs.                                  
              A new technique to model the load duration                                     
              curve will be investigated which will                                          
              facilitate the representation of DSM impacts on                                
              peak load, load factor and energy consumption.                                 
              This will provide an analytical method to study                                
              the impact of DSM on capacity requirements.  In                                
              the past, iterative methods have been applied                                  
              to study these impacts.  An analytical method                                  
              would result in faster solutions with higher                                   
              accuracy.                                                                      
                                                                                             
              The research has a comparative value and should                                
              also provide a potential methodology with which                                
              to evaluate DSM programs prior to their                                        
              initiation.  The research may also result in                                   
              useful analytical techniques that are                                          
              fundamentally different from presently used                                    
              demand management evaluation methods.                                          
              Professor Rahman is knowledgeable in a wide-                                   
              range of topics related to power systems                                       
              engineering.  He is well-published in the area                                 
              of power systems planning and is familiar with                                 
              the power industry in Japan.  TEPCO is the                                     
              largest electric utility in Japan, and it is                                   
              the largest privately owned power company in                                   
              the world.  It serves 22 million customers with                                
              a peak demand of approximately 50,000 MW making                                
              it an ideal utility in which to carry out                                      
              direct load control studies.  A successful                                     
              development of the proposed methodology could                                  
              be used to evaluate the impact of some new DSM                                 
              programs in the U.S. electric utility industry.                                
              It is expected that this collaborative effort                                  
              between the researchers will continue even                                     
              after the formal agreement has terminated.  It                                 
              is also expected that a number of publications                                 
              will result from the project.
