Title       : Mathematical Sciences: Inverse Problems in Neutron Reflectometry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1992    
File        : a9201936

Award Number: 9201936
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael H. Steuerwalt                   
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  1992     
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul E. Sacks psacks@iastate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Iowa State University
	      2207 Pearson Hall, Room 15
	      Ames, IA  500112207    515/294-5225

NSF Program : 1266      APPLIED MATHEMATICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              21        Mathematics                             
Program Ref : 9263,
Abstract    :
                   The goal of this research is to investigate analytically and              
              numerically an inverse scattering problem that arises in neutron               
              reflection physics.  One seeks to recover the neutron interaction              
              potential, which is a bounded, real valued function defined on                 
              the real line, that is zero to the left of the origin, and                     
              approaches a nonzero constant as the space variable tends to                   
              positive infinity.  The information to be used for the                         
              reconstruction is the amplitude of the reflection coefficient                  
              corresponding to a wave incoming from the left, defined in the                 
              usual quantum mechanical sense.  Because the reflection                        
              coefficient is in general complex valued, the missing phase                    
              information is the central difficulty, and in fact this problem                
              is closely related to the well known phase retrieval problem in                
              optics.  However, even if the full complex reflection amplitude                
              were known, the problem still presents some new aspects, in                    
              comparison with standard formulations of inverse scattering for                
              the Schrodinger equation, because of the fact that the potential               
              does not decay to zero.  The investigator will also consider some              
              cases in which the phase data are partially known.  In the                     
              neutron scattering application, one may usually assume that the                
              potential does not have any bound states, and this hypothesis is               
              essential for the main line of approach.  Nevertheless the case                
              when bound states are present is of some interest also, so an                  
              alternative procedure allowing for this possibility will be                    
              investigated.                                                                  
                   A newly emerging technology for the detailed analysis of                  
              chemical and magnetic properties of layered materials is the use               
              of neutron reflectivity data.  For example, there are many                     
              applications to the study of surface and interface structure at                
              the molecular level for polymer blends.  This in turn is a                     
              valuable tool in the development of new high performance                       
              materials.  In a typical experimental set up, a beam of neutrons               
              is incident from a vacuum region onto a reflecting material,                   
              whose material properties vary only in the direction                           
              perpendicular to the material surface.  An instrument called the               
              neutron reflectometer measures the reflected neutron intensity                 
              with high precision as a function of the particle's momentum in                
              the direction perpendicular to the surface.  These data are thus               
              dependent in some manner on the so-called neutron interaction                  
              potential, which is a function of location within the material.                
              If this potential can be determined, then other physical                       
              properties of the material can be directly inferred.  The                      
              proposed research addresses directly the problem of interpreting               
              reflectivity data in order to determine the interaction                        
              potential.  Specifically, the investigator seeks to understand                 
              the mathematical structure of the problem, and to develop                      
              accurate and reliable computational procedures.
