Title       : Model Structure Identification in Three Dimensions and Observation Design in
               Groundwater Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 19,  2003  
File        : a0001082

Award Number: 0001082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : November 1,  2000   
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194000             (Estimated)
Investigator: William W-G. Yeh williamy@seas.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ne-Zheng Sun  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0001082
Yeh

The development of a reliable model for basin water resources
              management is a challenging problem because real aquifer structure is highly
              complex and mostly unknown and that we only have very limited data to calibrate
              the model.  The three major difficulties are:  (1) How to determine an
              appropriate level for model complexity;  (2) How to parameterize and identify
              the unknown distributed parameter values;  and (3) How to judge the sufficiency
              of existing data for the chosen model.  In our recent studies, we have
              developed a new approach to fix model complexity and to estimate a model
              structure and its corresponding parameter values for groundwater modeling in a
              2-dimensional distributed parameter system.  We have defined a generalized
              inverse problem, in which the model complexity level is set by available data
              and the accuracy requirements of model applications.  We have further developed
              a stepwise regression method to solve the generalized inverse problem in two
              dimensions as well as a new methodology for constructing groundwater models. 
              The utility of the new methodology was demonstrated by an application to a
              water resources management problem of a groundwater basin in  Southern
              California.  We have found that management requirements were satisfied by a
              simple model structure with a few identified parameters to represent various
              hydraulic and mass transport properties.  We also found that existing data are
              insufficient to identify certain boundary conditions with the required
              accuracy.

This work explores new frontiers in groundwater modeling.  The key
              objectives are:  (1) To make our methodology for model structure identification
              more general.  We will consider zonation and such other parameterization
              methods as finite element interpolation and kriging.  We will extend the
              methodology to three dimensions.  Parameter structures to be identified will
              include not only hydraulic conductivity but also initial and boundary
              conditions and source terms.  (2) To build the theoretical basis of the
              generalized inverse inverse problem.  We will define model structure
              identifiability and find its sufficient conditions.  We will also consider how
              information on geological structure can be incorporated into model structure
              identification procedure in three dimensions.  (3) To develop methodology for
              observation design.  After the least complex model structure is found, we can
              formulate the observation design problem into an optimization to find the most
              cost-effective design from all sufficient and feasible designs.  Our ultimate
              goal is to quantitatively link observation design to model structure
              complexity, model parameter identifiability, and model application reliability.
               Results will be compared  to Monte Carlo simulations.  We will apply our
              research results with a water resources agency in Southern California. 

