Title       : Collaborative Research: Monetary Policy in a Data-Rich Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0001751

Award Number: 0001751
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $63614              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jean Boivin jb903@columbia.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Columbia University
	      1210 Amsterdam Avenue; MC 2205
	      New York, NY  10027    212/854-6851

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The collaborative and individual empirical research planned in this project will
              analyze the determinants and effects of monetary policy, taking explicitly into
              account the fact that policy is made in a data-rich environment in which
              monetary policymakers can exploit information contained in hundreds or even
              thousands of macroeconomic data series.  Our study contrasts with most previous
              work, which typically assumes that the Federal Reserve's information set is
              spanned by ten variables or less. We will also take into account that monetary
              policy is made in real time; that is, instead of assuming (contrary to fact)
              that the Fed has final revisions of data at hand, we use only data that were
              actually available to the Fed at each date. To do this we use a real-time data
              set constructed by others to which we add non-revised data from various Federal
              Reserve documents and other federal agencies. 
Our basic task is to estimate
              policy reaction functions (PRFs) for the Federal Reserve, which relate the
              Fed's instrument  to measures of the state of the economy. As far as possible,
              we want to allow the state of the economy to depend on the full range of
              macroeconomic data available at the time. To make estimation feasible we need a
              dimension-reduction scheme. We will apply a dynamic factor model approach, to
              be estimated using methods devised by others in a forecasting context. Besides
              allowing us to work with data sets in which the number of series exceeds the
              number of observations, this method permits us to deal systematically with data
              irregularities, including data of different frequencies and different spans. As
              already indicated, we are also able to incorporate the fact that at each date
              the Fed may be looking at a different vintage (revision) of the same underlying
              data series. We will allow for time variation in the parameters of the PRF,
              using a method that makes estimation of such models computationally easy in
              this context. Finally, the Fed's PRF can be estimated jointly with equations
              describing the rest of the economy, or in an unrestricted manner that leaves
              the rest of the economy unspecified.
We are interested in addressing several
              questions with the empirical analyses. On the positive side we want to see if
              information-intensive PRF's provide a better description of the historical
              conduct of monetary policy than other alternatives.  We also want to determine
              what types of information the Fed has historically responded to and to see if
              the information that appears to affect Fed decisions can be explained in terms
              of its predictive content for inflation and real activity. If that latter
              appear not to matter, then we will explore what can account for the Fed's
              behavior.  If we are able to obtain sharper estimates of both the systematic
              and non-systematic components of monetary policy,  we hope to use these results
              to refine recent work on the effects of each of these components on the
              economy.  From a normative point of view, we would like to address the question
              of just how monetary policy should be conducted in a data-rich environment.
              This is a more complex question than the problem of forecasting with many
              variables, since the Fed's decision problem is dynamic and its loss function
              may have very different properties from a standard econometric loss function.
              We believe that addressing such questions will be of practical value, as well
              as providing a more realistic description of what the Fed actually does.

