Title       : Latitude-Dependent Climatic Responses to Milankovitch Orbital Forcing and its
               Expression in Cretaceous Rocks of the Northern Hemisphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0001093

Award Number: 0001093
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150012             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bradley B. Sageman brad@earth.northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Latitude-Dependent Climatic Response to Milankovitch Orbital Forcing and its
              Expression in Cretaceous Rocks of the Northern Hemisphere 

Bradley B.
              Sageman
EAR-0001093

	The proposed research seeks to document and constrain
              changes in the behavior of the hydrologic cycle and atmospheric circulation
              patterns over North America during the mid-Cretaceous greenhouse.  The key to
              this reconstruction is the preservation of orbital signals in hemipelagic
              deposits of the Western Interior basin.  These deposits offer an opportunity to
              examine the effect of the same climatic changes on two fundamentally different
              pathways of sedimentation in the basin that are sensitive to changes in
              hydrologic and atmospheric conditions: detrital and biogenic.  Because orbital
              forcing places predictable constraints on the behavior of these two pathways, a
              succession in which orbital parameters are quantified offers the possibility to
              deconvolve the relative roles of each.  Ultimately, by placing processes like
              biogenic sedimentation within a quantified time series, greatly improves the
              ability to reconstruct biogeochemically significant events such as the flux of
              organic matter to sediments resulting from increased primary productivity. 
              This component of the global carbon cycle, which has been inferred to play a
              major role in many critical events in Earth history, such as "oceanic anoxic
              events," is notoriously difficult to constrain in the ancient rock record.  
              
	This project is based on recent quantitative documentation of orbital
              signals in rhythmic limestone-marlstone facies of Cenomanian-Turonian (C-T) age
              in the central Western Interior using spectral techniques.  With that work as a
              foundation, PI will apply improved spectral methods to reconstruct detailed
              sedimentation rates for the C-T interval, and quantify changes in
              biomarker-type organic compounds based on the spectrally defined time scale. 
              His data set will include samples from core comprising a paleolatitudinal
              transect of the basin.  These two components will allow him to test the
              following key working hypotheses:  (1) Does limestone-marlstone formation
              reflect climatic forcing of siliciclastic dilution, carbonate productivity, or
              a combination of both? (2) Does the unique pattern of bedding in the C-T
              deposits reflect latitude-dependent forcing of different orbital parameters
              through different depositional pathways?  Specifically, does obliquity dominate
              detrital flux through forcing of the higher latitude hydrologic cycle, and
              precession dominate biogenic flux (carbonate) through forcing of lower latitude
              surface water conditions? and (3) How are the Milankovitch scale variations
              expressed in limestone-marlstone facies influenced by longer-term changes in
              the ocean-climate system, such as the global carbon burial and ocean anoxic
              event termed OAE II?  Can he detect feedback in the carbon cycle-climate
              relationship via changes in latitude-dependent orbital forcing (i.e., did
              obliquity become more dominant due to carbon burial, CO2 drawdown, and climatic
              cooling)?  The application of an integrated quantitative
              cyclostratigraphic-organic geochemical methodology represents a significant
              innovation in the study of ancient climate-ocean dynamics and will
              significantly advance knowledge of the Milankovitch climate-sedimentation
              linkage during the mid-Cretaceous greenhouse. 


