Title       : Quantification Without Quantifiers: Number Sensitivity in Articleless
               Constructions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2001       
File        : a0001669

Award Number: 0001669
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $127962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Veneeta Dayal dayal@rci.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project deals with semantic variation in bare nominal constructions.
              English bare plurals vary between kind, generic and existential readings.
              Hindi, which has singular and plural bare nominals, differs in two respects.
              Hindi bare singulars do not admit existential readings in all contexts where
              English or Hindi bare plurals do.  Hindi bare nominals have an additional
              definite reading, not available to English bare plurals.  The research question
              driving the investigation is the possibility of predicting variations in the
              interpretation of bare nominals within and across languages.

The main claim
              is that singular kind formation differs from plural kind formation in not
              allowing predication to its instantiations.  This explains differences between
              Hindi bare singulars and plurals, as well as between English definite
              (singular) generics and bare plurals.  Though kind formation strategies are
              universal, natural languages differ in having the definite article and in
              encoding number sensitivity.  Semantic operations responsible for various
              readings interact with each other and lexical options in the two languages to
              create the observed effects. The project also deals with two other language
              types, one without number distinction or articles (Korean) and one with number
              distinction but only one article (Hebrew).

 Among the theoretical questions
              addressed are the following: Is reference to kinds an integral part of the
              semantics of bare nominals or are they simply indefinites? Are null determiners
              available in natural language or can a theory of type-shifts explain the facts?
               The general line of approach, consonant with current developments in syntax
              and phonology, is that semantic variation can be explained if semantic
              operations are subject to a set of interacting constraints.  The results of
              this research should be of interest to linguists, philosophers, computational
              linguists and other cognitive scientists as well as to those working on second
              language acquisition.
