Title       : Late Pliocene Hominid Bahavior and Paleoecology at Kanjera South, Africa
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 13,  2001      
File        : a0001453

Award Number: 0001453
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $215831             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas W. Plummer plummer.tom@hotmail.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Queens College
	      65 30 Kissena Blvd
	      Flushing, NY  113671575    718/997-5400

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Tom Plummer and colleagues 
will
              conduct two field seasons of excavation at Kanjera South, southwestern 
Kenya.
               The team brings together specialists in archaeology, paleontology,
              
paleoecology and geology to conduct an interdisciplinary investigation of
              
the behavior and paleoecology of hominids forming early archeological
              
(Oldowan) sites.  The appearance of Oldowan archeological sites at c. 2.5
              
million years ago (Ma) reflects a profound adaptive shift in human
              
evolution, the incorporation of large mammal tissue into the diet.  The
              
proposed project will be the first to carry out a detailed study of site
              
formation processes at Oldowan sites older than 2.0 Ma, using a wide range
              
of traditional and innovative methodologies.
Excavations in 1996 and 1997
              located rich concentrations of artifacts and 
fossils in c. 2.2 Ma deposits in
              the Southern Exposures at Kanjera.  Over 
1,000 stone tools and thousands of
              fossils were collected in carefully 
controlled taphonomic excavations. 
              Documentation of relatively high 
archeological densities in three beds at two
              of five sites along a 70m 
transect suggests that hominid activity was
              spatially focused for a 
considerable length of time.  Preliminary lab
              analysis has identified 
hominid marrow processing and carnivore damage to
              bone, as well as several 
artifact refits.  Stable isotopic chemistry of
              paleosol carbonates and high 
equid frequencies indicate Oldowan hominid
              activities in a novel (open) 
paleohabitat.  A high proportion of small,
              immature mammals is suggestive of 
small mammal hunting while medium to very
              large mammal remains (including a 
potentially butchered hippopotamus) may
              have been scavenged.  Hominid 
transport of artifacts and raw material
              selectivity is suggested by lithic 
analysis.
Expanding the samples of
              excavated material will allow reconstruction of 
hominid activities within
              their paleoecological context at Kanjera and 
facilitate meaningful
              comparisons with other large Oldowan site assemblages, 
particularly those
              from Olduvai Gorge, Tanzania and the Lake Turkana basin, 
Kenya and Ethiopia. 
              Faunal analysis will provide information on hominid 
procurement and
              processing of animals as well as the role of carnivore 
activity in assemblage
              formation.  Lithic analysis will document local 
technological characteristics
              and hominid transport behavior as well as the 
tasks chert artifacts were used
              for.  Paleoenvironmental information will be 
obtained using multiple
              methodologies.  Limb element ecomorphic analyses and 
isotopic analysis of
              carbonates will provide information on habitat 
structure.  Ecomorphic
              analysis of mandibles and analysis of carbon isotopes 
from enamel will
              provide paleodietary information.  Oxygen isotopes in tooth 
enamel will
              constrain paleotemperatures and the degree of seasonality during 
Kanjera Fm
              (S) deposition.  Cementum analysis will be used to assess 
antelope season of
              death.
Documentation of hominid utilization of open habitats at Kanjera may
              
influence views of early hominid capabilities, including their ability to
              
compete with large carnivores.  This project should also contribute to the
              
on-going debate over faunal acquisition strategies, by providing a test of
              
whether small mammals were hunted.  As the sample of medium and larger sized
              
mammals increases, it may be possible to assess the timing of access to
              
larger carcasses and thus whether hominids were passively or actively
              
scavenging them.  Our attempts to measure the intensity of seasonality
              
through the sequence, as well as the influence of seasonality on hominid
              
foraging for animal tissue, have not been conducted on this scale before and
              
may provide valuable information on the motivation and frequency of Oldowan
              
carnivory.





