Title       : Khirbat al-Mudayna al Aliya: Production, Politics, and Power in an Iron Age
               Village
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0001661

Award Number: 0001661
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $131676             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce Routledge routleg@sas.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. Routledge
and his
              colleagues will conduct a program of archaeological excavation and
survey in
              the vicinity Khirbat al-Mudayna al-`Aliya (KMA) on the eastern
edge of
              Jordan's Karak Plateau, ca. 35 kilometers due east of the Dead Sea.
KMA is an
              exceptionally well-preserved village occupied for a brief period
of time in
              the last half of the eleventh century BC (Iron Age Ib).
Importantly, this
              occupation immediately precedes the emergence of
territorial states in the
              region, including the biblical state of Moab into
which this part of Jordan
              was incorporated in the ninth century BC.  The
founding, and brief occupation,
              of substantial villages in what is now an
agriculturally marginal part of
              Jordan raises many questions about economic
and political developments during
              this period of significant social change.
Dr. Routledge's research aims to
              address these issues by elucidating the
cultural form, political economy, and
              local ecology of Khirbat al-Mudayna
al-'Aliya and its surrounding Iron Age
              settlement system.  In particular,
evidence will be sought for past
              environmental change, crop husbandry
practices, herding strategies and
              off-site pastoral activities, household
organization, the spatial distribution
              of activity areas in relation to
architectural variation, and exchange "paths"
              between households.  This
evidence will not only shed light on the political
              economy of local
agro-pastoral production strategies, it will also illumine
              the structuring
practices of everyday life that are the social context for
              these
strategies.  One key idea to be tested in this research is the
              suitability
of African models of state formation that emphasize social
              relations over
Eurasian models that emphasize control of land.





