Title       : Dissertation: Community Organization and Cultural Complexity in the Early
               Formative Cultures of Southeastern Uruguay
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0001933

Award Number: 0001933
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11991              (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas D. Dillehay dilleha@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      201 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    /   -

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Thomas Dillehay Mr. Jose Iriarte will collect data
              for his doctoral dissertation.. He will conduct archaeological excavation at
              the site of EMA, located on the Atlantic coastal plain of Uruguay. Preliminary
              field research has revealed that the site dates to the Early Formative period
              and encompasses ca. 50 ha bearing more than 70 mounds located on a flat spur
              which projects into extensive wetlands. The majority of the mounds are low flat
              and circular, between .5 and 1.5 m in height with a diameter ranging between 15
              and 30 m. The accretional nature of these mounds results from the incidental
              accumulation of midden refuse and does not suggest any intentional construction
              episodes or deliberate shaping. They are arranged in a semicircular shape
              around a central open space resembling the village layout characteristic of
              many ethnographic and prehistoric Amazon groups. Mr. Iriarte will carry out an
              excavation program with the goal of defining how settlement space is
              partitioned in mound and off-mound areas. He wishes to discover the nature of
              activities conducted in different areas and how these relate to the
              organization of the community. He will examine deep mound deposits by trench
              transect and conduct systematic interval transect sampling in the shallow
              deposits which characterize off mound areas. Faunal and floral remains will
              provide insight into subsistence and ceramic seriation in conjunction with
              thermoluminescent and radiocarbon dating will allow absolute dating of
              individual features.

The Early Formative period marks the transition from
              hunting and gathering to a settled village way of life. While long-held
              assumptions suggest that the prehistoric cultures of southeastern Uruguay
              remained marginal hunter-gatherers organized in simple, small and highly mobile
              bands until recent times, EMA and similar sites argue otherwise. The
              multi-mound sites indicate a decrease in residential mobility and ceremonial
              mounded architecture suggests community planning. Sites such as EMA are
              aggregated in highly productive wetland areas and this suggests both
              intensification and the exploitation of new environments and species. Maize,
              squash, beans and possibly cultivated tubers were added to the diet. This
              general type of transition occurred, independently, in many parts of the world
              and archaeologists wish to understand the processes responsible for this
              change. Mr. Iriarte argues that the single tightly defined developmental
              trajectory postulated by many theorists does not exist but rather that
              significant variation can be observed in the archaeological record. This
              project helps to define the limits of such variability. It will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists and assist in training a promising young
              scientist.

