Title       : CONFERENCE GRANT: Image and Meaning: Communicating Science and Technology (I &
               M), June 14-16, 2001, at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 10,  2001 
File        : a0001042

Award Number: 0001042
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Hyman H. Field                          
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : March 1,  2000      
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Boyce Rensberger boyce@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Felice Frankel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 7259      INFORMAL SCIENCE EDUCATION
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              0001042
RENSBERGER

The Massachusetts Institute of Technology is conducting a
              three-day symposium to consider how to use images to communicate science and
              technology most effectively.  Participants will include scientists, imaging
              technologists, computer scientists, photographers, science writers,
              illustrators, computer modelers, mathematicians, and others involved with
              communicating the basic science and findings from research.  The focus of the
              conference will be on communication -- both from the scientific community to
              the general public, and within the scientific community.  The 300 conference
              attendees will hear presentations from professionals working in the area. 
              However, they will spend the majority of the time working collaboratively on
              solutions to model problems such as how to represent the interaction of a
              receptor with a ligand, how to make visually explicit the passage of time at
              all scales, and how to explain visually a sequence of events.  Those who have
              committed to attend the conference will participate for several months in a
              conference web site prior to and after the meeting.  The web site will enable
              participants to "critique" and make modification to various images and text
              used to communicate science.  It also will be used to enable participants to
              collaborate in working groups on the model problems.

The PI's for the
              project are Boyce Rensberger and Felice Frankel.  Rensberger is director of the
              Knight Science Journalism Fellowships program at MIT.  He is a science writer
              and editor and has worked in these capacities for both the New York Times and
              The Washington Post.  Frankel is Artist-in-Resident and research scientist in
              the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at MIT.  She
              photographs and digitally images research data in science and engineering.  She
              has collaborated with George Whitesides to publish "On the Surface of Things:
              Images of the Extraordinary in Science."

