Title       : CSEDI Collaborative Research: A Coupled Geodynamic/Geochemical Study of the
               Hawaiian Plume
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0001924

Award Number: 0001924
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : February 28,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth W. Sims ksims@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew Jull  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0001924
Sims/Depaolo 

This CSEDI proposal will focus on developing a
              coupled geodynamic-geochemical model of the Hawaiian plume that will allow the
              investigators to address questions relating to the spatial and temporal
              variations in magma compositions. Chemical data available from studies in the
              Hawaiian island chain and from the Hawaiian Scientific Drilling Project (HSDP)
              drill core will provide constraints for this modeling. The project will focus
              on answering the question: ``Can the petrological, geochemical, and isotopic
              characteristics observed among the Hawaiian volcanoes be explained in terms of
              plume derived melts from a self-consistent geodynamic-geochemical model?''. In
              particular, the investigators will determine whether the compositional changes
              in magmas erupted along the island chain are consistent with our understanding
              of plume dynamics and mantle melting. During the one-year time frame of this
              proposal, the goals will be to couple the recently developed 3-D variable
              viscosity plume model of Ribe and Christensen (1999) with calculations of
              trace-element chemistry and uranium series disequilibria. They will also
              develop a new major-element parameterization specifically designed to address
              melting in the Hawaiian plume. The development of this model will be an ongoing
              project; the algorithm will be designed to be updated as new experimental data
              become available. By iteratively refining the plume model and calculations of
              magma chemistry, and by comparing the model computations to the observed magma
              compositions and eruption rates, this research will further our understanding
              of the dynamics of the mantle plume and determine the melting conditions in the
              mantle beneath the Hawaiian island chain. 



