Title       : Sediment Transport in an Urbanizing Karst Aquifer-Watershed
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0001197

Award Number: 0001197
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip C. Bennett pbennett@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John M. Sharp  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0001197
Bennett

The turbulent flow of groundwater through karst-aquifers
              effectively transports sediment and colloids through the subsurface and may
              provide a pathway for the rapid transport of organic contaminants.  Sediment
              storage in karst aquifers, in contrast, may sequester contaminants for long
              time periods while altering the flow properties of the aquifer.  The
              availability and transport of sediment in a karst aquifer are in turn
              profoundly influenced by changes in land-use and the associated changes in
              runoff and stream discharge.  While there has been extensive research into the
              hydrodynamics of sediment transport in surface water, little is known about
              karst hydrodynamics, less about the connection between the surface and
              subsurface domains, and almost nothing about the dynamics of sediment transport
              in karst aquifers.  

The proposed study will investigate the transport of
              sediment in the urbanizing Barton Creek segment of the Edwards aquifer
              watershed of central Texas.  Sediment characteristics, sediment transport, and
              sediment chemistry will be examined in Barton Creek across the primary recharge
              area in SW Austin, into the aquifer, and out at the watershed's only discharge
              points at Barton and Cold Springs.  The goals of this project are to 1)
              Characterize the sediment chemistry in the stream at the recharge point and
              compare that to the discharged sediment; 2) quantify the transport of sediment
              through this section of the aquifer using natural and introduced tracers; and
              3) quantify the sediment budget in urbanizing and agricultural watersheds under
              different flow regimes.

We will characterize the sediment in the Barton
              Creek runoff at base and stormflow stages, at the Barton and Cold Springs
              discharge points, and directly in the aquifer using several monitoring wells
              between the recharge and discharge points.  A sediment mass-balance will be
              developed by comparing sediment 'recharge' into the aquifer to sediment
              discharge at the springs.  Samples will be collected during baseflow and
              stormflow conditions to examine sediment loading, size distribution, and
              mineralogy as a function of discharge.  Tracing of water flow using fluorescent
              dyes in cooperation with the City of Austin, and both natural and introduced
              sediment tracers, will be used to characterize sediment transport in the karst
              aquifer.  A novel sediment tracer using DNA-labeled clay will be used to
              quantify transport time from the recharge feature and the loss of sediment to
              storage in the aquifer.  The potential for contaminant transport by suspended
              sediment will be characterized by analyzing surface area sediment organic
              carbon, and contaminant loading will be characterized by analysis of total
              petroleum hydrocarbons on selected sediment samples.

This project will
              provide fundamental insight into sediment transport processes into and through
              karst aquifers, the mobility of sediment and sediment-bound contaminants, and
              the sources of mobile sediment in urban and rural watersheds.  

