Title       : Robust Estimation of Nonlinear Errors-in-Variables Models Using Replicate
               Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0001663

Award Number: 0001663
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cheryl L. Eavey                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61558              (Estimated)
Investigator: Tong Li toli@indiana.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1333      METHOD, MEASURE & STATS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will study the robust estimation of nonlinear errors-in-variables
              models using the functional modeling approach.  The usual statistical inference
              for statistical and econometric models is derived based on the assumption that
              data are precisely measured.  In real applications, however, it is often the
              case that data are measured with errors or the variables in a model cannot be
              observed by the researcher.  As is well known, in general, a single measurement
              (or proxy) is not sufficient for the identification and estimation of a
              nonlinear errors-in-variables model.  This project raises the following
              fundamental issues: (i): Is the information from the replicate measurements
              useful in the functional modeling? (ii) If the answer to (i) is yes, which
              assumptions are needed and which kind of information can be extracted? (iii)
              How can one use the information extracted from replicate measurements to
              provide a robust estimator in the estimation of nonlinear errors-in-variables
              models?  To address these issues, this project will first investigate under
              what kind of conditions and assumptions, replicate measurements can be used to
              extract information that is useful in robust estimation of nonlinear
              errors-in-variables models.  Then it will study how the information extracted
              from the replicate measurements can be used in the consistent estimation of
              nonlinear errors-in-variables models. 

The methods proposed in this project
              are robust as they avoid the parametric specifications of the latent
              distributions.  As a result, they can also be used to test whether the
              functional forms for the latent distributions are correctly specified in the
              structural modeling approach.  Completion of the project will advance the
              progress in the research of measurement errors in nonlinear models.  The
              methodology studied in the project will also have wide applications in other
              statistical and econometric models with latent variables.

