Title       : Refining the Age of Neoproterozoic Glaciation in the Boston Basin,
               Massachusetts: New Uranium-Lead (U-Pb) Zircon Constraints on the Last Snowball
               Earth
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 31,  2000      
File        : a0001134

Award Number: 0001134
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Margaret D. Thompson mthompson@wellesley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wellesley College
	      106 Central Street
	      Wellesley, MA  02481    781/283-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Refining the Age of Neoproterozoic Glaciation in the Boston Basin,
              Massachusetts: New U-Pb Zircon Constraints on the Last Snowball
              Earth

Margaret Thompson
EAR-0001134

As climatologists struggle to agree
              upon future dimensions of global warming, debate is also heating up among earth
              scientists who study sedimentary rocks formed during ice ages at the close of
              Precambrian time.  According to the hypothesis dubbed "snowball earth",
              climatic conditions in this era were so extreme that the world's oceans froze
              over resulting in mass extinction of marine micro-organisms and shut-down of
              precipitation and related chemical erosion on land.  The deep freeze gave way
              to equally extraordinary greenhouse conditions after an estimated ten million
              years with the accumulation of atmospheric carbon dioxide supplied by erupting
              volcanoes.  These dramatic claims of the snowball earth hypothesis will be
              tested in this study by refining currently available age constraints for
              terminal Precambrian glaciation recorded in the Squantum "Tillite" Member of
              the Roxbury Conglomerate south of Boston, Massachusetts.  Improved ages will
              pinpoint the duration of the Squantum glaciation, and also clarify whether the
              Squantum deposits are the same age as glacial deposits in the Avalon Peninsula
              of eastern Newfoundland.

Ages will be obtained by measuring U/Pb ratios in
              minerals extracted from lava flows, volcanic ash beds and "argillite" that can
              be related to previously dated rocks above and below the glacial beds.  The
              maximum depositional age (approx. 590 million years) will be refined using
              samples from coastal exposures in Hingham, Massachusetts where a lava flow is
              overlain by conglomerate containing limestone boulders that will be analyzed
              for C and Sr isotope signatures characteristic of post-glacial "cap carbonate"
              elsewhere in the world.  Fine grained sandstone at the top of the Hewitts Cove
              section is also significant because it has recently yielded Aspidella fossils
              which in Newfoundland are younger than approx. 565 million years.  Because
              surface exposure of rocks above the Squantum deposits is poor, the minimum age
              of glaciation (approx. 570 million years) will be refined by dating ash beds
              and ash-rich argillite overlying the Squantum beds in the Main Drainage Tunnel
              and the Inter-Island Tunnel.  Dates from this study will not only provide the
              first robust estimate of the duration of a terminal Precambrian glacial event,
              but will also furnish a valuable maximum age constraint on soft bodied
              "Ediacaran" fauna preceding the explosion of life forms in Cambrian time.

