Title       : Social and Chronological Dimensions of Life in an Illinois Middle Woodland
               Hamlet
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 19,  2000      
File        : a0001056

Award Number: 0001056
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37939              (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas K. Charles dcharles@wesleyan.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wesleyan University
	      237 High Street
	      Middletown, CT  064590241    860/685-3683

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Douglas Charles and student
              assistant will analyze material excavated from the Smiling Dan site, located in
              the lower Illinois River valley. The salvage excavation, conducted as part of
              the central Illinois Expressway project revealed an intact archaeological
              occurrence located below plow induced surface disturbance. Such a situation is
              rare in the heavily agricultural Midwest. The cultural materials date to ca.
              2050-1700 years before the present and are associated with the Middle Woodland
              culture. In all, the area covers 6705 square meters and excavation revealed
              three house structures and a total of 182 pit features. Because evidence of
              postmolds was preserved, the size and shape of the structures can be
              reconstructed. Large amounts of lithic, ceramic, floral and faunal materials
              were recovered and these potentially permit reconstruction of subsistence
              practices and social organization. While preliminary analysis has been
              conducted by other researchers, the full potential of this material has not
              been realized. It is uncertain whether all structures and associated pits
              represent a single synchronous occupation or whether they result from
              sequential episodes. Through a careful examination of microstratigraphic
              relationships it should be possible to resolve this question. This work
              involves careful plotting of material in three dimensional space and an attempt
              to refit broken material recovered from different parts of the site to
              establish contemporanity. With this information, it will then be possible to
              address a number of site specific questions. Was Smiling Dan occupied year
              round? Did all members of the household reside there at the same time? Where
              patterns of residence seasonally structured? What percentage, and what specific
              elements of subsistence and maintenance related activities occurred at Smiling
              Dan rather than at special purpose sites?

The Middle Woodland period marks
              the rise of complex societies in the US Midwest. For many years archaeologists
              have focused attention on impressive mound sites which contain ritual objects
              and which required large organized labor forces for their construction. Many
              researchers however believe that such centers were not living sites but rather
              were used primarily for ceremonial functions. Very few habitation sites have
              been examined in detail and Smiling Dan's importance rests on its assignment to
              this latter category. It is also unusual because of the extensive and carefully
              detailed and recorded excavation which was conducted there. Dr. Charles'
              research will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and shed
              important light on the functioning of Middle Woodland society.

