Title       : Workshop on Functional Analysis of the Arabidopsis Genome: Project 2010 to be
               held at the Salk Institute, La Jolla, California, January 13-14, 2000
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 3,  2000    
File        : a0001429

Award Number: 0001429
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2000   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18308              (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph R. Ecker   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1131      ARABIDOPSIS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Biologists are in the midst of assimilating a new paradigm. After a generation
              of characterizing genes one or a few at a time, scientists now have access to
              the complete genome sequences of many bacterial species and several eukaryotes
              including the reference plant Arabidopsis. Biologists now envision the day when
              the complete genome sequence of their favorite organisms, or a proxy thereof,
              will be available in powerful electronic databases. Access to this information,
              and new tools that exploit it, will profoundly alter the ways in which we
              select and approach questions in biology. This, in turn, will directly impact
              the application of directed genetic methods to the improvement of economically
              important plants.

An important and revolutionary new initiative -to
              understand the function of all plant genes by the year 2010- has been proposed
              by the community of plant biologists. Implicit in this mission statement is an
              endorsement of the allocation of resources to attempts to assign function to
              genes that have no known function. This represents a significant departure from
              the common practice of defining and justifying a scientific goal based on the
              biological phenomena. The rationale for endorsing this radical change is that
              for the first time it is feasible for plant biologists to envision a whole
              system approach to study of plant form and function. This whole system approach
              promises to be orders of magnitude more efficient than the conventional
              approach. We envision that once the efficiencies of genomics have been
              realized, within the next decade, there will be a renewed emphasis on
              problem-oriented approaches and an expanded emphasis on understanding
              diversity.

The aim of this workshop is to further discuss the feasibility of
              commencing a federally funded project to determine the function(s) of all plant
              genes by the year 2010. The workshop participants will identify essential
              features that should be considered in any proposal for the establishment of a
              national program to initiate a systems approach to the study of gene function.
              The participants will discuss the role of individual investigator initiated
              research in an era where multidisciplinary centers are being established to
              approach complex research problems and the possible roles that individual
              laboratories and centers may play in this effort. This group will also discuss
              the possible impact that the "2010 project" would have on the progress of basic
              plant research as well as on the strategic interests of the United States as
              they relate to agriculture, energy and the environment. Finally, the workshop
              participants will discuss issues of coordination of efforts in the United
              States with similar programs already underway or being consider by other
              nations.


