Title       : DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Representation and Processing of Verbal
               Morphology in First and Second Languages
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2000      
File        : a0001961

Award Number: 0001961
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11988              (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael T. Ullman michael@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Georgetown University
	      37th & O St N W
	      Washington, DC  20057    202/625-0100

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This dissertation project investigates specific aspects of the mental
              computation of verbal morphology in speakers of Spanish as a first language,
              and speakers of English as a second language. The project is framed within a
              research program directed by Michael Ullman. The program investigates the
              computational and neural underpinnings of two capacities that characterize
              language: the mental lexicon of memorized words, and the mental grammar of
              rules that specify how lexical forms combine into larger sequences. It tests
              the 'dual-system' hypothesis that the lexicon is subserved by associative
              memory, whereas a symbol-manipulation system underlies grammatical
              combinations. In contrast, 'single-system' theories posit that all words and
              rules depend upon associative memory. 

Evidence supporting a dual-system
              view has come from psycholinguistic and neurolinguistic studies of morphology.
              These have shown that irregular forms (e.g. 'dug') are lexically memorized,
              while regular forms (e.g. 'walked') are computed by grammatical rules. Most
              studies have examined this distinction in English past-tense inflection, in
              native English speakers. This project will test the generality of the results
              in (1) Spanish verbal morphology, which differs substantially from English
              morphology, in native Spanish speakers; and (2) English past-tense morphology,
              in Spanish and Chinese native-speaking adult learners of English as a second
              language.
