Title       : Subsurface Magmatic Processes in the Western Galapagos Islands from
               High-Resolution Interferometric Radar Deformation Measurements
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a0001096

Award Number: 0001096
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Howard A. Zebker zebker@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Paul Segall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1044,1322,9196,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Zebker 
0001096 



Interferometric synthetic aperture radar (InSAR)
              observations of the Western Galapagos during 1992-1999 show that at least six
              out of the seven volcanoes on the islands of Isabela and Fernandina have been
              deforming, some at unusually high rates. Four volcanoes are inflating,
              including Sierra Negra on southern Isabela Island at rates of up to 0.9 m/year.
              The total uplift of Sierra Negra during 1992-99 is more than 2.5 m. The uplift
              is caused by pressure increases in shallow magma chambers beneath the volcanoes
              at depths 1.5-3.0 km. Two other volcanoes, Cerro Azul on Isabela Island and
              Fernandina volcano, erupted during the observation period. These volcanoes show
              a complicated pattern of pre-eruptive inflation, co-eruptive deflation, and
              localized deformation due to shallow intrusions. Amazingly, decades-old lava
              flows are continuing to subside at the present time. The high-resolution
              spatially-dense InSAR data can be used to constrain subsurface magmatic
              processes. Preliminary results indicate that some of the observed signals are
              well-modeled by simple symmetric pressure sources, while others cannot be
              explained by such models. Data from Sierra Negra volcano appear to require
              episodic faulting, or other inelastic deformation, accompanying inflation.
              



The investigators propose to investigate the current activity and its
              relation to subsurface processes using a combination of new observations and
              model development, as enabled by radar interferometry. They will use the
              observations to constrain the geometry and volume changes of magma chambers
              beneath the volcanoes, the dynamics of flow between storage chambers and
              intrusive/eruptive dikes, and the role of faulting and inelastic deformation
              associated with sustained magma chamber inflation. They also will examine
              temporal variability in these processes as evidenced in the InSAR measurements.
              Analysis of these high-resolution InSAR observations of Galapagos volcanism
              requires creation and validation of interferograms, development of inverse
              methods suited to InSAR data, and extension of these methods to derive detailed
              models of subsurface activity and inelastic response in the overlying rock.
              Specifically, the team will i) develop analytical methods that capitalize on
              the dense nature of the InSAR observations, ii) extend modeling capability by
              examining more physically realistic magma chamber geometries, iii) examine
              inelastic response observed in some Galapagos calderas, iv) test whether there
              is evidence that the magmatic systems at the various volcanoes are coupled or
              interacting, and v) study the extraordinary observation of subsidence of lava
              flows that are up to 20 years old. 



