Title       : A Collaborative Proposal: Protype Development of Under ice Ocean Bottom
               Seismometer
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 14,  2002   
File        : a0001392

Award Number: 0001392
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $551770             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Reves-Sohn rsohn@whoi.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Woods Hole Ocean Inst
	      
	      Woods Hole, MA  02543    508/548-1400

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP-99-06674
Sohn
This is a collaborative project by Principal
              Investigators from Scripps        Institution of Oceanography and Woods Hole
              Oceanographic Institution. The Principal Investigators will combine autonomous
              underwater vehicle (AUV) and ocean bottom seismometer (OBS) technologies to
              develop an instrument (AUVOBS) capable of making broadband seismic measurements
              on the seafloor beneath the Arctic Ocean ice cap.  The structure of the
              instrument will be based on the Odyssey 11 AUV design and the seismometer
              package will be based on the "Webb" OBS developed by Spahr Webb at Scripps. 
              These technologies will be integrated into a single instrument capable of being
              deployed and recovered from an icebreaker, and capable of making broadband
              seismic measurements over periods of up to one year on the seafloor.

The
              motivation for developing this instrument arises from the pressing need for
              seismic observations to constrain the nature of melt production in the mantle,
              crustal structure, and tectonism associated with the ultra-slow spreading
              Gakkel Ridge.  The Gakkel Ridge is essentially unsampled because it lies
              beneath the Arctic Ocean permanent ice cap.  This key piece of the global
              spreading system puzzle provides an opportunity to image crustal accretion and
              mantle processes that are masked or hidden in other spreading environments. 
              The logistics and priorities for an international field program to study the
              Gakkel Ridge have been developed through a series of InterRidge workshops.  One
              of the highest priorities is the acquisition of passive and active source
              seismic data.  It has been impossible to make seismic measurements on the
              seafloor at the Gakkel Ridge, but with the development of an AUVOBS instrument,
              the Arctic Ocean Basin could be opened to seismic investigation.  The Principal
              Investigators will solve the first order problems associated with deploying and
              recovering AUVs from icebreakers in the ice pack and modifying AUVs to make in
              situ seafloor measurements over long periods of time.  In addition to
              developing an AUVOBS prototype, they will also develop techniques and hardware
              that will allow the routine deployment of AUVs for a variety of Arctic (and
              Antarctic) science missions in the future.

