Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: The Persistence of
               Presidential Campaigns in the Public Agenda
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a0001728

Award Number: 0001728
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7898               (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles H. Franklin franklin@polisci.wisc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Wisconsin Madison
	      750 University Ave
	      Madison, WI  537061490    608/262-3822

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	Scholars of American politics continue to debate whether campaigns and
              elections really matter.  After all, the outcomes of campaigns can be predicted
              by presidential approval and economic factors a year before the election
              (Gelman and King, 1993; Lewis-Beck and Rice, 1992).  Accordingly, it is argued
              that the influence of campaigns on the polity must be minimal.
	This doctoral
              dissertation research project argues that presidential campaigns do matter. 
              They matter not just for the election outcomes,  but also for public policy by
              influencing the public agenda after the election and by establishing the
              criteria by which presidents are evaluated subsequently.  Campaigns influence
              governing largely through the persistence of campaign messages in the public
              consciousness.  The researcher draws on the literatures on campaign effects,
              public opinion formation, agenda setting, and presidential evaluation to
              address the link between democratic elections and public policy.  Using newly
              collected rolling-cross section survey data collected during the 2000
              presidential campaign and after, the investigator tests three basic hypotheses
              while allowing for individual variation.  The first is the themes emphasized by
              presidential candidates become increasing important to the public.  The second
              is the winner's themes persist in the public agenda and into his
              administration.  The third is that the campaign themes establish the bases for
              presidential evaluations.  In sum, presidential campaigns do not simply respond
              to the public agenda; they play an important role in setting it.  The public
              does not merely attend to the campaign agenda; it holds the president
              accountable after the election.  

