Title       : Landscapes of Settlement: Historical Ecology in Northern Iceland
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 3,  2002        
File        : a0001026

Award Number: 0001026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194261             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas H. McGovern nabo@voicenet.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ian Simpson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew Dugmore  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Orri Vesteinsson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : CUNY Hunter College
	      695 Park Avenue
	      New York, NY  100215024    212/772-4020

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 5914,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Thomas McGovern and his colleagues
              will conduct three seasons of archaeological investigation at the site of
              Hofstadir, a medieval settlement in Iceland. First excavated in 1908,
              researchers uncovered a large hall structure with a central long fireplace and
              side benches and postulated it functioned as a temple. More recent work which
              has further uncovered the building and located a series of surrounding house
              sites indicates that the complex has a complicated occupational history and
              likely was primarily a full scale high status farmstead.  Dr. McGovern will
              direct additional research at this site to understand how its function changed
              over time and how its occupants derived their sustenance from and in turn
              influenced the environment. They will conduct extensive horizontal excavation
              and combine this with extensive survey and test-pitting of satellite sites and
              fields within the farm. They will also sample sites and features in the broader
              region. Iceland was first settled by humans from Scandinavia and the British
              Isles during the Viking age and extensive contemporary literature describes the
              latter stages of this occupation. This documentary record (sagas, law codes,
              annals) provides rich evidence for a socially complex non-state society. These
              writings have been employed by historians and anthropologists for studies of
              Iceland and the development of general theories of chieftainship. However,
              although the early settlement period is described in sagas and other later
              accounts, all these documents date to after AD 1100 and are clearly secondary
              sources much influenced by medieval rather than Viking period social and
              economic contexts. The first 225 years are, in effect, prehistoric and thus can
              be understood only through systematic archaeological and paleoecological
              investigation. Dr. McGovern's research will help to accomplish this
              goal.

The work will shed important new light on human environment
              interactions and the effect of human behavior on island ecosystems. Human
              impact on local animals, vegetation, soils and drainage patterns was rapid and
              profound. By 950 AD ca 80% of the native scrub woodlands had been cleared and
              soil erosion had begun in the higher elevations. By the later Middle Ages,
              accelerated loss of groundcover led to more widespread erosion of ca 40% of the
              topsoil present before human settlement and massive alteration of river
              drainage patterns. Iceland thus represents an extreme case of pre-industrial
              human impact on the environment and provides an excellent laboratory to
              understand such interactions.

