Title       : Socio-Economy, Interregional Interaction, and Demographic Shift in North Central
               Anatolia: Excavations at Prehistoric Cadir Hoyuk
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2000      
File        : a0001383

Award Number: 0001383
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $112574             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sharon R. Steadman steadmans@cortland.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Cortland
	      P O BOX 2000
	      Cortland, NY  13045    607/753-2201

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Sharon Steadman and her
              
colleagues will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research in the
              Yozgat province of 
central Turkey  (Anatolia), at the site of Cadir Hoyuk.
              The team consists of 
field archaeologists, specialists in faunal analysis,
              paleobotany, lithics analysis, and ceramic 
analysis. Investigation will
              concentrate on the prehistoric occupation at the site of 
Cadir Hoyuk in the
              north central Anatolian plateau, primarily on the Chalcolithic and Early
              
Bronze I periods (ca. 5000-3000 B.C.) prior to the rise of the early second
              millennium state-level 
societies. The lack of extensive prehistoric remains
              in this region has left a large gap in the 
understanding of the transition in
              the north central plateau culture history from the early 
farming/herding
              settlements in the fifth/fourth millennia to the rise of the Hittite
              Empire/State in the 
early second millennium B.C.
	 
Previous work in this
              region has demonstrated that the Chalcolithic and 
Early Bronze periods 
              witnessed extensive socio-economic changes, including 
the rise of
              long-distance ("international") trade, the influx of a new, migratory,
              population, and the 
development of increasingly complex society (culminating
              in the second millennium Hittite 
empire). However, previously excavated sites
              were lacking in continuous occupation, making the 
documentation of a lengthy
              and coherent occupational sequence impossible. Dr. Steadman's previous work at
              Cadir Hoyuk has demonstrated that this is a multi-period site, with a long
              occupational sequence.The NSF-funded research program will focus on the
              following three 
investigative goals:

 1. What was the nature of the
              indigenous Chalcolithic/EB occupation in this 
region of
 Anatolia? 
 2.
              What was the nature and extent of long-distance trade in the north central
              
plateau region?
  3. What impact did the Late Chalcolithic arrival of a new
              population (later 
to become the second millennium Hittite State) have on the
              indigenous Anatolian 
socio-economic
 organization? 
 
The proposed
              fieldwork provides previously unavailable insight into the north 
central
              plateau occupational history before, during, and after two important events in
              this 
region's prehistoric sequence: the florescence of long-distance
              exchange, and the arrival of 
immigrants who forever after changed the nature
              of central Anatolian demographics. The site 
of Cadir Hoyuk has the utmost
              potential to provide answers to the proposed research 
questions and will go
              far in enabling us to establish a secure prehistoric cultural sequence for this
              
little understood region of the Anatolian plateau.


