Title       : Strategic Persuasion and the Manipulation of Knowledge Structures in Social
               Choice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 12,  2002  
File        : a0001749

Award Number: 0001749
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $61006              (Estimated)
Investigator: Diana Richards Richards@polisci.umn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Minnesota-Twin Cities
	      450 University Gateway
	      Minneapolis, MN  554151226    612/625-5000

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For the past twenty years, theories of social choice have emphasized the
              
important effects of institutions. However, the cognitive structures with
              which 
individuals represent a decision context are also important. These
              mental 
models, or knowledge structures, create categories and relationships
              among 
alternatives, thereby influencing the existence and characteristics of
              an 
equilibrium. In previous papers it was shown that in both cooperative
              games such
as social choice and non-cooperative games such as coordination
              problems, the 
prospects for stability are greatly improved when players have
              shared mental 
representations (despite having conflicting preferences). These
              results are 
broadly referred to as a "knowledge-induced
              equilibrium."
	Although a knowledge-induced equilibrium is immune to
              manipulation by insincere
voting, the more interesting question is the extent
              to which players can 
manipulate others' mental representations--such as
              through framing, discourse, 
or persuasion--in order to influence the
              collective outcome. This "second-order"
strategic behavior is much closer to
              William Riker's concept of heresthetics. The task 
of this project is to
              explore the possibilities and characteristics of 
manipulation in the
              knowledge-induced equilibrium framework. More specifically, 
the investigator
              constructs a game model where players can send signals to a subset of other
              players to which they are persuasive in an attempt to alter the mental
              
representations of the decision context and thereby altering the collective
              
outcome. Players' strategies include heresthetical tactics such as arguing
              
relationships among alternatives, adding or removing alternatives from the
              
choice set, and influencing the distribution and depth of other players'
              
knowledge representations. Results from the project contribute to several
              
topics, including (1) explanations of the endogenous emergence of shared
              
knowledge structures through strategic dialogue, (2) the identification of
              
structural positions or contexts that are "lever points" in that a player has
              
disproportionate ability to direct the outcome through strategic persuasion,
              (3)
a formalization of a set of heresthetical maneuvers along the lines called
              for 
by Riker, (4) applications to bargaining and negotiation theory, and (5)
              the 
development of an alternative index of power based on equilibrium
              opportunities 
for strategic persuasion rather than on the combinatorics of
              coalitions.


