Title       : High Pressure Synchrotron Radiology and Microtomography Studies of Mechanisms
               and Kinetics of Liquid Iron -Silicate Segregation: Implications for Formation
               of the Earth's Core
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a0001088

Award Number: 0001088
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $280000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yanbin Wang   (Principal Investigator current)
              Mark L. Rivers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Sutton  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Wang 
0001088 

All core formation models depend on knowledge of mechanisms
              of the liquid iron-silicate separation. The investigators propose to study the
              iron-silicate separation process by in-situ synchrotron X-ray radiography in
              the large-volume press at GSECARS and the Advanced Photon Source. Their pilot
              experiments have demonstrated that droplets of Fe-rich melt from a mechanical
              mixture of silicates and Fe (with controlled amounts of light elements) can be
              observed by in situ radiography during the separation process. Computed
              microtomography has been applied to the recovered samples to generate
              three-dimensional reconstructions of the size and spatial distribution of the
              melt droplets as a function of pressure, temperature, composition, and time. In
              the proposed study, the investigators will examine systems containing selected
              light elements, such as C, S, H, O, and Si, with various metal/silicate volume
              ratios at pressures up to 15 GPa and 2000K. They will start with simple
              compositions by selecting pure constituents but as understanding increases will
              work on more realistic compositions such as iron meteorite and carbonaceous
              meteorite. Currently a white beam is used for the radiography experiments but
              monochromatic radiation will be used in future experiments to enhance image
              resolution and contrast. In addition, the team plans to develop an X-ray
              transparent Drickamer-type high-pressure cell for in-situ microtomography,
              which will greatly enhance resolution power to the micron level. Samples will
              be examined at various stages of the experiment by microtomography to
              reconstruct the evolution of the size and spatial distribution of the Fe-rich
              droplets as a function of light element, pressure, temperature, and time.
              Recovered samples will be sectioned and examined by scanning and transmission
              electron microscopy to resolve metal-silicate interaction to sub-micron level.
              Composition analyses will be performed and element partitioning will be studied
              using electron microprobe and X-ray fluorescence microprobe. These experiments
              will provide first-hand laboratory observations on iron-silicate separation and
              improve our understanding of possible core formation mechanisms and dynamics of
              the core-mantle boundary. The results will be used to constrain existing models
              regarding physical and chemical processes of the formation of the core. 

