Title       : Dissertation: Archaeology of the Western Caroline Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2000     
File        : a0001531

Award Number: 0001531
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : April 1,  2000      
Expires     : March 31,  2002      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11930              (Estimated)
Investigator: William S. Ayres wsayres@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. William Ayres, Mr. Scott Fitzpatrick will collect
              data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research on
              the island of Palau located in the Pacific Western Carolines Islands and couple
              this with trace element analysis of lithic samples collected. The island of
              Yap, located ca. 400 nautical miles from Palau is well known to archaeologists
              for its use of stone money and examples, some weighing many tons, have been
              discovered on the island. These stones were carved into flattened circular
              shapes with a single hole cut into the center. Specific value was attributed by
              a complicated system based in part on the history of each stone and they served
              as recognized currency. They also brought prestige and power to their owners.
              Although some stones were carved from local rock, many were fashioned and
              transported by canoe from the island of Palau and this practice has been
              ethnographically described since it continued into historic times. At least in
              the recent past, Yap islanders would travel to Palau and pay, either in the
              form of goods or labor, for the right to mine and transport the raw material.
              However it is unclear when this practice originated, how prehistoric mining was
              conducted and what ties might have existed between specific villages or groups
              on Yap and Palau. Through a program of archaeological excavation and chemical
              analysis of raw materials Mr. Fitzpatrick will address these issues. He will
              conduct excavations at two quarry sites which likely contain pottery,
              production waste and other cultural materials. Organic samples will be
              collected for radiocarbon dating. With such data it should be possible to date
              the probable origin and subsequent development of stone extraction. Through a
              chemical analysis of both worked and parent material, it should also be
              possible to determine what types of rocks were most frequently utilized and
              determine why such was the case. Mr. Fitzpatrick will also evaluate the
              possibility of tracing individual pieces of money back to a specific quarry
              source. Through trace element analysis he will establish the range of
              variability within the single source and the degree of overlap among different
              sources. If distinctive "chemical fingerprints" can be distinguished, then
              sourcing should be possible.

At the time of first western contact, many
              Pacific societies were highly stratified and had complex forms of social
              organization. Anthropologists wish to understand how these developed over time
              and believe that control and manipulation of trade played a major role. Yap and
              Palau provide an excellent situation in which to examine this question. The
              results of this work will be of interest to many archaeologists. The project
              will also assist in training a promising young scientist.

