Title       : Interaction Between Magma & Altered Crust on a Mature Oceanic Island: An Isotope
               & Trace Element Study of the Diego Hernandez Fmtn, Las Canadas Caldera,
               Tenerife, Canary Islands
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0001013

Award Number: 0001013
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $183839             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Wolff jawolff@mail.wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Peter B. Larson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0001013
Wolff/Larson

Much of our understanding of how Earth's mantle
              works comes from measurements of trace element abundances and isotope ratios in
              ocean island basalts.  Both act as conservative "flight recorders" of the
              mantle sources and transport histories of magma up to the point of eruption and
              freezing upon Earth's surface.  Application of basalt geochemistry to the
              mantle depends on the assumption that basaltic magmas are not significantly
              affected  by their passage through the crust en route to the surface.  While
              most scientists would admit the possibility of some degree of host-rock
              assimilation by rising magma, a powerful argument in favor of ocean island
              basalts as faithful recorders of source chemistry is that crustal host-rocks -
              dominantly earlier erupted basalts - exert no chemical leverage on the magma
              that they may be incorporated into.  We shall test this assertion, and place
              limits on the maximum extent of assimilation that may reasonably be expected in
              an ocean island setting, by studying an extreme case.  In contrast to many
              islands, Tenerife has an extensive development of fusible felsic rocks both on
              the surface and within the island structure.  Also, in the formation we propose
              to study, there is abundant evidence for intimate mingling of mantle-derived
              basaltic magmas with felsic magma, some of which is derived from melting of
              subsurface rock.  The preservation of mingling textures in rapidly-quenched
              ignimbrites will allow us to study basaltic-felsic interactions in detail,
              while the compositional leverage provided by the felsic rocks will allow us to
              constrain the extent to which the mantle isotopic and, especially,
              trace-element characteristics of ocean-island basalts are compromised by
              crustal interactions.  


