Title       : SAFOD: Near-Surface Geophysics and Field Camp Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 6,  2001      
File        : a0001183

Award Number: 0001183
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Leonard E. Johnson                      
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $65258              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. Malin malin@duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1581      CONTINENTAL DYNAMICS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0001183
Malin

This project involves a near-surface 3D geophysical
              investigation of the drill site area near Parkfield, CA for the San Andreas
              Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD).  Major portions of the fieldwork and data
              analysis will include advanced training of students in the investigation
              methods and extensive interactions between industry, government, and the
              universities involved in the investigation.  The scientific purpose of the
              investigation will be to further characterize the near-surface fault and basin
              structure of the site.  Knowledge of the near-surface structure is essential
              for interpreting the results of the deeper drilling and more regional
              geophysical investigations that are currently planned.  In addition,  these
              data will help to establish some of the near surface complications the drilling
              effort may encounter.  The geophysical methods to be included in the site
              investigation are potential field and field gradient profiling, seismic
              profiling, magnetic field survey, and radar profiling.

The drill site
              investigation will be conducted as part of an advanced, multi-university
              near-surface geophysics field camp and seminar.  The camp will also be used as
              a focus for industry-university-government cooperation and interaction on the
              SAFOD project.  The camp will primarily include students from Duke, Stanford
              and UC Berkeley, but will also be open to students from Questa College Cal Poly
              San Luis Obispo, and other institutions participating in the SAFOD effort.  The
              educational purpose of the field camp will be two fold:  1)  to demonstrate the
              techniques and value of 3D geophysical surveying and data; and 2) to acquaint a
              large group of students with the scientific objectives and research
              possibilities of the SAFOD program.  By sharing the data in an open and
              coordinated fashion between each of the participating institutions, it is hoped
              that several competing models of the drill site will emerge, with the ultimate
              test being provided by the drilling itself.
***

