Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Redistricting on "Pork" Project
               Allocation and Constituency Service in the U.S. Congress
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a0001808

Award Number: 0001808
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4507               (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold W. Stanley   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              What is the effect of redistricting and constituency change on distributive
              policy making and constituency service in Congress?  This Doctoral Dissertation
              Research project answers this question.  Scholars have for some time been
              interested in both the normative implications of and the empirical effects of
              racial and other types of redistricting on congressional representation and
              public policy, though the limitation of nearly every one of these past
              empirical studies is that only roll-call voting behavior is explained.  By
              looking at representatives' roll-call voting, researchers have neglected other
              important forms of institutional behavior in Congress and behavior that occurs
              in the district.  The dependent variables analyzed in this proposal look at
              these other forms of congressional participation and activity.

The
              dissertation consists of two main parts.  In the first part, the effect of
              redistricting on "pork" project allocation is considered.  Methodologically,
              the analysis for this first part relies primarily upon quantitative analysis of
              all U.S. congressional districts from 1983-1998, utilizing a data set of
              federal project allocations.  This quantitative analysis is also supplemented
              with qualitative interviews of congressional staff.  In the second part of the
              study, the effect of redistricting on constituency service in analyzed.  This
              relies on a mix of both quantitative analysis and qualitative analysis, though
              most heavily on field research in the southern United States.

The
              Dissertation Research Support investigation has its major objective not only to
              make a contribution to the literature on minority representation, but also to
              contribute to a greater understanding of the interplay between electoral
              institutions, congressional representation, and the voting behavior of
              constituents.  The data and information collected will be provided to the
              scholarly community at large.


