Title       : Dissertation: Style and Culture Contact in the Southern Highlands of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2000       
File        : a0001472

Award Number: 0001472
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : January 1,  1900     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $12000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Katharina J. Schreiber schreibk@sscf.ucsb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Santa Barbara
	      Office of Research
	      Santa Barbara, CA  93106    805/893-4188

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Katharina Schreiber, MS Melissa Chatfield will
              collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will continue fieldwork in
              highland Peru and conduct archaeological investigation at the site of Aqnapama.
              Because it is protected by a deep river gorge, it has escaped looting which is
              common in the region. Excavation will serve both to elucidate architectural
              forms, which characterize specific regional cultures and to obtain large well
              dated ceramic samples for detailed analysis. Based on work to date, it appears
              that five types of structures, distinguished by size and shape are present and
              a representative of each will be excavated in order to determine function.
              Laboratory analysis will focus on ceramics and materials will initially be
              classified into decorative groupings. This will be followed by a simple
              quantification of paste and temper characteristics. A representative sample
              will then be set aside for subsequent detailed petrographic
              analysis.

Aqnapama dates to the Late Intermediate Period, ca. 900-1476 AD, a
              time when highland Peru was dominated by two large empires: Wari centered
              around Cuzco and Tiwanaku with a capital further South in Bolivia.
              Archaeologists wish to understand how each of these entities functioned and the
              relationship between the two. To what extent were these true "states" which
              exercised a direct control over outlying regions and which, at their mutual
              border engaged in hostile or competitive relationships? Although the area of
              demarcation between the two is fairly clear, Aqnapama is unusual because it
              appears to combine elements of both. Through analysis of pottery imported to
              the site as well as that locally produced, MS Chatfield will evaluate a series
              of hypothesized modes of interaction. Since it is likely that local inhabitants
              of the region had a tradition which predated the arrival of either Wari or
              Tiwanaku influences MS Chatfield wishes to determine how they related to both
              entities and the extent to which they were able to maintain a degree of local
              autonomy. Through a careful analysis of ceramic materials she will gain insight
              into these issues.

This research is important for several reasons. It will
              provide data of interest to many South Americanist archaeologists. It will shed
              new light into how states arise and maintain their integrity and it will
              contribute to the development of a promising young scientist.

