Title       : Equations of State, Elasticity, and Rheology of Earth Materials at High
               Pressures and Temperatures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2002      
File        : a0001173

Award Number: 0001173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $460336             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ho-kwang Mao mao@gl.ciw.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell J. Hemley  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Inst of Wash
	      1530 P Street NW
	      Washington, DC  200051910    202/387-6400

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1031,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Mao 

0001173 



A series of high-pressure experimental studies of the
              elasticity and equations of state of mantle and core materials needed to
              address major problems concerning the structure, dynamics, and evolution of the
              Earth's deep interior is proposed. The project takes advantage of numerous
              recent developments in diamond-anvil cell techniques, including cell design,
              high-temperature methods, synchrotron single-crystal and polycrystalline x-ray
              diffraction, synchrotron x-ray spectroscopy, and Brillouin scattering
              spectroscopy. The following experiments will be performed. (1) P-V-T equations
              of state of iron, iron alloys, and iron compounds will be studied to core
              pressures using polycrystalline x-ray diffraction with monochromatic
              x-radiation, hydrostatic pressure media, and an improved pressure calibration.
              (2) The shear modulus and elasticity tensor of core materials (initially e-Fe)
              will be determined up to 50 GPa and temperatures up to 1500 K using radial
              x-ray diffraction methods with monochromatic synchrotron radiation. (3) The
              technique will be further applied to study the rheological properties of these
              materials (including Fe, Fe-Ni, FeO, and FeS2) with accurate measurements of
              the intensities of reflections as a function of temperature and time. (4) The
              phonon densities of states of iron-bearing materials will be determined to core
              pressures using nuclear resonant inelastic x-ray scattering, as recently done
              for Fe to 153 GPa. Combined with theoretical calculations, the technique will
              be extended in later stages of the project to simultaneous high pressures and
              temperatures. (5) The P-V-T equations of state of principal deep mantle oxide
              and silicate phases will be determined using polycrystalline x-ray diffraction
              in hydrostatic media over the entire geotherm of the lower mantle. (6) This
              will be complemented by single-crystal x-ray diffraction of select phases for
              complete structure refinements to >100 GPa using a new combined energy
              dispersive/angle dispersive technique. (7) Brillouin scattering measurements of
              deep mantle phases [initially stishovite and (Mg,Fe)SiO3 perovskite] will be
              carried out to pressures above 50 GPa, and in the later stages of the project
              their temperature derivatives will be determined with resistive heating
              techniques. These results will provide an essential baseline for interpreting
              seismic velocity distributions and anisotropy of the lower mantle. (8) Finally,
              the calibration of pressure will be extended to high pressures and temperatures
              (>800 K and >50 GPa) using the integrated Brillouin/x-ray diffraction approach
              recently applied to MgO at room temperature. 




