Title       : Behavior of Monazite and Zircon During Amphibolite-Facies Fluid-Rock
               Interaction: Implications for U-Th-Pb Geochronological Interpretations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0001084

Award Number: 0001084
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $55188              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jay J. Ague jay.ague@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Christopher J. Carson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0001084
Ague, Carson

How long does it take to build a mountain range? 
              Geologists can now address this basic question because modern isotopic
              techniques allow the ages of individual mineral grains in rocks to be
              determined with unprecedented accuracy.  As age determination methods improve,
              it has become apparent that minerals may preserve a complex record of multiple
              geologic events separated in time by millions or even billions of years. 
              Fluids, including water-rich solutions and silicate melts, flow through Earth's
              crust during mountain building, carrying with them heat and chemical species
              such as greenhouse gases (e.g., CO2) and valuable ore metals.  In this regard,
              a fundamental question actively debated today is:  do these migrating fluids
              impact the U-Th-Pb isotopic systematics of commonly studied minerals like
              monazite and zircon, providing a record of the actual rates and timing of fluid
              flow through the Earth during mountain building?  To address this question, our
              proposal seeks to develop new petrological and geochemical criteria to identify
              the effects of fluid infiltration on the morphology, chemistry, and isotopic
              systematics of monazite and zircon.  The research centers on electron
              microprobe, rock chemical, and ion-microprobe study of well characterized,
              Early Paleozoic metamorphic fluid--rock interaction zones cutting the Archaean
              gneisses of the Napier Complex, East Antarctica.  Ultimately, our findings are
              expected to determine the complete pressure-temperature-time history of the
              fluid infiltration, and have implications for tectonic and chronological models
              of the assembly of the Gondwana supercontinent.

