Title       : Specification and Estimation of Spatial Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 11,  2002     
File        : a0001780

Award Number: 0001780
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $231578             (Estimated)
Investigator: Harry H. Kelejian kelejian@econ.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ingmar Prucha  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal relates to the specification and estimation of spatial models.
              These models are important tools in economics, regional science and geography
              in analyzing a wide range of empirical issues. In spatial models, interactions
              between cross sectional units are typically modeled in terms of some measure of
              distance between them. These interactions could be due to competition between
              cross sectional units, copy-cat policies, network issues, spillovers,
              externalities, regional issues, etc. Spatial distances could relate to
              geographic space, as well as other spaces such as product space or input space.
              Spatial models have seen many recent applications including the determinants of
              productivity, local public expenditures, vote seeking and tax setting behavior,
              population and employment growth, contagion problems such as bank failures, and
              the determinants of welfare expenditures.
By far the most widely used spatial
              models are variants of the one suggested by Cliff and Ord for modeling a single
              spatial relationship. Even in its simplest form, maximum likelihood estimation
              of these types of models entails substantial, and even forbidding,
              computational problems if the number of cross sectional units is large. Against
              this background, we have suggested alternative procedures which are
              computationally simpler:  the Gild estimator and an instrumental variable
              estimation procedure which is based on a generalized moments (GM) estimator of
              a parameter in the spatial autoregressive process. 
The purpose of this
              proposal is to generalize Cliff-Ord type models in three important directions
              allowing them to cover a wider range of applications and lessening the danger
              of model misspecification in applied work.  The first extension will allow for
              estimation of Cliff-Ord type models with heteroskedastic innovations which are
              quite often encountered in empirical analysis of spatial units of different
              size. We also plan to relax other restrictive model assumptions, including a
              typically maintained assumption regarding the parameter space of the spatial
              autoregressive parameter.  As a second generalization we propose an extension
              of the estimation methodology we have developed to a panel data framework in
              which the spatial units are observed for multiple time periods. In this
              framework the disturbances will be assumed to follow a spatial autoregressive
              process.  Motivated by the error components literature, the innovations
              entering this process will be modeled as the sum of two error components,
              reflecting unit specific effects and some overall innovation. Taken together,
              the disturbances entering the regression model would be both spatially and time
              correlated.  Finally, because modeling interactions between spatial units will
              frequently involve a system of equations, we propose an extension of Cliff-Ord
              type models to simultaneous equation systems. In such a framework it should be
              of interest to consider full information estimators. However, to the best of
              our knowledge, no formal results concerning the large sample distribution of
              such estimators exist.
For each of those generalizations we will introduce
              estimation methodology which will involve extensions of our earlier work. In
              all three cases we plan to formally study the large sample properties of our
              proposed estimators, and to supplement those theoretical results with
              corresponding Monte Carlo studies.

