Title       : Research in Econometric Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0001706

Award Number: 0001706
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 29,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200472             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald Andrews donald.andrews@yale.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Yale University
	      P.O. Box 208337
	      New Haven, CT  065208337    203/432-2460

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal describes research on several new topics and continued research in
              several areas.  First, the PI will consider bias-reduced semiparametric
              estimation of the long memory parameter  'd'. The most common estimator of 
              this parameter, the Geweke and Porter-Hudak (GPH) estimator, has been found to
              have substantial finite sample bias. The PI and P. Guggenberger, a graduate
              student at Yale, will develop an alternative GPH estimator whose bias is
              reduced by an order of magnitude, whose variance is increased only by a
              multiplicative constant, and whose rate of convergence is faster than that of
              the GPH estimator. We plan to establish the optimal rate of convergence of
              estimators of 'd' when the normalized spectral density is smooth of order s at
              zero and show that the bias-reduced GPH estimator attains this rate, but, for s
              > 2, the GPH estimator does not. Working with Yixiao Sun, a graduate student at
              Yale, the PI will develop a local polynomial Whittle estimator that behaves
              like other local Whittle estimators, but has reduced bias and a faster rate of
              convergence.
The second area of proposed research is on the bootstrap for
              nonlinear estimators. This research continues work already reported by the PI..
              We aim to obtain higher-order improvements for bootstrapping minimum distance
              and indirect inference estimators, stronger higher-order improvement results
              for the iid nonparametric bootstrap than those currently available, and new
              results for residual-based and BCa bootstraps and Lagrange multiplier (LM) and
              likelihood ratio (LR) tests.
The third area of research is to develop some new
              asymptotic optimality properties of the classical LM, LR, and Wald tests. The
              idea is to generalize the finding that the LM test for serial correlation
              against AR(1) errors is the same as that against MA(1) errors. This finding
              implies that the LM, LR, and Wald tests have Wald-type asymptotic optimality
              properties for testing against both AR(1) and MA(1) errors. Results of this
              type hold more generally, both in this model and in many other models. The
              object of the proposed research is to obtain some general results that
              determine different classes of alternative models for which a given LM, LR, or
              Wald test has asymptotic optimality properties.
The fourth area of proposed
              research continues the PI's research on testing problems when a parameter is on
              the boundary of the maintained hypothesis and a parameter appears under the
              alternative but not under the null hypothesis.  Numerous examples of such
              problems already exist, and we believe that problems of this sort will become
              increasingly prevalent as researchers rely more and more on nonlinear models.
              We aim to show that the LR, LM, and Wald tests are asymptotically admissible,
              develop new tests that maximize weighted average power for certain weight
              functions, construct a complete class of tests,  and establish the asymptotic
              null distribution of the LR, LM, and Wald tests in the Markov regime switching
              model.  Finally, we plan to show that the LR, LM, and Wald tests for testing
              for conditional heteroskedasticity of GARCH(1, 1) form are consistent against
              any form of serial correlation in the squared errors.

