Title       : High-Risk Exploratory Research: Phreatic-Zone Excavation and Integrated Site
               Analysis in Southwestern Madagascar.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2000       
File        : a0001420

Award Number: 0001420
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2000       
Expires     : April 1,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $17960              (Estimated)
Investigator: David A. Burney burney@fordham.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              William L. Jungers  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Fordham University
	      441 E.Fordham Road
	      Bronx, NY  10458    718/817-4650

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will use a newly-developed approach for excavating fossils from
              bogs and other flooded sites.  The investigators have found that by placing a
              large-diameter well in the corner of an excavation pit and pumping groundwater
              to a different part of the same aquifer with lightweight, high-pressure water
              pumps, it is possible to extract fossils from sites previously out of reach
              under the water table.  Such sites are especially favorable to fossil
              preservation, and this method will allow the extraction of bones, soft tissue,
              ancient DNA, plant microfossils and macrofossils, and many other types of
              information with a maximum amount of control over the depth and context.  There
              is no impact on the area's water resources, because the water is returned to
              the aquifer.  

If this approach works in the ancient lake-beds of
              southwestern Madagascar, it will permit the scientists to investigate the
              circumstances surrounding the apparently rapid extinction of the giant lemurs,
              elephant birds, and other large and unusual animals of prehistoric Madagascar,
              and to reconstruct the conditions under which they lived.  Work of this type
              will allow the testing of five competing hypotheses for the cause of these
              extinctions, which many scientists believe were caused in some way by
              prehistoric humans.  Perfecting this technique will open new avenues for
              research on prehistoric landscapes and facilitate the direct application of
              paleoecology to the goals of ecological restoration.

