Title       : Paleontology and Geology of Newly Discovered Oligocene Faunas and Floras in
               Western Ethiopia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 27,  2001  
File        : a0001259

Award Number: 0001259
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : February 15,  2001  
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $284999             (Estimated)
Investigator: John W. Kappelman jkappelman@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Paleontology and Geology of Newly Discovered Oligocene Faunas and
              Floras in Western Ethiopia

John Kappelman:  EAR-0001259

     	One of the
              still unanswered questions about African faunal evolution concerns the tempo
              and mode of the transition from the more archaic terrestrial vertebrate faunas
              that date to older than 33 million years in age, to the more modernized faunas
              that first occur about 23 million years ago. The transition between the two
              faunas is dramatic and includes numerous extinctions, reductions in diversity
              of once dominant groups, and suspected immigrations of new groups from Asia and
              Europe that subsequently evolved to become the dominant groups on the
              continent.  The ten million year long period of time that separates these two
              faunas was until recently unsampled by any significant fossil vertebrate
              localities located anywhere on the African or Arabian continents.  
	During
              the winter of 1997-1998 reconnaissance surveys in Western Ethiopia located a
              series of fossiliferous sediments on the western Ethiopian Plateau.  These
              sediments preserve abundant and diverse plant fossils (pollen, leaves, seeds,
              nuts, pods, and tree branches, stumps, and trunks), vertebrate fossils, and
              trace fossils. Preliminary radiometric dating places the fossils at about 27
              million years in age. Together this evidence shows that the Chilga late
              Oligocene faunas and floras are the first significant fossils of this age
              reported for the entire continent of Africa as well as the first sub-Sahara
              site located in the interior of the continent.  
	Our study of the Chilga
              Oligocene faunas and floras will aim to characterize the communities that lived
              during this time period in order to understand the transition from archaic to
              modern faunas and floras. Work will include recovering fossils from the
              currently known localities, surveying for new localities, screen washing for
              small mammals, documenting the depositional setting of the lacustrine and
              fluvial beds, reconstructing the paleoenvironments, and carrying out a program
              of radioisotopic and paleomagnetic dating to establish firm chronostratigraphic
              control.  
	The Chilga region provides the first real opportunity for studying
              one of the most dramatic faunal and floral transitions known for African.  A
              better understanding of the nature of this transition should provide new
              information for understanding the complex interplay among extinctions,
              immigrations, and radiations that characterize later transitions in African
              faunas and floras.

