Title       : "GSA Field Forum- "Glaciohydraulic Supercooling, Freeze-on, Stratified Basal Ice
               and Deformable Till Beds": Matanuska Glacier, Alaska"
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OPP 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 4,  2000   
File        : a0001503

Award Number: 0001503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Jane V. Dionne                          
	      OPP  OFFICE OF POLAR PROGRAMS                
	      O/D  OFFICE OF THE DIRECTOR                  
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $7560               (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward B. Evenson ebe0@lehigh.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lehigh University
	      Alumni Building 27
	      Bethlehem, PA  180153005    215/861-3000

NSF Program : 5280      ARCTIC NATURAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1079,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract
OPP 00-01503
Evenson


This award will support the participation
              of several foreign scientists and U.S. graduate students to attend the
              inaugural Geological Society of America field conference.  This conference is
              designated to introduce, and generate discussion of an important, new debris
              entrainment and transport process operating at temperate glaciers.  The theory
              that glaciohydraulic supercooling and the associated ice growth (frazil and
              anchor ice terraces) and debris entrainment is occurring at the Matanuska
              Glacier, Alaska has clearly been demonstrated. It has also been demonstrated
              that thick, debris-laden, stratified basal ice is recent and is directly
              related to the supercooling, freeze-on process.  In addition, both the
              Malispina and Bering are currently experiencing supercooling and freeze-on. 
              The importance of the freeze-on process is that it provides a significant new
              debris entrainment and transport mechanism.  Unfortunately, only those working
              in the Principal Investigator's research group have ever witnessed the field
              evidence for this new mechanism.  Therefore, they hope that this field
              conference will engender discussions on the nature and importance of
              glaciohydraulic supercooling and the associated debris entrainment processes. 
              They are also confident that after the glaciologists are exposed to the field
              evidence for this process, that it will be embraced by the community and
              integrated into models of debris entrainment and transport in the same way that
              "deformable bed theory" impacted the field in the last decade.

