Title       : Celebration 2000: A Seismic Investigation of Lithospheric Structure in the
               Trans-European Suture/Carpathian Mountains Region
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2001      
File        : a0001356

Award Number: 0001356
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Cassandra M. Dudka                      
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $64440              (Estimated)
Investigator: George R. Keller keller@geo.utep.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kate C. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas El Paso
	      University Ave at Hawthorne
	      El Paso, TX  79968    915/747-5000

NSF Program : 5979      CENTRAL & EASTERN EUROPE PROGR
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5915,5930,5953,5994,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              INT 0001356
Keller

This cooperative research project, "CELEBRATION 2000:  A
              Seismic Investigation of Lithospheric Structure in the Trans-European
              Suture/Carpathian Mountains Region" is an ambitious regional project involving
              researchers from the geophysical and geological communities in the US, Poland,
              the Slovak Republic, Hungary and the Czech Republic.  Researchers from Denmark,
              Finland and Sweden will also contribute to this project.    The principal
              investigators are Dr. G. Randy Keller from the University of Texas at El Paso
              and colleagues from the Institute of Geophysics of the Polish Academy of
              Sciences, the University of Warsaw, Eotvos Lorand Geophysical Institute in
              Budapest, the Slovak Geological Survey, the Institute of Geophysics in
              Bratislava (Slovakia) and the Geophysical Institute in Prague (Czech
              Republic).

Eastern Europe contains a variety of interesting and important
              tectonic features.  Three of these features are the Trans-European Suture Zone
              (TESZ), the Carpathian Mountains, and the Pannonian basin.  In 1997, the PI and
              his colleagues joined researchers from Poland in a very large seismic
              experiment (POLONAISE '97) that targeted the northern portion of the TESZ
              region.  This project was very successful and has yielded a series of
              scientific papers in major journals.  The PI now proposes to expand this
              collaboration to neighboring countries in the region in order to undertake
              another experiment (CELEBRATION 2000 - Central Europe Lithospheric Experiment
              Based on Refraction) that targets the southern portion of the TESZ as well as
              the Carpathian Mountains and Pannonian basin.   This research will augment two
              of the PI's ongoing research efforts in the US.  One deals with the tectonic
              history of the southern margin of the North American craton.  The other
              involves a study of the structure and evolution of the souther Rockies.  The
              joint study of the Carpathian Mountains and Rocky Mountains is expected to
              provide additional insight into the processes involved in mountain
              building.

This project in earth sciences research fulfills the program
              objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Central/Eastern
              Europe to combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong
              mutual interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and
              mutuality of benefit.
