Title       : Forearc Basin Provenance Analysis by SHRIMP Detrital Zircon Geochronology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 23,  2000      
File        : a0001036

Award Number: 0001036
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $125946             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephan A. Graham graham@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael O. McWilliams  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Project Title: Forearc Basin Provenance Analysis by SHRIMP Detrital Zircon
              Geochronology
PI: Stephan Graham

ABSTRACT


         The composition of
              grains in sandstone can be diagnostic of the original source of those grains,
              as in the case of volcanic grains eroded from volcanic arcs.  Conventionally,
              such analyses are conducted with a standard optical microscope, but the broad
              compositional similarity of sand from all volcanic arcs often results in
              ambiguity as to specific sources. Greater interpretational leverage would be
              provided by an ability to determine the ages of individual grains, and that
              capability exists in the Sensitive High Resolution Ion Microprobe (SHRIMP). 
              The application of SHRIMP technology to a geologically well-characterized
              arc-related sedimentary basin (i.e., one for which the sources of sediment are
              independently known) could serve as a standard against which studies of poorly
              known but analogous basins might be gauged.
        The Mesozoic strata of the
              Great Valley basin of California present such an opportunity, because the
              bulk-grain and trace element compositions of sediment are already determined,
              and the sources of sediment in the adjacent Sierran and Klamath arcs are
              generally known.  Thus, SHRIMP study of the ages of Great Valley zircon sand
              grains will form the basis of a model of sediment source relations in an
              ancient arc-related basin, as well as provide insights into long-term rates of
              erosion of volcanic arcs and sedimentation of derivative sediments.  The Great
              Valley model subsequently will be compared with results of SHRIMP analysis of
              zircon grains from the Mesozoic Methow basin of Washington and British
              Columbia.  If consistent with the Great Valley study, the Methow results may
              demonstrate the broader utility of the analytical method, as well as contribute
              to solving some specific problems of the geologic evolution of that
              region.



