Title       : Facies Architecture and Paleobiology of a Terminal Proterozoic Carbonate Ramp,
               Kuibus Subgroup, Namibia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0001018

Award Number: 0001018
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $244010             (Estimated)
Investigator: John P. Grotzinger   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

Facies Architecture and Paleobiology of a Terminal Proterozoic
              Carbonate Ramp, Kuibus Subgroup, Namibia

John P. Grotzinger
EAR-0001018


                  This project will attempt to improve our understanding of the first-order,
              long-term evolution of carbonate platforms by investigating the
              three-dimensional stratigraphic architecture and paleobiology of the terminal
              Proterozoic Kuibis carbonate platform of southern Namibia.  The Kuibis platform
              has ramp geometry, marked by relatively gentle gradients in facies from
              intraclast-ooid grainstone shoals into deeper-water heterolithic assemblages of
              thin-bedded lime mudstones, thrombolitic/stromatolitic laminites, and shales. 
              Sediment transport was dominated by wave- and storm-produced currents, as shown
              by interspersed beds of hummocky cross-stratified and quasiplanar stratified
              calcarenites, in addition to finer-grained graded beds probably deposited from
              dilute turbidity flows.   The ramp also contains numerous reefal facies, formed
              of thrombolites, stromatolites and diverse fossils of what may be one of the
              oldest assemblages of calcified metazoans.  Reefs have variable geometry,
              forming sheet-like biostromes or distinct patch reefs in updip positions, or
              large pinnacle reefs in deeper-water, more downdip positions.
     The
              objectives of this research are to: 1) document the detailed paleoenvironments
              of the Kuibis platform by mapping it in three dimensions, 2) quantify the
              spatial arrangement of facies between parasequence boundaries, 3) test various
              hypotheses for the origin of thrombolite textures, 4) quantify the taxonomic
              diversity of calcified fossils using new digital 3D reconstruction techniques. 
              The proposed research will provide important information that will be useful in
              understanding facies development within the earliest calcified metazoan and
              microbial ecosystems, the quantitative distribution of facies within
              parasequences, and the morphology and taxonomic diversity of the oldest
              calcified metazoans.

