Title       : COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Site Proposal for Long-Term Interdisciplinary Studies
               (LSLIS) into the Extreme Environment of Deep Subsurface Microbial Communities:
               South African Ultra..
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0001709

Award Number: 0001709
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: H. Richard Lane                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2005        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214903             (Estimated)
Investigator: David R. Boone booned@pdx.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Portland State University
	      P O BOX 751
	      Portland, OR  972070751    503/725-3423

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1075,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
EAR-0001709

   Recent investigations have identified microbial communities
              in various crustal environments down to 3.2 kilometers below the surface 
              (kmbls.).  Only a hand full of deep microbial samples from continental crust
              (>0.5 kmbls.) exist, however, because coring is expensive.  In the fall of
              1998, an expedition of scientists from the USA, Canadian, and Swedish
              universities and U.S. DOE National labs searched the rock strata and
              groundwater of the ultradeep Au mines of South Africa for microorganisms.  The
              goal of this research was to determine whether these mines, which extend >3
              kmbls., offer ready access to indigenous, subsurface microbial communities and
              whether radiolysis of groundwater provides a nutrient source for the
              microorganisms.  Rock, water and biofilm samples were collected from several of
              these mines at depths ranging from 0.8 to 3.2 kmbls.  Preliminary results
              indicate that a variety of thermophilic microorganisms are present in the
              groundwater and rock.  Some of these microorganisms represent novel species,
              radiation tolerant and appear uniquely adapted to the geochemical and
              hydrological crustal environment from which they were derived.  Furthermore,
              evidence indicates that most of these microorganisms are autochthonous and not
              simply the result of contamination.  PIs plan to establish a 5 year observation
              and sample acquisition program to analyze the microbial communities in the deep
              continental lithosphere of South Africa and address the following hypotheses,
              which are critical to gaining insight into potential exobiological niches and
              into how microorganisms can adapt and survive in relatively extreme
              environments.   

1. Do autotrophic microbial communities dominate over
              heterotrophic communities in the deep subsurface?
2. Are there deep subsurface
              microbial communities that are self-sufficient in terms of their energy and
              catabolic resources or do they all ultimately rely upon organic constituents
              supplied from the present surface biosphere or ancient buried fossil fuels?
3.
              Are the cell lifetimes on the order of centuries as suggested by geochemical
              estimates of subsurface microbial activity and, if so, are these rates
              compatible with long term survival under low levels of ionizing radiation?
4.
              Are microbial communities present in fluid fractures functionally and
              phylogenetically distinct from those present within the rock matrix.

To
              address the above research hypotheses, PIs will improve enrichment, culturing
              and isolation technologies, in the detection limits for and rapidity of PLFA
              and DNA analyses, and develop instruments for quantifying in situ microbial
              activity within deep boreholes.

