Title       : The Thermo-Chemical State and Thermo-Tectonic Evolution of Cratons and Deep
               Cratonic Lithosphere
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a0001029

Award Number: 0001029
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Robin Reichlin                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $164595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adrian Lenardic adrian@geophysics.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1574      GEOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Adrian Lenardic 



A continental craton is a region that has remained
              tectonically stable for on 
the order of a billion years. Many cratons are
              also associated with thick 
lithosphere that has been isolated from mantle
              recycling for an equally long 
period of time. Understanding the factors that
              provide for the stability of 
cratons and for the longevity of deep cratonic
              lithosphere are related issues 
that bridge the gap between studies of
              continental tectonics and of mantle 
dynamics. To address these issues, the
              investigators will constrain the present day 
thermo-chemical structure and
              explore the thermo-tectonic evolution of the 
crust and mantle lithosphere
              below several cratons. They will work with 
collaborators from Montreal and
              Australia to collect and compile data 
constraints for thermal models of the
              cratonic lithosphere in the Canadian 
Shield and in Western Australia. They
              will then develop data constrained models 
for the present day thermo-chemical
              structure of cratonic lithosphere within 
these regions. The heat that comes
              from the convecting mantle will be treated in 
a fully self-consistent way and
              both vertical and lateral 
variations in lithospheric structure will be
              explored. The researchers will also work directly with data oriented colleagues
              to collect, analyse, and synthesize all the data that can constrain the
              evolution of target cratons. They will then explore models of 
coupled mantle
              convection and continental tectonics to isolate the factors that 
allow for
              the longevity of deep cratonic lithosphere and the stability of 
cratonic
              crust. This will be accomplished using a powerful new numerical 
simulation
              tool that has been designed to bridge the gap between mantle 
convection
              modeling and continental tectonics modeling. The advanced modeling
              
methodology, together with the data that will be brought to bear on the
              problem at 
hand, will allow this team to develop rigorous and testable models
              that address the 
cratonization of continental crust and the longevity of
              cratonic lithosphere in 
a self-consistent manner. 


