Title       : A "Nash Program" for multi-player games, reducing coalitions to agencies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 31,  2001       
File        : a0001711

Award Number: 0001711
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $58172              (Estimated)
Investigator: John F. Nash   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is concerned with the study of multi-player cooperative games by
              the means of reducing them to non-cooperative games, that is, the "Nash
              program."  It is based on some newer ideas and methods that favor its
              feasibility.  The current approach is partially inspired by that used in
              evolutionary games, where strategies are selected from a class of types based
              on their outcomes in actual play.

The other important basis for the project
              is a new approach for providing a means for the elimination of coalitions as
              such and their replacement by "agencies."  The usual approach based on
              formation and dissolution of coalitions is avoided by studying a transformed
              game, where each player can designate or elect another to act as his/her agent.
               This is very simplifying because a priori there is no limit to the complexity
              of the relevant interactions of coalitions and their members.

In studying
              the transformed game we allow the players to employ "reactive strategies" of
              specific forms.  This is directly analogous to the phenotype strategies studied
              in evolutionary games.  Thus how a player will allocate the possible gains in a
              playing of the game, if he/she has become elected to be the effective general
              agent, can be a function of an allowed form that depends on the previous
              history of the playing of the game.

The fulfilled expectations equilibrium
              of such strategies is explored.  Numerical calculations with two and three
              players show that the approach can give results interestingly relating to
              various standard cooperative solution concepts such as the Nash-Zeuthen and the
              Kalai-Smorodinsky solutions for two-person bargaining and the nucleolus or the
              Shapley value in three-person games.  It is proposed to more carefully study
              the relatively simple three-person game examples that seem to effectively
              feature all of the basic difficulties of extending cooperative theory beyond
              the level of 2-player games.

This project is intrinsically theoretical, in
              relation to economics, but it can be observed that understanding of cooperative
              games enables applications to many economic and political contexts, where some
              players do act as agents for others.  For example, in mergers and acquisitions
              one bank or underwriting firm takes the lead role, and international trade
              negotiations the major countries represent regional blocks.

