Title       : Religious Interaction Along La Frontera
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0001432

Award Number: 0001432
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 15,  2000      
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116490             (Estimated)
Investigator: William H. Walker wiwalker@nmsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              James M. Skibo  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New Mexico St University
	      Box 30001, MSC 3RES
	      Las Cruces, NM  880038001    505/646-2481

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Fountain support Drs. William Walker and James Skibo will
              conduct three years of archeological investigation at the site of Joyce Well,
              located in southern New Mexico.  The site is part of a larger Chihuahua
              interaction sphere which was centered on the major town of Casas Grandes and
              which, in the several centuries preceding the arrival of Spanish in the New
              World, covered much of the US Southwest and adjacent regions in northern
              Mexico. Shared similarities across this large region indicate a relatively high
              degree of social integration but it is unclear the nature of the "glue" which
              bound together widely separated communities over this extensive area.
              Archaeologists originally theorized that trade was responsible and that sites
              were integrated into a larger system which extended South into central Mexico.
              Walker and Skibo postulate however that the region forms part of a religious
              interaction sphere comprised of autonomous groups whose common ritual
              activities resulted in homogenous assemblages of certain classes of material
              culture. Rather than uniting into a single economic or political entity, the
              investigators believe communities in this regional system possessed similar
              artifacts such as shared polychrome style ceramics, architecture and rock art
              which is indicative of a reservoir of shared beliefs and ritual practices. The
              organization of religious interaction in the region however remains murky
              because until recently the majority of research has focused on the central site
              of Casas Grandes. Although Casas Grandes is relatively well known, the majority
              of sites in the complex remain untested or unreported. With NSF support the
              investigators will conduct research at Joyce Well one of several large son the
              northwestern periphery of the interaction sphere. Evidence of community and
              household ritual power at this site and others likely resides in their method
              of abandonment. Joyce Well  like many other sites in the region including Casas
              Grandes, exhibits evidence of fiery destruction that has consistently been
              attributed to prehistoric violence. Ongoing southwestern archaeological
              research however suggests that this burning may have resulted from ritual
              activities rather than war. The investigators will conduct careful
              stratigraphic excavation in an attempt to determine the cause of
              destruction.

Researchers wish to understand the factors which led to the
              rise of complex societies and because they are so readily accessible and
              document increasing complexity over time, archaeologists have focussed on the
              US Southwest and adjacent areas in Mexico. Very few however have seriously
              considered religion and associated ritual as forces strong enough to allow
              cohesion over such a large sparsely inhabited region and this research is
              important because it will evaluate what role such a factor may have played.

