Title       : The Ecology of Female Dominance in Three Prosimian Primates in Southeastern
               Madagascar
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0001351

Award Number: 0001351
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $230253             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deborah J. Overdorff overdorff@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Within the order Primates, lemurs have traditionally been considered to be
              unique in that females can be dominant to males (referred to as female
              dominance).  Recently the universality of female dominance among lemurs has
              been questioned although there have been no systematic studies of this behavior
              to date on wild populations.  Therefore, the purpose of this study is to answer
              the following questions: 1) how do male and female reproductive strategies
              influence the expression of female dominance and female feeding priority?, 2)
              can female feeding priority exist in the absence of female dominance?;  3) are
              there alternative behavioral strategies that individuals can use to influence
              their foraging efficiency in the absence of or in conjunction with female
              dominance and feeding priority?, 4) can these behaviors be considered types of
              feeding priority, and 5) how do environmental constraints (specifically
              ecological stress) and male deference work together to influence the expression
              of female dominance, feeding priority, and/or alternative ways to increase
              foraging efficiency.  These questions will be answered by examining the feeding
              ecology and behavior of three endangered species of primate (Varecia variegata,
              Propithecus diadema edwardsi and Eulemur fulvus rufus) in the Ranomafana
              National Park over a three and a half year period.   

This research has
              several important implications.  The main objectives are: a) to test specific
              predictions regarding the relationship of female dominance and feeding priority
              in lemurs; and b) develop methods that can document the subtle ways female
              primates influence their feeding ecology through non-aggressive means in
              response to reproductive demands and seasonal changes in food.  This research
              has the potential to contribute in a broader way to primatology by challenging
              existing paradigms that rely on a narrow definition of a dominance hierarchy to
              identify individuals who have social and ecological influence within social
              groups.  In fact in recent anthropological studies on humans, researchers
              emphasize that the concepts of status and prestige can be considered distinct
              entities from dominance.  In human societies that are male dominant, females
              can still have power and prestige in public or private domains.  Although the
              cultural concepts of power and prestige are not appropriate to non-human
              primates, the concept that females can behave in subtle ways that influence
              social dynamics and foraging efficiency should be examined more carefully in
              non-human primates, particularly if these behaviors significantly impact
              survivability and reproductive success.

It is assumed in this project that
              male and female mating strategies in addition to the ecological stress
              experienced by females when reproductive, work together to influence the
              expression of female dominance, feeding priority, and/or alternative strategies
              to improve foraging efficiency.  These alternative strategies include
              intersexual differences in food selection and coordination of group movements. 
              To test this hypothesis, behavioral and ecological data will be collected on at
              least two study groups of each lemur species during different reproductive
              phases and food availability periods. 



