Title       : Thermodynamic and Kinetic Control of Adsorption in Complex Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CTS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0001526

Award Number: 0001526
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert M. Wellek                        
	      CTS  DIV OF CHEMICAL AND TRANSPORT SYSTEMS   
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : October 1,  2000    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Igal G. Szleifer   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue Research Foundation
	      
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    317/494-6200

NSF Program : 1414      INTERFAC TRANS,& THERMODYN PRO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT
CTS-0001526
I. Szleifer
Purdue University

The adsorption of large
              and complex particles plays a key role in a large number of important
              technological processes.  For example:  1) The control of protein adsorption is
              fundamental in the molecular design of biocompatible materials.  2) 
              Preferential adsorption of proteins on surfaces in a given conformation is of
              primary importance for the design of biosensors.  3)  Asphaltene aggregates
              adsorb on rocks or oil pipes creating serious problems for the recovery and
              transport of oil.  4)  Processes involving adsorption of surfactants and
              surfactant aggregates are important in the reduction of interfacial tension and
              the use of surfactants as detergents.  The understanding of the molecular
              factors that determine the adsorption behavior are then necessary for the
              rational design of materials with desired properties.  This is also a very
              important fundamental problem that requires the development of theoretical
              approaches that are able to describe at the molecular level complex mixtures of
              molecules with internal degrees of freedom that are in inhomogeneous
              environments.  The size of the particles implies large energy scales and thus
              in many cases the process is dominated by its kinetic behavior.  Thus, the
              challenge is to develop reliable theoretical approaches that can describe the
              equilibrium and kinetic adsorption at the molecular level.  Furthermore, these
              approaches should bridge the gap in time and length scales from atomistic to
              macroscopic.  For example, adsorption processes in that huge time scale keeping
              maximal possible molecular detail.

A recent developed general theoretical
              approach enables the study of the structural and thermodynamic properties of
              mixtures of chain molecules and proteins.  The predictions of the theory have
              been shown to be in excellent quantitative agreement for the equilibrium
              adsorption isotherms of proteins on surfaces with grafted polymers.  Here it is
              proposed to generalize this molecular approach to study multicomponent
              mixtures, charged systems and systems out of equilibrium.  Namely, to extend
              the approach to study kinetics of adsorption.  Further, the plan includes the
              use of conventional simulations methodologies, Monte Carlo, molecular dynamics
              and Brownian dynamics in a variety of systems where the computational
              complexity does not make the calculations prohibitively long, to check the
              validity of the kinetic molecular approach.  In this way a hierarchy of
              theoretical methods that will enable the study of the equilibrium and dynamic
              involved in the adsorption process will be obtained.  These approaches will
              serve the dual purpose of:  1) Bridging the gap in time and length scales
              between atomistic and macroscopic descriptions.  This is a major theoretical
              challenge that will provide fundamental understanding of the behavior of these
              complex systems.  2) The approaches developed in this work will also be sued to
              build up a database for the understanding of how to control complex particle
              adsorption depending on the desired properties of the materials.  More
              explicitly, the ability of tethered polymer layers, including polyelectrolytes,
              to reduce particle adsorption to selectively adsorb a desired kind of particle
              will be studied.  This understanding will be used in conjunction with
              experimental collaborators in the rational design of biocompatible materials,
              drug carriers, biosensors and solubilizers.  The findings from this work are
              also expected to have a major impact on the design of materials for other
              applications, such as chromatography, oil transport and detergency.

Specific
              problems to be studied:  1) Generalization of the molecular theory to three
              dimensions and comparisons with full simulation studies.  2)  Inclusion of
              electrostatic interactions and their effect on large particles and protein
              adsorption.  (3)  Systematic study of the kinetics of adsorption.  (4)  Effect
              of conformational changes on the kinetic and thermodynamic behavior of protein
              adsorption.  (5) Thermodynamic and kinetic behavior on adsorption of proteins
              mixtures.       

