Title       : Network Intermediation in International Trade: Theory and Evidence
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 29,  2002   
File        : a0001832

Award Number: 0001832
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $75201              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Rauch jrauch@weber.ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The principal investigator's prior NSF-supported research has used disaggregated
              trade data to identify and quantify the need for travel and the usefulness of
              business and social networks in overcoming informational barriers to
              international trade.  The PI has also developed theoretical models of the
              consequences of the existence of informational barriers for the functioning of
              the world economy.  This research has raised (at least) three questions. 
              First, can more direct, microeconomic evidence be found for the relatively
              greater importance of  foreign travel, and of private than publicly available
              information, in the search for foreign buyers or sellers of differentiated than
              homogeneous products?  Second, can any direct evidence be found on if and how
              new information technology is affecting the search for foreign buyers or
              sellers?  Third, and most important, does the apparent importance of
              informational barriers to trade and the usefulness of transnational networks in
              overcoming them have any implications for policy?   A survey of intermediaries
              such as export management companies, export trading companies, importers, and
              buying agents, guided by a theory of "network intermediation," could help to
              answer all these questions.  The PI will develop such a theory and perform a
              pilot survey that will determine the feasibility of a full-scale survey.
              

More specifically, the trade-creating impacts of immigrants, foreign direct
              investment by business groups, and long-settled ethnic minorities that maintain
              co-ethnic business societies (such as the Overseas Chinese) found by various
              researchers suggest that existing intermediaries are inadequate means of
              connecting buyers or sellers to foreign opportunities.  The apparent importance
              of belonging to these transnational business and social networks does not prove
              that intermediation is undersupplied, however, because the costs of
              establishing each of these transnational networks were sunk for purposes other
              than creating trade. It could be that the costs of setting up new
              intermediaries would outweigh the benefits of the additional trade they would
              create.  A preliminary theoretical model suggests that market failure may
              indeed exist in provision of "network intermediation."  Network intermediaries
              are agents who, in effect, sell access to their networks, which consist of
              firms of whose capabilities and preferences they have the "deep knowledge"
              necessary to match them to appropriate buyers or sellers of differentiated
              products.  It is hypothesized that such agents accumulated their deep knowledge
              of the firms in their networks by having worked with them in a non-intermediary
              capacity before entering careers as intermediaries when this became more
              profitable.  This process is unlikely to supply intermediaries whose networks
              span many product lines, however, which are valuable if for example clients
              want to buy many components that need to be matched to each other.  Moreover,
              investment in network diversification may fall short of the socially optimal
              level because the deep knowledge intermediaries need of the members of their
              networks in order to find the best matches for their clients. The quality of
              their service is inherently non-contractible, leaving them vulnerable to the
              hold-up problem given the specificity of each match.  One of the policy
              recommendations of the model (established in a general equilibrium framework
              with endogenous supply of intermediation) is thus a subsidy to large,
              diversified intermediaries in particular. Indeed a number of countries
              (including the United States) have adopted policies to encourage the
              establishment of such intermediaries. The pilot survey will be designed to test
              a number of hypotheses drawn from this model.

