Title       : Characterization of Hydrologically Active Sheet Fractures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 24,  2002      
File        : a0001146

Award Number: 0001146
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence Murdoch lmurdoch@clemson.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Cecil O. Huey  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Rex A. Hodges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Clemson University
	      Box 345702
	      Clemson, SC  296345702    864/656-2424

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1325,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0001146
Murdoch

Sheet fractures in crystalline rock are an important control
              of ground water whose occurrence, characteristics, and processes of formation
              are poorly understood.  The objective of this project is to combine information
              from several well-studied sites in the vicinity of western South Carolina with
              results from a new borehole test to improve the ability to characterize sheet
              fractures.  The new test will use a straddle packer fitted with a precision
              borehole extensiometer, similar to devices used to measure rock deformation
              during geothechnical investigations.  The device will be centered on a fracture
              and then used to conduct either injection or recovery tests.  The resulting
              data will provide fracture aperture, or axial displacement of the borehole, as
              functions of pressure and the volume of injected (or recovered) fluid.  The
              transient aperture change during an injection-displacement test will provide an
              additional descriptive record that goes beyond what can be measured during
              conventional packer tests. Preliminary theoretical analyses have been derived,
              and additional analyses will be developed, to predict transient aperture,
              volume and driving pressure, as functions of fracture length, spacing,
              connectivity and other variables.  Those solutions will be invested to estimate
              characteristics of sheet fractures, such as fracture length and connectivity,
              which are beyond the resolution of conventional packer tests.  Characteristics
              that can be measured using conventional packer test, such as fracture
              storativity, will also be evaluated using the new method.  The results of the
              analyses will be compared to findings from field mapping of surface exposures,
              as well as core descriptions, borehole flowmeter logs, temperature logs,
              borehole radar, concentional packer tests, and other methods.  This study will
              also investigate natural variations in pore-fluid pressure and fracture
              aperture due to Earth tides, barometric pressure fluctuations or other effects.
               Those loadings may contribute to the growth of sheet fractures, and provide
              insights into conceptual models of sheet fracture formation.  In addition, the
              response of fracture aperture to natural stresses holds the potential for
              estimating properties, such as hydraulic conductivity, storativity and elastic
              modulus, without pumping tests.  The primary contribution of this research is
              expected to be the development of a new method for determining mechanical and
              hydrologic characteristics of gently dipping fractures in crystalline rock. 
              This will advance the ability to site productive wells, stimulate well
              productivity by hydraulic fracturing, and evaluate risks associated with
              contaminant migration.

