Title       : Mantle and Crustal Causes of Compositional Variation in Kilauea Historical Lavas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 21,  2000      
File        : a0001123

Award Number: 0001123
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Glen S. Mattioli                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $191920             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael O. Garcia garcia@soest.hawaii.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Hawaii
	      2530 Dole Street
	      Honolulu, HI  968222225    808/956-7800

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              EAR-0001123
Garcia

Lavas provide essential clues to the crustal and mantle
              processes associated with volcanoes. Kilauea Volcano is an ideal natural
              laboratory for evaluating how physical processes within volcanoes cause
              observable changes in lava composition and it is the best-studied volcano in
              the world. Thus, we can address fundamental problems from a well-constrained
              perspective.  This project involves making precise trace element and isotope
              analyses for quantitative modeling of mantle melting processes, assessing
              source heterogeneity and evaluating crustal contamination effects on the
              composition of Kilauea historical lavas. We will make a comprehensive
              petrologic and geochemical characterization of historical Kilauea lavas,
              including lavas from the ongoing Puu Oo eruption. We have documented long-term,
              systematic isotopic and compositional variations within its historical summit
              lavas (~200 year period) and short-term geochemical variations during the
              ongoing (17+ years) Puu Oo rift zone eruption. The magma for the Puu Oo and
              other major rift zone eruptions is thought to have bypassed the summit
              reservoir and to give us a clearer picture of mantle melting processes and
              source heterogeneity.  The cause for the lower oxygen isotope ratios in oceanic
              island basalts compared to mid-ocean ridge basalts remains controversial.  Some
              studies have been related the differences to distinct mantle sources, while
              other studies have invoked crustal contamination. We documented evidence for
              extensive crustal contamination in some Kilauea historical lavas, including
              those from the Puu Oo eruption but have not determined the oxygen isotope value
              for Kilauea's source. New techniques will be use to determine oxygen isotopes
              for well characterized samples from the ongoing eruption, other historical
              lavas and hydrothermally altered rocks from a 3 km deep geothermal well to
              better understand mantle source heterogeneity and crustal contamination
              processes for Kilauea.  The results of this project will allow us to: 1.
              evaluate the relative importance of mantle source heterogeneity and changes in
              extent of partial melting in controlling geochemical variation of historical
              Kilauea lavas; 2. determine the amount of crustal contamination in Kilauea
              lavas and better understand the oxygen isotope heterogeneity in its source; and
              3. decipher the mantle melting processing associated with the ongoing Puu Oo
              eruption.   

