Title       : Money, Interest Rates, and Exchange Rates: A Segmented Asset Market View
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0001895

Award Number: 0001895
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $362666             (Estimated)
Investigator: Fernando E. Alvarez   (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew G. Atkeson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              We propose to study the connection between money, interest rates, and exchange
              rates in a model with endogenously segmented markets. In our model agents must
              pay a fixed cost to transfer money between the asset market and the goods
              market. This fixed cost leads agents to trade bonds and money only
              infrequently. In any given period only a fraction of agents are currently
              actively trading.  Thus the asset market is segmented in the sense that when
              the government injects money through an open market operation only the
              currently active agents are on the other side of the transaction and only their
              marginal utilities determine interest rates and exchange rates. Money
              injections fall disproportionately on these active agents; they increase their
              current consumption and, hence, real interest rates fall and the real exchange
              rate depreciates. We contrast the implications of this model with this
              segmentation effect to a standard one with no market segmentation.
We first
              use this model to study two features of the data on money, inflation, and
              interest rates that have been discussed extensively in the literature. First,
              using indexed and nominal bonds, expected inflation and real interest rates
              move in opposite directions. Second, there has been a long-held belief that
              open market operations have liquidity effects: money injections lead initially
              to a decline in short-term nominal interest rates. These liquidity effects are
              thought to decay over time, with short-term rates eventually returning to
              normal levels or even rising. Accordingly, money injections are thought to
              steepen the yield curve, lowering long-term rates less than short-term rates or
              even raising long-term rates. The VAR literature has been somewhat successful
              in confirming this pattern in the data.  Our model can produce both of these
              features while the standard model cannot. We show that with relatively moderate
              amounts of segmentation the model can produce dynamic responses similar to
              those found in the VAR literature. Moreover, our model can generate persistent
              real effects from market segmentation even from anticipated shocks. 
We then
              use a two-country version of our model to study the variability of nominal and
              real exchange rates and the forward rate anomaly. For low inflation countries,
              real exchange rates are persistent, substantially more variable than inflation
              and interest rate differentials across countries, and movements in nominal and
              real exchange rates are very similar. The standard model fails to reproduce
              these observations. Our model can produce volatile and persistent real and
              nominal exchange rates.
Finally, our model can generate the forward premium
              anomaly, namely the tendency for high interest rate currencies to appreciate.
              This tendency is puzzling since intuitively one might expect that investors
              would demand higher interest rates on currencies that are expected to fall in
              value. The key to generating this anomaly is to have exchange rate risk vary
              systematically with the level of inflation and interest rates. In the standard
              model, risk premia are constant. In contrast, in our model endogenous changes
              in market segmentation lead to systematic changes in risk premia.

