Title       : Documenting Post-War Activist Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  2000  
File        : a0001690

Award Number: 0001690
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John P. Perhonis                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  2000  
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $4700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Bruce V. Lewenstein   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9237,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This Small Grants for Exploratory Research funding will fund a small conference
              of scholars and archivists to explore the feasability of creating an in-line
              archives in the area of activist and public interest science. From the late
              1940s through the l970s, a significant element of the American scientific
              community found itself in a complex relationship with major national
              institutions. On the one hand, Federal funds were flowing freely, spurred by
              "national security state" concerns about the cold war. This largesse expanded
              the government's research laboratory system and greatly affected the size,
              scope, and character of science carried out in university and industry
              settings. On the other hand, many scientists personally objected to certain
              elements of national policy, both on moral grounds and on technical scientific
              grounds. Some of these scientists organized their dissent through public
              interest and activist groups that argued for scientific and political
              alternatives. Exploring complexities and tensions among these diverse
              institutional relationships
in science is crucial to better understand the
              interactions of scientific knowledge and social context in post-World War II
              America. The impact of Cold War policies upon the scientific community and
              scientific knowledge within more traditional institutions has become a robust
              area of research. However, relatively few studies exist on the relationships
              between activist and public interest science and the more mainstream scientific
              community and institutions. A number of scholars have begun exploring the
              history and sociology of activist science and scientists and their effect on
              public and political understandings of scientific knowledge (most explicitly,
              Moore 1995; but also Kuznick 1991; Lewenstein 1999; Nye 1999; Wang 1999).
              Informal discussions among some scholars have identified a pressing historical
              need: to locate and, if necessary, preserve existing archival resources of the
              post-war period related to activist and public interest science. This effort
              might also include collecting oral histories of prominent scientists active in
              political issues during the post-war period. While some materials exist, and
              many interviews have been conducted, they are often scattered, unknown, or not
              publicly available. Moreover, as the scientists of the postwar generation reach
              the ends of their lives, their papers are being dispersed and sometimes lost.
              An urgent project must be undertaken to identify these resources and preserve
              them.  Funding for this project will allow for a small planning meeting in
              Washington D.C. in conjunction with the February 2000 AAAAS Meeting.  The
              purpose of the meeting is to explore systematically whether a more thorough
              project is worth developing.        
