Title       : Order Flow Matters for Exchange Rate Determination
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 9,  2002      
File        : a0001893

Award Number: 0001893
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $260600             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martin Evans evansm1@georgetown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard Lyons  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Our proposed agenda is organized around a simple but provocative idea: order
              flow matters for exchange-rate determination. The idea is provocative because
              order flow plays no role in most exchange rate models. For order flow to play
              no role, however, requires strong assumptions about how market-clearing prices
              are actually found. On theoretical grounds, these assumptions are difficult to
              defend. They are difficult to defend on empirical grounds too. There is strong
              evidence now that order flow plays an important role, a role that traditional
              models are not designed to capture.  By relaxing these strong assumptions, our
              models provide a vehicle for understanding how price-setters find the clearing
              price, and what that price is based upon. Empirically, our initial results show
              that order flow can account for half of daily exchange-rate variation, a far
              greater share than traditional macro fundamentals such as interest rates. Our
              project represents a distinctly different research agenda because these results
              are hard reconcile with either the existing macroeconomic or microstructure
              approach.
Our research agenda borrows liberally from both the macroeconomic
              and microstructure approaches, but cannot be viewed as encompassed by either.
              The agenda does not treat exchange rates as decoupled from macro fundamentals,
              as is typical within the microstructure approach. It is thus firmly anchored in
              the broader context of asset pricing. Nor does the agenda treat exchange rates
              as determined in a common-knowledge environment, as is typical within the
              macroeconomic approach. Departing from common knowledge requires a treatment of
              information aggregation. We make ample use of tools from the microstructure
              literature for addressing this aggregation.
The project uses two new data sets
              that cover activity in the spot foreign exchange market over a four-month
              period, May 1 to August 31, 1996.  One data set contains time-stamped,
              tic-by-tic data on actual transactions for nine currencies. Three features of
              this data set are noteworthy. First, it provides transaction information for
              the whole interbank market over the full 24-hour trading day whereas earlier
              data sets typically cover one dealer, and only part of the day. Second,
              individual participants do not observe these market-wide data in real time,
              which allows us to get inside the "black box" of price determination. Third,
              multiple currencies and a relatively long time span allow us to address price
              determination from more of an asset-pricing perspective.
The second of our two
              data sets is much less extensive than the first, but covers a segment of the
              market that has, until now, remained beyond the reach of empiricists - trading
              by the public. Until now, all transaction data in foreign exchange have come
              from interbank trading.  This second data set contains all the public trades in
              DM/$ received by a large bank over the same four-month period covered by our
              first data set. That bank is number one worldwide in terms of foreign exchange
              market share. This data set allows us, for the first time, to connect dealers'
              trading and prices to the underlying sources of demand in the economy.
The
              questions we will address with the proposed research include:  What share of
              exchange rate variation is attributable to order flow?  What components of
              order flow convey the most information? Are the price effects of macroeconomic
              announcements uncorrelated with order flow?  Does exchange rate determination
              work from macroeconomic fundamentals, to order flow, to price?  How does order
              flow link to learning, herding, and noise trading in foreign exchange markets? 
              Does feedback trading account for part of the correlation between order flow
              and price, e.g., Friedman's stabilizing speculators? When is order flow from
              central banks likely to have the most price impact? 

