Title       : Snow Surface Roughness - Data Collection, Geostatistical Analysis, Relationship
               to Meteorologic Observations, and Relevance to Snow Hydrologic Models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  2000      
File        : a0001514

Award Number: 0001514
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74352              (Estimated)
Investigator: Ute C. Herzfeld herzfeld@tryfan.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              T. Nelson Caine  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1325,5936,9189,EGCH,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0001514
Herzfeld

Objectives of the proposed work are to study the snow
              surface roughness during late winter and melting season, to relate these
              changes to weather conditions, and to assess the influence of changes in
              surface roughness on hydrologic response models.

Snow surface roughness is
              critical to surface - atmosphere exchanges, including the investigation of
              snowmelt at several scales; surface energy exchange; meltwater flux in the
              snowpack, and wind transport and erosion of the snow cover in winter.  Snow
              surface roughness also influences Remote Sensing return signals from the snow
              surface.  To date surface roughness has usually been estimated as the roughness
              length, estimated from flow conditions in the boundary layer.

In the
              proposed work we plan to 

(1) evaluate snow surface
              roughness/microtopography by direct measurement with an instrument especially
              designed for this purpose,
(2) classify snow surface types
              geostatistically,
(3) relate snow surface roughness parameters to meteorologic
              and micrometerologic time series data and 
(4) provide realistic (= measured)
              roughness characterization as input for hydrologic models:  (a) roughness
              length as input for commonly used models and (b) multidimensional parameters
              including correlation length, characteristic length, height and spacing of
              surface features and their anisotropies, which will require an adaptation of
              snow hydrological models.

Snow surface conditions will be measured with the
              Glacier Roughness Sensor (GRS), and kinematic GPS (Global Positioning System)
              data will be collected at Niwot Ridge, Colorado Front Range.  This is the site
              of a Long-Term Ecological Research (LTER) Project.  Hydrologic and
              environmental data collected as part of the LTER and associated programs will
              provide the empirical evaluation of the importance of measuring surface
              roughness directly.

Geostatistical methods developed especially for surface
              characterization will be applied and refined in the data analysis. 
              Geostatistical surface characterization utilizes a feature vector where
              components capture high-resolution-morphologic properties and facilitate a
              classification of snow surface types.

