Title       : Provenance of Loessite in Equatorial Pangea: Implications for Paleoclimatic
               Reconstructions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 9,  2001      
File        : a0001052

Award Number: 0001052
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Enriqueta Barrera                       
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gerilyn S. Soreghan lsoreg@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Michael J. Soreghan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1571      GEOLOGY & PALEONTOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Both circulation models and some geologic data suggest that monsoonal
              circulation characterized the Pangean supercontinent.  The timing of monsoon
              onset, however, and data on wind directions, intensities and seasonality at
              paleoequatorial latitudes, remain poorly constrained.  The objective of this
              study is to characterize the provenance of ancient eolian siltstones of western
              North America (western equatorial Pangea) to delineate paleodispersal and
              thereby paleoatmospheric circulation in late Paleozoic time.  To achieve the
              objective, the Pls and students will integrate petrographically based framework
              mineralogy and grain-size analyses with singlecrystal detrital zircon age
              dating to precisely establish both silt provenance and size spectra, and
              thereby identify surface wind directions and strengths.  The detrital zircon
              age spectra should reflect the age spectra of their sources, i.e., basement
              terranes and/or silt-bearing strata exposed in late Paleozoic/earliest Mesozoic
              time.  We will address the possibility and implications of silt recycling by
              using existing detlital zircon reference sections published for North America,
              supplemented by key cratonal reference sections.
Preliminary results indicate
              that detrital zircon and grain-size data can be used to constrain prevailing
              and subordinate wind directions and strengths, and provide information on
              seasonality.  Results of detrital zircon geochronology in particular suggest
              that this work may additionally contribute to improvements in constraints on
              maximum ages of the target redbeds and of late Paleozoic stage boundaries. 
              Ultimately, study results should also contribute to (1) an improved
              understanding of the low-latitude paleoclimate and potentially paleotectonism
              of late Paleozoic western Pangea, and (2) our understanding of climate change,
              and calibration of climate models in general.



