Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Many-Body Dynamics in Open Shell Atoms and Ions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2000      
File        : a0001501

Award Number: 0001501
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9700               (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael S. Pindzola pindzola@physics.auburn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Auburn University
	      202 Samford Hall
	      Auburn, AL  36849    205/826-4000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,5940,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0001501
Pindzola

Description:  This award is for support of a cooperative
              project by Dr. Michael S. Pindzola, Department of Physics, Auburn University in
              Auburn, Alabama, Dr. Thomas W. Gorczyca, Department of Physics, Western
              Michigan University, Kalamazoo, Michigan and Dr. Zikry Altun, Department of
              Physics at Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey. This project represents a
              continuing effort in the development and application of many-body perturbation
              theory (MBPT) to the study of atomic photoionization.  These investigators plan
              to develop a theoretical methodology to treat many-body dynamics in the
              photoionization of open- shell atoms and ions, which is ab-initio, assessable
              and accurate.  Through the inclusion of discrete-state correlations,
              interchannel coupling and spin-orbit interactions, a theoretical construct will
              be formulated based upon many-body perturbation theory.  The methodology will
              be used to investigate (i) the photoionization of transition metal atoms and
              ions, (ii) the photoionizaion plus excitation of ground and excited open-shell
              atoms and ions, and (iii) the photorecombination of open-shell atoms and ions.
              

Scope:  This award will allow collaboration between Turkish and US
              scientists who have complementary capabilities and experience.  The Turkish
              investigator and Dr. Pindzola are experts on the application of many-body
              perturbation theory methods in atomic physics. Dr. Gorczyca is knowledgeable in
              the close coupling approach to treating atomic photoionization and electron
              scattering processes.  The proposed work is at the frontier of the capabilities
              of computational physics: the systems proposed for study are complex, electron
              correlations are significant, and relativistic effects may prove to be
              important. This theoretical work will support experimental efforts at measuring
              photoprocesses for complex systems, particularly at photon energies high enough
              to excite core ions. The project is timely as experimentalists using third
              generation light sources are capable of measuring some of the processes
              proposed, thus allowing theory and experiment the possibility of progressing
              hand in hand, with each checking and stimulating the other.  The authors
              propose to check their results using a Dirac-Fock calculation, which would not
              have the problems that may arise in other methods.  This project meets INT
              objectives of supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.
