Title       : Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2000     
File        : a0001679

Award Number: 0001679
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $60930              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Popp dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Syracuse University
	      113 Bowne Hall
	      Syracuse, NY  132441200    315/443-2807

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              When considering solutions to long-term environmental problems such as climate
              change, it is important to consider the  role that technological change may
              play.  Nonetheless, most economic models of climate change treat technology as
              exogenous.  Since policies adopted to combat climate change are likely to have
              a large impact on the pace and direction of technological change, these models
              miss the important link between policy and innovation.  The proposed project
              addresses this concern by making use of empirical results on technological
              change in the energy industry to incorporate endogenous technological change
              into the DICE model of climate change.

To date, few models of climate change
              include endogenous technological change that affects carbon emissions. 
              Although these models offer valuable contributions to the efforts of modeling
              endogenous technological change, they suffer from a lack of empirical estimates
              on the nature of technological change.  Thus, the most important contribution
              of the proposed research is that it makes use of empirical studies of
              technological change in the energy sector to more accurately model
              technological change that may help ameliorate climate change.

The proposed
              research will begin by modifying the DICE model of climate change to include
              endogenous technological change in a manner consistent with existing empirical
              studies. In addition, by making use of the DICE model, which explicitly models
              both the costs and benefits of greenhouse gas reduction, the proposed research
              aims to provide a better understanding of how consideration of endogenous
              technological change affects the optimal policy decision.  One can imagine two
              offsetting effects.  First, a higher carbon tax may be desired, because the tax
              leads to increased R&D, which lowers the cost of achieving a given level of
              abatement.  Second, a lower carbon tax may be desired, because the innovation
              induced by a tax allows a given abatement target to be achieved more easily. 
              The revised DICE model will be used to study which of these two effects
              dominates.

Finally, the proposed research extends previous work of other
              researchers in this area by modeling the effect of research on a backstop
              technology on the extraction of an exhaustible supply of fossil fuels.  In
              particular, the project asks whether policies that speed up technological
              advances in non-carbon backstop technologies also increase the rate at which
              the stock of fossil fuels is extracted.

