Title       : An Acre An Hour: Documenting the Effects of Urban Sprawl on a Model Watershed in
               Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 26,  2002      
File        : a0001884

Award Number: 0001884
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2000     
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $705000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Claire Welty weltyc@drexel.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Susan S. Kilham  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Aaron Packman  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert J. Brulle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Drexel University
	      3201 Arch Street
	      Philadelphia, PA  19104    215/895-2000

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1237,1325,5209,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0001884
Welty

The principal objective of the proposed work is to document
              the effects of urbanization on Valley Creek Watershed in a rapidly developing
              area of suburban Philadelphia.  Valley Creek, a tributary of the Schuylkill
              River, runs through Valley Forge National Historical Park. The limestone-fed
              stream supports a native brown trout population.  In addition to the common
              effects of development such as increased surface runoff and sediment loading,
              the watershed has experienced point-source pollution problems from hazardous
              waste sites and aquifer dewatering from quarrying operations and pumping for
              municipal water supply.

A historical review will determine the changes in
              the stream caused by development over the last 200 years.  The study will then
              turn to the effect of continuing urbanization.  Development-induced
              geeomorphologic changes are stream flows, channel morphology, bed composition,
              and suspended sediment concentration.  The degree and pattern of heterogeneity
              of hydraulic conductivity of the fractured rock aquifer will be examined at
              multiple scales from existing hydrogeologic data and with a 3D groundwater
              model material to representing contaminant transport in fractured rock  We will
              then evaluate the effect of aquifer heterogeneity and 3D flow pathways on
              stream subsurface exchange rates, contaminant transports, and chemical loadings
              to the fish and other biota.  Tracer-injection experiments will be used to
              directly assess stream-subsurface exchange in Valley Creek.

We propose to
              investigate several aspects of the interaction between environmental quality
              and biota.  First, we will collect sediment distribution data to assess impacts
              of changes in channel characteristics on community structure of
              macroinvertebrates and fish.  Second, we will compare sediment PCB levels and
              supply rates with PCB levels found in organisms.  Third, we will use stable
              isotope d15 N values to assess positioning of species in the food web in order
              to measure biomagnification.  Fourth, we will measure general stress levels in
              the organisms using heat shock proteins (hsp 70) and relate this to PCB levels
              as an independent indicator of environmental impacts on organisms.  This work
              leads to a comprehensive picture of how urbanization-induced changes affect
              invertebrate and fish communities.  

Political controversies in this
              watershed have left a history of the political struggles that develop during
              urbanization that can be used to gain understanding of the political forces
              during urbanization.  The social science research will be based on the use of
              three sociological perspectives:  (1) The Advocacy Coalition Framework; (2)
              network analysis; and (3) discourse analysis.  These sociological perspectives
              define a watershed politics that results from the formation of different
              advocacy coalitions, each with a specific network structure and belief system. 
              The vision definition will give a comprehensive view of the process of
              urbanization, as well as the influence by social, economic, and political
              factors.

