Title       : Late Preceramic Farmer/Foragers at the Foot of the Mogollon Rim: The Mceuen Cave
               Archaeological Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 21,  2002     
File        : a0001395

Award Number: 0001395
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83494              (Estimated)
Investigator: M. Steven Shackley shackley@sscl.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Steven Shackley and his
              collaborators will conduct one season of archaeological excavation at the
              McEuen Cave site located in the Gila Mountains of East Central Arizona. The
              site was originally excavated 60 years ago and was later subjected to extensive
              looting. Dr. Shackley recently  returned to the cave and his preliminary work
              indicates, surprisingly, that a substantial portion of the archaeological
              deposits remain intact. He will conduct careful stratigraphic excavation with a
              emphasis on recovery of botanical and other organic material. McEuen Cave is
              particularly important because it spans a critical period in the Southwest,
              from ca. 2,000 to 2500 years ago, during a time when the hunting and gathering
              residents of the region began to shift their subsistence mode to focus more
              intensively on maize agriculture and sedentary aggregated settlement. McEuen
              Cave can provide unique insight into this change because of the excellent
              preservation of cultural material which results from the dry nature of the
              sediments. The remains from the early investigations include intact basketry,
              cordage, sandals, dart shafts and abundant floral and faunal remains as well as
              chipped and ground stone artifacts. Although many open air sites dating to this
              period have recently been investigated in the region, very few dry rock
              shelters of this critical age have been located. McEuen Cave contains abundant
              maize remains and these provide insight into the domestication process.

The
              shift from a hunting and gathering mobile lifestyle to a more sedentary mode of
              existence based on the utilization of domestic plants and animals occurred
              independently in many parts of the world and anthropologists wish to understand
              this developmental process. To do this they employ a comparative approach,
              study individual cases in many parts of the world and then attempt to discern
              general trends. The Southwest US and Northern Mexico constitute one such
              instance and thus have been the focus of intensive study. Dr. Shackley's
              research will provide important data through which to examine an early stage in
              such change. The information he produces will be of interest to a wide group of
              scientists.

