Title       : Globalization's Impact in the Third World Before 1940
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2000    
File        : a0001362

Award Number: 0001362
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2000  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey G. Williamson jwilliam@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9251,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The PI's previous research on the Atlantic economy during the century up to 1940
              has confirmed that globalization debates today can be better understood if
              history is taken seriously and if, as trade theory suggests, we look at factor
              and commodity prices, rather than simply at trade flows and GDP aggregates. The
              current proposal will exploit a very-nearly-established data base of factor and
              commodity prices from 26 regions in the Third World -some starting as early as
              1820, to explore the determinants of long run economic change in Latin America,
              the Mediterranean and Asia prior to the industrialization boom in the second
              half of the 20' century. The agenda will be to take a new look at the theses of
              W. Arthur Lewis and other economists writing in the 1940s and 1950s, now guided
              by the improved theory of the 1990s as well as by a vastly augmented, extended
              and improved historical data base.
The project will explore the extent of
              global commodity market integration between the Third World and the industrial
              leaders in Europe and North America from about 1870 to 1940. It will decompose
              the sources of terms of trade changes in the pre-1940 Third World into that
              accounted for by the spectacular decline in transport costs between center and
              periphery and that accounted for by demand and supply in "world" markets. The
              20th century debate over the evolution of the terms of trade facing primary
              product producers goes back almost fifty years when economists used poor
              commodity price evidence to establish a case for industrial protection in the
              Third World. The project should raise the quality of this terms of trade debate
              by the construction of a commodity price data base quoted in home markets using
              a set of country-specific trade weights for all 26 countries in the sample. 
              Also, by using  econometrics and general equilibrium models to explore the
              impact of the price shocks on these Third World countries -- including on their
              factor income distributions and thus on attitudes towards various policy
              options - additional light will be shed on the terms of trade debate.
 The
              project will also include the estimation Third World factor supply responses --
              especially that of labor and land - and a comparative assessment essential to
              any understanding of long run economic performance in the Third World. This
              part of the project will decompose the long run labor supply into local
              demographic responses and across-border migration from labor "surplus" to labor
              scarce areas in the Third World -- flows that were at least as big as the mass
              migrations from Europe to the New World. It will also include tests of the
              global integration of financial capital markets distant from the Atlantic
              economy, the only place where such tests have been performed prior to this
              proposal.
Finally, the project will use new evidence to explore the evolution
              of living standard gaps between center and periphery within Europe since the
              14th century, between India and Europe since the late 16th century, and between
              China and Europe since the early 18th century. This part of the project will
              make it possible to develop a much sharper understanding of the determinants of
              economic change in the very long run.

