Title       : The Impact of Public Opinion, the Party Balance, Interest Groups, and Social
               Movement Organizations on Congressional Support for Policy Change
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2003      
File        : a0001509

Award Number: 0001509
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2000    
Expires     : January 31,  2004    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $143290             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul Burstein burstein@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Burstein, Paul
SES-0001509

Two related questions have long been central to
              scholarly and public debate about democratic government. First, is public
              policy in a democracy influence strongly by the public as a whole? Second, do
              the organizations created to influence policy in all democracies-political,
              interest groups, and social movement organizations (SMOs) -help the public
              influence policy, or do they enable particular groups to get the policies they
              want even if a majority of the public is opposed?

The proponents of
              democratic theory contend that democratic governments respond to public opinion
              and that, on balance, political organizations have little direct influence on
              policy in the face of public opinion.  Other theories, however, see public
              opinion as having little impact on policy, and propose that political
              organizations have strong, direct impacts on policy.

The proposed research
              will test three hypotheses stemming from this controversy: (1) congressional
              support for policy change is affected most strongly by the public's policy
              preferences and its intensity of concern; (2) the party balance is likely to
              affect congressional support for policy proposals when the public is closely
              divided or relatively indifferent: as the public's concern about an issue and
              support for a particular policy proposal increase, the impact of the party
              balance will decrease; but the party balance is likely to have a greater effect
              than either interest groups or SMOs; and (3) interest groups and SMOs may
              affect congressional support for policy proposals when the public is closely
              divided or relatively indifferent; but as the public's concern about an issue
              and support for a particular proposal increase, the impact of interest groups
              and SMOs will decrease.

The hypotheses will be tested through an analysis of
              congressional support for a sample of policy proposals considered since World
              War II.  Support will be gauged in two ways: Congressional sponsorship of bills
              from the time policy proposals are first introduced until they are either
              enacted or leave the congressional agenda; and the ultimate outcome of
              congressional consideration of proposals-whether they were enacted into law,
              reframed, or allowed to languish and die.

	To test the hypotheses, the
              proposed research will collect and analyze data on public opinion and the
              activities of political organization for the periods during particular policy
              proposals are under consideration.  Data on public opinion and the intensity of
              the public concern will come from available polls.  Data on the activities of
              intermediary organizations will be drawn from congressional hearing, the mass
              media, and other publicly available documents.

