Title       : Dissertation: Pre-Iroquioian Households at the Owasco Period, Thomas/Luckey Site
               in New York (AD 1250-1350)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2000       
File        : a0001997

Award Number: 0001997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : June 1,  2000       
Expires     : May 31,  2002        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $11960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Albert Jr. A. Dekin adekin@binghamton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Binghamton
	      Vestal Parkway East
	      Binghamton, NY  13901    607/777-2000

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Under the direction of Dr. Albert Dekin, MS Laurie Miroff will collect data for
              her doctoral dissertation. The immediate goal of her project is to coordinate
              specialist analyses of archaeological materials excavated from the
              Thomas/Luckey site, located in the Town of Ashland, New York. This large open
              air occurrence dates from 900 - 1300 AD and, on the basis of ceramic remains,
              is attributed to the Owasco culture. The Owasco, archaeologists believe, are
              directly ancestral to the Iroquois peoples who inhabited a large region of the
              US Northeast at the time of European contact. The origin of the Iroquois is
              poorly understood and based on comparisons with adjacent groups, the
              distinctive Iroquois language appears intrusive. Because early ethnographers
              studied the Iroquois extensively their prehistory is of considerable interest
              because it provides a background for understanding colonial period adaptation.
              Although based on ceramic typologies the Owasco culture appears directly
              ancestral to the Iroquois, relatively few sites have been excavated and their
              social organization is poorly known. MS Miroff's research has the potential to
              remedy this situation. The Thomas/Luckey site contains large scatters of
              archaeological material and beginning in 1994 has been excavated over multiple
              field seasons. Lower soil layers are undisturbed and they preserve traces of
              house posts. MS Miroff and colleagues have discerned the presence of two large
              dwellings which, based on ethnographic comparison, likely were occupied by
              multiple family groups. MS Miroff will conduct a spatial analysis of recovered
              material to determine spatial clustering, infer whether these represent
              domestic groups and then compare across groups to examine the extent to which
              social differentiation or specialization existed. At the time of contact, the
              Iroquois were organized into chiefdoms and tribes and status differences were
              clearly present. It is uncertain when these first appeared. With NSF support,
              MS Miroff will obtain radiocarbon and thermolumenescence dates to determine
              contemporanity among features. Botanical and use wear analyses of stone tools
              will also be carried out and the results will be incorporated into cluster
              characterization.

This research is important for several reasons. It will
              illuminate a poorly understood period of US prehistory and will provide data of
              interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light on the development of
              complex societies and contribute to training a promising young scientist.

