Title       : Identification Problems in the Social Sciences
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0001436

Award Number: 0001436
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2000      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196542             (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles F. Manski cfmanski@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Econometricians have long found it useful to separate inferential problems into
              statistical and identification components. Studies of identification seek to
              characterize the conclusions that could be drawn if the researcher had
              available a sample of unlimited size. Studies of statistical inference seek to
              characterize the generally weaker conclusions that can be drawn given a sample
              of positive but finite size. Statistical and identification problems limit in
              distinct ways the conclusions that may be drawn in empirical research.
              Statistical problems are most severe when the available sample is small.
              Identification problems are most severe when the researcher knows little about
              the population under study and the sampling process yields only weak data on
              the population.
The proposed research will continue the investigator's program
              of work on identification problems in the social sciences. This program is
              deliberately conservative in the assumptions that it brings to bear. The
              investigator believes that it is not sufficient for empirical researchers to
              know the inferences that can be made if assumptions strong enough to yield
              identification are imposed. It is also important to characterize the inferences
              that can be made without imposing such assumptions, which often lack
              credibility. Conservative analysis allows the establishment of a domain of
              consensus among researchers who may hold disparate beliefs about what
              assumptions are appropriate.
The investigator will study how empirical
              analysis of treatment response informs the normative problem of treatment
              choice in heterogeneous populations. Recent work by the investigator has shown
              how identification problems generate ambiguity about the identity of optimal
              treatment rules. The planned research will analyze the complementary
              statistical problem of induction from finite samples to populations, which
              generates further ambiguity. The long-run objective is a coherent integrated
              analysis of identification and statistical inference.
The investigator will
              also study problems of incomplete identification of regressions that arise
              under empirically relevant sampling processes. One problem to be examined is
              inference on long regressions using data on short regressions. This research
              has immediate application to the longstanding ecological inference problem.
              Another problem to be analyzed is inference on regressions when only interval
              measures of covariates are available.

