Title       : Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science: Law and Development:
               Explaining Legal Change in Emerging Economies
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2000    
File        : a0001805

Award Number: 0001805
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 15,  2000   
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $16535              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer Widner jwidner@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This study seeks to establish and test a theoretical framework for understanding
              legal change and the relationship between law and development in the emerging
              economies of Africa.  This study asks the following question: Under what
              conditions will entrepreneurs in developing countries actually avail themselves
              of the legal framework supplied by the state? Synthesizing theoretical insights
              from socio-legal studies and the new institutional economics, the study argues
              that entrepreneurial demand for law is a function of both the level of social
              distance within business communities and the credibility and capacity of the
              state-provided legal system. The effectiveness of law in promoting economic
              development in emerging economies thus depends upon the interaction of informal
              social institutions and formal state-supplied political institutions.

This
              theory will be tested by analyzing data collected over the course of nine
              months of field research on commercial law reform initiatives in Tanzania. Data
              includes a combination of close-ended surveys and open-ended ethnographic
              interviews of the owners/managers of Tanzanian firms in three cities (Dar es
              Salaam, Mwanza and Mbeya) and independent data on legal institutions, law
              reform initiatives and institutional capacity in Tansania.  The study seeks to
              make important contributions to three distinct social science disciplines:
              comparative politics (particularly the comparative study of political
              institutions in the developing world), law and development (by identifying the
              conditions under which law reform may contribute to the creation and
              development of market economies), and comparative law (by analyzing the
              operation of commercial law and legal systems in developing countries).

