Title       : Late Prehistoric Agriculture on the North Coast of Peru
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2001       
File        : a0001290

Award Number: 0001290
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $158698             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frances M. Hayashida fmh5@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              
Irrigation agriculture was the economic backbone of the ancient civilizations
              that flourished on Peru's desert coast.  With support from the National Science
              Foundation, Dr. Frances Hayashida and collaborators will explore the technology
              and organization of late prehispanic coastal agriculture through
              interdisciplinary fieldwork on the Pampa de Chaparri in the Lambayeque region
              of the north coast of Peru. Archaeological evidence indicates that the pampa
              was cultivated when Lambayeque was under the rule of the Chimu and Inka empires
              (early 14- early 16 Centuries).  Fields were watered by one of the few
              well-preserved canal systems on the north coast that has not been destroyed by
              historic and modern cultivation and settlements.  Researchers thus have the
              unusual opportunity to investigate late prehispanic agriculture in the region
              and to explore the broader question of how large-scale agriculture was
              structured in ancient states. What were the political, social, and
              environmental factors that informed decisions about land use, water
              distribution, and crops? To what degree were these decisions directed by the
              state? 

During a six-month field season in 2000, data will be collected on
              (1) the distribution and chronology of settlements, canals, fields, roads, and
              other features, (2) the ancient environment and changes since the prehispanic
              occupation, and (3) crops and cultivation practices.  Fieldwork will include
              systematic archaeological survey and site mapping and test excavations of
              canals, fields, and settlements.  Team members will also collect data on the
              modern and ancient environment though study of soils, geomorphology, modern
              vegetation, and pollen and other botanical remains from the excavations.  In
              2001, researchers will return to Peru for 2.5 months to analyze material from
              the 2000 season.  The results of these two seasons will yield information on
              crop and water management, the scale of production, the organization of labor,
              and the role of the state versus local polities in planning and management. 
              Results will also establish the direction of future fieldwork. 

Fieldwork on
              the Pampa de Chaparri will contribute to studies of ancient civilizations by
              providing a detailed case examination of the relationship between water, land,
              crops, people, and politics in the past.  By focusing on the articulation of
              states with farmers and by recording agricultural practices and technologies
              that persisted over centuries, the research can also contribute to modern
              development policies and projects.


