Title       : Investigation of the Solution Complexation Behavior of the Rare Earth Elements
               with Naturally Occurring Organic Ligands in Natural Terrestrial Waters
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 22,  2000      
File        : a0001086

Award Number: 0001086
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: L. Douglas James                        
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $66844              (Estimated)
Investigator: Kevin H. Johannesson   (Principal Investigator current)
              John R. Donat  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Old Dominion Research Fdn
	      800 W. 46th Street
	      Norfolk, VA  23508    757/683-4293

NSF Program : 1579      HYDROLOGIC SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,1325,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0001086
Johannesson

Understanding the chemical behavior of the rare earth
              elements (REE) and other heavy metals in the environment is critical to
              predicting their impact on, as well as their fate and transport within, the
              environment.  One of the most important factor affecting these and other heavy
              metals in natural waters is solution complexation.  Solution complexation, for
              example, may exert controls on the mobility, effective solubility, reactivity,
              and toxicity of heavy metals in the environment.  Unfortunately, metal
              speciation with naturally occurring organic ligands, and its direct connection
              to those processes and total metal concentrations, is only poorly known for
              most trace metals, including the REEs.  Although geochemical models do exist
              that allow predictions to be made of REEs complexation with inorganic ligands
              (i.e., CO32-, P 4 3-, SO42-, OH-, CI- in natural waters, their in situ
              complexation behavior with naturally occurring organic ligands in natural
              waters has not been specifically studied.  This disparity in our understanding
              of REE complexation exists despite the fact that stability constants for REE
              complexes with many simple organic acids are of the same magnitude, or greater,
              than stability constants for the strongest REE-inorganic (i.e., carbonate)
              complexes.  Therefore, it is possible that organic complexation also controls
              the speciation of the REEs in natural waters, as has been shown to be the case
              for many transition metal cations.  Consequently, considering what little is
              known about the [in situ] complexation of REEs with organic ligands in natural
              waters, the chief objectives of our study are:  (1) modify and develop a
              specific electrochemical technique to (a) measure the fraction of dissolved
              REEs complexed with naturally occurring organic ligands in natural waters, and
              (b) measure the strength (i.e., conditional stability constants) of these
              naturally occurring REE-organic ligand complexes; (2) apply the modified
              electrochemical method to measure organic complexation of REEs in waters that
              span the pH range of natural waters and contain various concentrations of
              inorganic complexing ligands and dissolved organic carbon concentrations; and
              (3) develop a qualitative model of REE solution complexation that addresses
              competition between inorganic ligands and naturally occurring organic ligands
              and that builds upon an earlier equilibrium thermodynamic model.  These
              objectives will be addressed using a combined laboratory and field approach. 
              We will modify the competitive ligand equilibration/adsorptive cathodic
              stripping voltammetry (CLE/ACSV) technique currently used for transition metals
              to quantify the amount of dissolved REEs that occur in natural waters as
              solution complexes with naturally occurring organic ligands.  Natural water
              samples will be collected to compare and contrast concentrations, where organic
              ligands must compete with inorganic carbonate complexes, neutral pH waters with
              moderate concentrations or inorganic complexing ligands and low DOC, and acidic
              waters with high DOC.  Our results concerning REE complexation with natural
              organic ligands will be combined with an equilibrium (inorganic ligand
              speciation) model currently in use.

