Title       : Relationship of Foraging Strategy and Social Organization in Western Lowland
               Gorillas
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0001673

Award Number: 0001673
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark L. Weiss                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2000     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $325301             (Estimated)
Investigator: Diane M. Doran ddoran@notes.cc.sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 1392      PHYSICAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award will be used to continue a long-term study on the behavioral ecology
              of the western lowland gorilla (Gorilla gorilla gorilla) at the Mondika
              Research Center, Central African Republic. The primary long-term goal of the
              study is to determine whether and/or how variation in ecological and social
              factors influences gorilla sociality, in order to evaluate current models of
              primate socioecology. Specifically, western lowland gorillas consume foods
              (fruit and aquatic herbs in swamps) that are more difficult to locate in the
              environment, compared to the abundant terrestrial herbs of mountain gorillas.
              Current socioecological thought suggests that differences in food availability
              may lead to differences in competition within and between groups, and that this
              in turn will influence the nature of social behavior. Currently, these
              questions cannot be addressed, because although mountain gorillas have been
              studied extensively, little is known about western lowland gorillas in the
              wild.  In this study, the researchers will initially habituate two gorilla
              groups to the presence of people at Mondika, in order to conduct studies of
              their foraging strategy and social behavior, in addition to studies of resource
              availability (distribution, abundance and density).  This information will
              allow determination of the role of resource availability in shaping social
              behavior in African apes, which will in turn, be fundamentally important in
              understanding how differing ecological factors influenced sociality in our
              earlier human ancestors. 
