Title       : Strontium Attenuation in Basaltic Aquifers: Experimental Determination of
               Ca2+-Na+-Sr2+-K+ Exchange Between Heulandite and Aqueous Solutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2000      
File        : a0001113

Award Number: 0001113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sonia Esperanca                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : July 1,  2000       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282388             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dennis K. Bird bird@pangea.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1573      PETROLOGY AND GEOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1043,9187,9189,9198,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Bird
EAR-0001113

The proposed study is an experimental, theoretical, and
              geologic investigation of zeolite-solution interaction that aims to quantify
              ion exchange reactions between aqueous solutions and heulandite in geologic
              systems.  Research is based on experimental evaluation of Ca2+, Na+, Sr2+, and
              K+ exchange reactions in natural heulandite, a common rock-forming zeolite,
              known to concentrate Sr2+ in its crystal structure via ion exchange. Our goal
              is to provide thermodynamic data required to model reactive mass transfer
              between heulandite and ground-waters in basaltic aquifers, with reference to
              attenuation of radioactive 90Sr derived from nuclear waste respositories. 
              	This study includes binary cation exchange experiments on heulandite to
              determine the thermodynamic properties of the exchange reactions and
              crystal-chemical investigation on the effects of ion exchange on the crystal
              structure of heulandite employing X-ray diffraction and nuclear magnetic
              resonance (NMR) techniques. Finally, the credibility of the laboratory
              experiments and thermodynamic analyses will be tested using measured fluid and
              mineral compositional relations in Icelandic geothermal/metamorphic systems. 
              The work will be conducted at Stanford University, Lawrence Livermore National
              Laboratory, and the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Laboratory. The specific
              objectives of this study are to determine: 1) Gibbs energies and enthalpies of
              ion exchange reactions, 2) quantitative description of cation sites and site
              occupancy in heulandite as a function of composition and 3)
              activity-composition models for binary solid solutions in the interchannel
              sites in heulandite. The results will facilitate geochemical modeling of
              alkali- and alkaline earth-metal mass-transfer in groundwater aquifers where
              zeolites occur. Our findings will provide essential data to help develop
              heuristic and quantitative models of groundwater-zeolite interaction and the
              fate of 90Sr in basaltic aquifers contaminated with nuclear waste such as those
              below the U. S. Department of Energy sites at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation,
              WA, and the Idaho National Engineering Laboratories, ID, as well as in more
              silicic volcanic rocks at Yucca Mountain, NV, where heulandite occurs.


