Title       : Efficient Financial and Monetary Institutions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 19,  2002  
File        : a0306912

Award Number: 0306912
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49898              (Estimated)
Investigator: Narayana Kocherlakota nkocher@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              	The research in this project is guided by a simple principle. Suppose cer-tain
              societal institutions governing financial and payment arrangements are used in
              a wide variety of societies. Then there should be a strong presump-tion that
              those arrangements are economically efficient. (The idea. of course is that the
              arrangements were not efficient. then the societies would change them in order
              to achieve the same individual utility, levels at lower costs.) The key here is
              that the term `'efficient arrangement" is to be understood as meaning efficient
              subject to both resource and informational/enforcement constraints: I use the
              term "economic frictions" to refer to the latter type of constraints.
Given
              this presumption of economic efficiency, the current project has two immediate
              goals. The first is to understand the economic frictions that make it efficient
              for societies to use money in conjunction with other assets. The second is to
              understand the economic frictions that make it, efficient for societies to use
              deposit insurance.
The general method of attack is as follows. A class of
              model economies is constructed that incorporates certain informational and/or
              enforcement frictions that appear to be important aspects of the real world.
              Efficient arrangements are then constructed for the class of economies. These
              efficient arrangements are examined to see if they resemble real world
              institutions along key dimensions. If not, then the original informational and
              enforce-ment frictions are perturbed so as to improve the "fit" between
              real-world institutions and the properties of the efficient
              arrangements.
Thus, the task is essentially one of "reverse engineering"
              existing institu-tions so as to understand what frictions underlie them. In
              this proposal, the institutions of interest are money/bond co-existence and
              deposit insurance. There is a simple reason why the proposed research has
              first-order policy relevance. If institutions are efficient responses to
              existing frictions, then governments and other agencies can only improve on
              those institutions if they can overcome the frictions that give rise to them.
              Doing so requires knowing what the frictions are.

