Title       : ADVANCE Fellows Award:Implementing Inquiry Pedagogy in Elementary and Middle
               School Science Classrooms
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : REC 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 4,  2002   
File        : a0306256

Award Number: 0306256
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Elizabeth VanderPutten                  
	      REC  DIV OF RSCH, EVALUATION AND COMMUNICATIO
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  2002  
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $308977             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jennifer L. Cartier jcartier@pitt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pittsburgh
	      4200 Fifth Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152600001    412/624-4141

NSF Program : 1666      RESEARCH ON LEARNING & EDUCATI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1681,9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              In the current climate of nationwide education reform, a strong movement is
              afoot to place inquiry at the
center of science education. Nowhere is this
              more apparent than in the National Science Education
Standards (National
              Research Council, 1996), which recommend that students be ieengaged in
              inquiryld
that involves combining ioprocesses and scientific knowledge as they
              use scientific reasoning and critical
thinking to develop their understanding
              of scienceln (p. 105). Clearly, if teachers are to promote
meaningful learning
              as advocated by the Standards, some of their instructional practices will have
              to
change, and such changes must be supported by strong, research-based
              professional development
programs. The proposed study will document the ways
              in which specific professional development
opportunities influence science
              teachers beliefs and knowledge and, consequently, their
              instructional
practices.
Several factors influence teachers instructional
              decisions, including their beliefs about the nature of
science, their theories
              about teaching and learning, and their knowledge of scientific concepts.
              Through a
series of week-long summer institutes, teams of elementary and
              middle school science teachers will gain
understanding of the nature of
              scientific inquiry, the role of models in scientific inquiry, and
              various
strategies for creating robust inquiry opportunities in diverse
              classrooms. Ongoing monthly meetings
throughout the academic year will provide
              teacher teams with opportunities to discuss issues related to
implementing
              inquiry pedagogy, share materials, and seek assistance with particular
              concerns.
A variety of professional development interventions will be employed
              to help alter teachers beliefs and
develop their knowledge about scientific
              inquiry and conceptual models. These interventions include:
collaborative
              study of a theoretical framework describing scientific inquiry;
eflective
              writing;
ongoing collegial interactions; and
quality curricular
              materials.
The analytical method employed for the study will be that of the
              collective case study. One focus teacher
from each teacher team will be the
              subject of a case study. Collectively, the case studies will be
formulated to
              shed light on the processes that teachers undergo in their attempt to adopt
              inquiry pedagogy
and the types of professional development and support that
              have positive influences on these processes.
Qualitative data such as
              interview transcripts, field notes, and teacher journals will be examined
              using
QSR NUD*IST, a theory-building qualitative analysis tool.
It is
              undeniable that national and statewide reform initiatives, bolstered by renewed
              emphasis on
standardized testing, are putting pressure on teachers to adopt
              inquiry-based instructional techniques.
Unfortunately, utilizing inquiry-based
              curriculum materials and providing hands-on learning experiences
in classrooms
              are not enough to enable students to ioengage in  the same activities and
              thinking
processes [italics added] as scientists who are seeking to expand
              human knowledge of the natural worldll
(NRC, 2000, p. 1). To accomplish this
              tall task, teachers will need support in developing greater
understanding
              about the nature of scientific inquiry and ways of implementing inquiry
              instruction into
their classrooms. The proposed study will make an important
              contribution to our knowledge of how
specific professional development
              opportunities enable teachers to adopt more inquiry-based practices.
