Title       : Microbial Observatories: Workshop to Expand the Understanding of Modern
               Microbial Identification Technologies in Environmental Settings, Morocco,
               Spring 2003
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0306927

Award Number: 0306927
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Matthew Kane                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : April 1,  2003      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel B. Oerther Daniel.Oerther@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 1089      MICROBIAL OBSERVATORIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1089,1670,5976,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              A grant has been awarded to Dr. Daniel B. Oerther of the Department of Civil and
              Environmental Engineering at the University of Cincinnati to host an
              international workshop of environmental microbiologists, engineers and students
              at the University Ibn Tofail, Kenitra, Morocco.  This international workshop is
              a direct follow-up of a workshop held previously at NSF headquarters in the
              Spring of 2002 (BES-0116929), the purpose of which was for U.S. researchers to
              explore the value of applying molecular biological tools in the field of
              environmental engineering.  The theme of the Morocco workshop will be using
              state-of-the-art molecular techniques to track microorganisms in the
              environment.  The specific objectives of the international workshop include:
              teaching state-of-the-art technology to young researchers; transferring
              technology to potential collaborators; and exploring opportunities for
              international collaboration to better tackle local issues facing environmental
              health in Morocco as well as global issues in environmental microbiology. 
              Approximately ten U.S. university faculty members specializing in environmental
              microbiology will visit Morocco, present their research results and give talks
              on molecular techniques for the detection of microorganisms in the environment
              to potential international collaborators and their students.  The Morocco
              workshop will also provide researchers from the U.S. with an opportunity to
              interact with and learn from colleagues abroad.  

The 2-day international
              workshop will serve as a lecture and discussion-based introduction for a
              two-week hands-on training course sponsored by the United Nations Educational,
              Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).  Involving environmental
              microbiologists from the U.S. in this broader training effort demonstrates a
              commitment by the U.S. to be actively involved in technology transfer and the
              exchange of intellectual capital in this part of the world.  One of the broader
              impacts of this effort is the emphasis on bringing female faculty in
              environmental microbiology from the U.S. to Morocco.  By involving women in
              this international effort, Dr. Oerther also hopes to elevate the visibility of
              women scientists in parts of the world where role models for women in science
              are less common.



