Title       : Surface Initiated Polymerization from Nanoparticles: Polymer Brushes on
               Nanoparticles as Polymeric Building Blocks
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 19,  2003     
File        : a0306055

Award Number: 0306055
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Timothy E. Patten patten@indigo.ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Intellectual Merit.  With increased interest in nanoscale phenomena has arisen a
              need to understand how to synthesize and assemble the building blocks of
              nanoscale materials.  There is much information on the synthesis of inorganic
              nanomaterials, such as semiconductor or magnetic nanoparticles, and there is
              much information on the synthesis of organic macromolecules that exhibit
              nanoscale features, such as block copolymer microphase separation domains.  A
              significant challenge now is to create new nanosized building blocks that merge
              the useful optical and magnetic properties of inorganic nanomaterials with the
              versatile functionality, reactivity, self-assembly, and mechanical properties
              of organic nanomaterials.  The objective of the proposed research is the
              synthesis of polymer / nanoparticle building blocks that could be used to
              assemble more complex materials.  The specific aims of this proposal are (1) to
              develop initiator attachment strategies that are applicable to nanoparticles
              with photoluminescent and magnetic properties, such as CdSe and g-Fe2O3; (2) to
              further the science of brush synthesis including an in depth look at the
              polymerization of acrylates from nanoparticle initiators and the grafting of
              block copolymers from nanoparticle surfaces; and (3) to develop methods to
              graft reactive monomers from nanoparticle surfaces which can then be used to
              assemble patterns of nanoparticles on complementary functionalized surfaces or
              to build complex assemblies of nanoparticles.

Broader Impact.  This research
              will contribute to knowledge about how to prepare and assemble matter on the
              nanometer scale.  Polymer layers will be grown from the exterior of
              nanoparticles that exhibit interesting magnetic and optical properties, and
              then the chemical functionality of the polymer will be used to interact the
              nanoparticles selectively with patterned surfaces and with other nanoparticles.
               Such syntheses and assembly processes could be used as tools to construct
              devices with sizes ranging from tens of nanometers to microns.  The resulting
              materials could also be used as components of biological and chemical sensors,
              materials for flexible and energy efficient displays, or magnetic resonance and
              optical imaging agents.

This research project will provide training and
              career advancement for graduate and undergraduate students in the important
              areas of polymer science and nanoscience, and the students will gain important
              research skills.  The PI and student participants in this project will also
              work to promote learning about polymer / materials science at the high school
              level through involvement in the COSMOS Program at UC Davis.  During one of the
              summers of the project period, the PI will design and teach a short course
              entitled "Polymers and Everyday Things" to be offered to the participating high
              school students.  Participating graduate students will help out with some of
              the laboratory exercises and field trips.  It is hoped that an early,
              stimulating experience with polymer / materials science will encourage more
              students to pursue studying science (and materials science) when they attend
              college.

