Title       : Theoretical Studies of Spectroscopy, Relaxation and Energy Transfer in Condensed
               Matter Molecular Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 4,  2003      
File        : a0306287

Award Number: 0306287
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Mark R. Pederson                        
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2003        
Expires     : April 30,  2006      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $420000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert J. Silbey silbey@mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,7202,7203,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Robert Silbey, of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is
              supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to perform
              theoretical studies of spectroscopy, relaxation and energy transfer in
              condensed-matter molecular systems.  He is extending theories of four-wave
              mixing spectroscopy for multilevel systems. Such analyses allow one to unravel
              microscopic molecular processes, which are otherwise averaged out when spectra
              of a large number of disordered molecules are simultaneously probed.  Silbey's
              methods account for both fluctuating environmental effects and perturbations
              due to the incident light. Applications include light harvesting complexes,
              other multichromophoric systems, and single quantum nanocrystals.

The
              ability to understand energy transfer in biologically relevant molecules is
              necessary for many biochemical applications, which include green catalysis,
              energy storage and controlled photolysis.   Observation and control of such
              processes are difficult using ordinary spectroscopic methods because the
              molecules are disordered and because the experimental probe itself may alter
              the standard properties of the molecules.  Silbey has devised a theoretical
              means, which allows one to effectively deduce properties and processes in
              single molecules.  The same techniques are thought to be of significance to
              quantum-computing applications as it enables a means for directly probing the
              state of a quantum dot.  The award will support education of two graduate
              students and one half of a postdoctoral student during the course of the grant.
              Outreach activities to high school students and teachers are also supported.

