Title       : Arithmetical geometry and number theory - A conference in honor of N. Katz
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2003     
File        : a0306938

Award Number: 0306938
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sylvia M. Wiegand                       
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2003       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Brian Conrey conrey@aimath.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andrew J. Wiles  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Peter C. Sarnak  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Amer Inst of Math
	      360 Portage Avenue
	      Palo Alto, CA  943062244    650/845-2065

NSF Program : 1264      ALGEBRA,NUMBER THEORY,AND COM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Principal Investigator: Brian Conrey
Proposal Number:  DMS
              -0306938
Institution: American Institute of Mathematics

					
Arithmetical
              geometry and number theory, a conference in honor of N. M.
              Katz

Abstract:

After the works of Weil, Grothendieck, and Deligne, the
              theory of zeta functions of varieties over finite fields has been a very
              powerful tool in number theory and geometry. Katz has been and continues to be
              a leading  researcher in these areas
and has championed their applications. 
              His contributions range from exponential sums, monodromy groups and their
              representations, number theory, modular forms classical and  p-adic, to
              arithmetic moduli problems. All of these areas are still very much at the
              center of current research. The PIs will conduct a 4 day conference on these
              connected areas. The timing will coincide with Katz' 60 th birthday. The
              conference will bring together many of the leading researchers in these fields
              to lecture on the latest developments. In addition to these advanced lectures
              the conference will also feature survey lectures and discussion sessions aimed
              for
graduate students and postdocs.

The combination of the mathematical
              fields of number theory and arithmetical geometry is concerned in part with the
              study of counting solutions to algebraic equations (such as Fermat's equation)
              where the solutions are to be whole numbers. The study of such problems
              requires some of the most sophisticated modern mathematical theories. The
              payoff for mastering and developing these theories is great. For instance,
              there are far-reaching applications to other areas of pure mathematics as well
              as to areas of applied discrete mathematics such as computer science, to the
              design of optimally efficient networks and to cryptography. This 4-day
              conference will feature this important mathematics, especially those aspects
              closest to the interests of N. M. Katz who is a world leader in these areas. 
              Particular attention will be devoted to including graduate students and
              postdoctoral associates in all aspects of the conference.  Survey lectures and
              formal  discussion sessions which will be particularly useful to younger
              mathematicians will be a highlight of the conference.


