Title       : IIc: Representational Validity of Computer Visualizations for Environmental
               Value Assessments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 24,  1999 
File        : a9976323

Award Number: 9976323
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Ann H. Bostrom                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : November 1,  1999   
Expires     : October 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $83032              (Estimated)
Investigator: Terry C. Daniel tdaniel@u.arizona.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas C. Brown  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arizona
	      601 Administration Building
	      Tucson, AZ  85721    602/621-2211

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              During the last thirty years in the United States, significant environmental
              management decisions have required the participation of the public. The
              justification for requiring public input is most clear for actions by public
              agencies on public lands, but the condition of the environment necessarily
              affects everyone so we are all stakeholders in every environmental management
              decision. People's opinions about the consequences of environmental changes are
              important, and they are often legally required. But the consequences of
              environmental management are often complex, they are frequently only to be
              realized far into the future, and they are always somewhat uncertain. How,
              then, is the public to be meaningfully engaged in the environmental management
              decision process? How are alternative future states of the environment to be
              communicated? How can the public determine and express their preferences for
              these alternatives?

Many different "public participation" methods have been
              developed and tried with varying levels of success, ranging from the posting of
              notices and the publication of lengthy environmental impact statements to
              holding open meetings to implementing elaborate conflict resolution processes.
              Every method has advantages and disadvantages, and all have a legitimate role.
              One of the most important public participation methods is a formal values
              assessment--a systematic survey of relevant public preferences. Environmental
              values assessments typically present management alternatives, including
              processes and expected outcomes, to representative samples of the public who
              indicate their preferences, usually by assigning numerical ratings or rankings
              or by making choices. For this process to be meaningful, it is critical that
              the values and preferences expressed in the assessment are consistent with the
              values and preferences that would be elicited if the alternative environmental
              conditions represented were actually realized--the results of environmental
              values assessments must be valid. Among the most basic factors affecting the
              validity of environmental values assessments is the accuracy and completeness
              of the representation of alternatives. That is, the words, numbers, maps and/or
              pictures used to describe relevant environmental conditions must allow
              participants to correctly understand the alternatives at issue, and to
              ascertain how those conditions affect things that they value.

The proposed
              study investigates the validity of computer visualizations as a means for
              representing alternative environmental conditions in formal value assessments.
              Environmental visualization technology has advanced very rapidly, from crude
              schematics to cartoon-like images to photographic realism to "virtual reality."
              These representations can very efficiently be distributed to audiences
              world-wide over interactive computer networks, providing unprecedented
              opportunities for public participation. But the effects of these
              representations on public understanding and evaluations of environmental
              alternatives is not known. This study will inform environmental managers and
              assessment specialists of the advantages and limitations of computer
              visualizations, and help to insure that public input to environmental decisions
              is valid.

