Title       : PPD: Accessible Web Graphics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 6,  2001   
File        : a9976548

Award Number: 9976548
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : December 1,  1999   
Expires     : November 30,  2002   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $553474             (Estimated)
Investigator: John A. Gardner John.Gardner@orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9180,SMET,
Abstract    :
                   Charts, diagrams, graphs and other types of graphically displayed
              information are currently not usable by people with severe print disabilities
              without assistance.  This project is developing and testing methods for
              enhancing bit-map web graphics so they can be universally accessible.  Images
              are enhanced by including a data structure that indicates each important object
              and provides a label and/or other information about these objects.  People with
              print impairments can access the information and "read" the picture through a
              choice of any combination of visual, auditory, tactile, and/or haptic modes. 
              These methods should be relatively inexpensive for both authors and users with
              print impairments.  they could become widely useful by the end of the project
              period.
     The activities are being done in two phases:  (1) Web page design
              and tactile picture production; and (2) Haptic access development and
              audio/haptic display of web x-y graphs.  Evaluation will occur in three
              distinct phases relative to production.  Data will be collected in a variety of
              ways (i.e., questionnaires, checklists and interviews) from the beta testers. 
              Beta test subjects will be volunteers who respond to e-mail list invitations or
              who are recruited by university officials from the Student Disability Support
              Office.
     This project should provide universities and federal agencies
              with an inexpensive, high-quality method for making web graphical information
              accessible to people with disabilities.  This research will not result in all
              graphical information being automatically accessible, since deliberate human
              input is required to add the annotations that enhance the figures.  The project
              staff plans to produce software for authoring and/or editing annotations for
              web graphics and will sell it at a cost sufficient to provide support.
    
              The staff plan to disseminate their research progress by giving talks at major
              meetings including the CSUN (California State University at Northridge)
              International Conference on Technology and Persons with Disabilities, and will
              seek invitations to present the information at major conferences that have a
              focus in disabilities-related areas.

