Title       : Structural Origins of DNA Deformation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a9976498

Award Number: 9976498
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $720000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Loren D. Williams loren.williams@chemistry.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Williams
MCB 9976498

The long-term goal of this research is to understand
              why DNA bends and twists, why the grooves are narrow or wide, how RNA folds,
              how and why altered nucleic acid conformational states are induced by proteins
              during "indirect readout". The premise of this work is that cations are
              intrinsic to each of these processes. This project describes a hybrid-solvent
              model that explains why x-ray diffraction has generally failed to detect
              cations around nucleic acids. In this model, water molecules and monovalent
              cations share the same solvent sites. Sites that were previously characterized
              as pure water are proposed to be hybrids composed of both water and monovalent
              cations. Crystallographically a hybrid is a solvent site occupied by water
              molecules at some locations in the crystal and by monovalent cations at other
              locations that are equivalent by symmetry. The goal here is to search for
              non-average occupancies, i.e., peaks and troughs of cation density. One can
              anticipate a peak in the minor groove of AT-tracts. Recent high-resolution
              single crystal diffraction data of several salts of the Dickerson Dodecamer led
              the PI to a new interpretation with significant occupancy of either sodium or
              potassium in the minor groove. Cation density appears to be high near the ApT
              step. This project will test a limiting model in which all DNA deformation is
              dominated by electrostatic interactions with uneven cationic density. X-ray
              diffraction will be used to correlate cation occupancies with DNA sequence,
              phosphate positions, conformation, deformation, ionic radii, etc.

Watson and
              Crick received the Nobel Prize for their model of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA)
              as a beautifully symmetric, base-paired double helix. Although the essential
              elements of their structure are correct, it is now known that DNA structure is
              not so symmetric or regular. Depending on the sequence, DNA bends and twists,
              and the major and minor grooves open and close. This conformational
              heterogeneity is important in gene expression, viral DNA packaging, etc.
              Conventional models of the origins of this heterogeneity arise from the
              'heterocyclic-centric worldview'. This view is based on the premise that direct
              base-base interactions modulate conformation. An alternative model is that
              partitioning of cations around DNA is affected by sequence. Conformation is
              modulated via interactions of time-average uneven cation density with phosphate
              groups. X-ray diffraction will be used here to correlate cation occupancies
              with DNA sequence, phosphate positions, conformation, deformation, ionic radii,
              etc.


