Title       : Full-Band Particle Based Simulation for Three Dimensional Device Structures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a9976484

Award Number: 9976484
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $389999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen M. Goodnick stephen.goodnick@asu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Dragica Vasileska  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9976484
Goodnick

Scaling of future semiconductor device technologies towards
              0.1gm and below is placing new demands on semiconductor device simulation tools
              in terms of the physical models employed, and the computational demands of
              increased physical accuracy. At the same time, the exponential increase of
              semiconductor manufacture costs as device technology shrinks below this
              critical feature size mandates an increased dependence on simulation prior to
              manufacture. Important issues which will occur as devices continue to shrink
              include full three-dimensional geometry effects, new material systems, random
              dopant effects, discrete electron charging effects, and ultimately quantum
              mechanical effects at the smallest dimensions.
Herein is proposed funding for
              a three year program of research with the goal of developing the necessary
              device simulation tools to meet the challenges of device scaling along the
              projected Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) roadmap and beyond with
              special attention given to the requirements of modularity, robustness and
              reliability. These device tools will employ full-band Cellular Automata and
              Monte Carlo particle-based techniques developed under previous NSF funding for
              efficient solution of the semi-classical Boltzmann transport equation and
              beyond. These techniques will be combined with robust field solvers based on
              multi-grid and Bi-conjugate gradient stabilized methods including non-uniform
              grids for arbitrary two- and three-dimensional device geometries. Discrete
              impurity effects and intercarrier interactions will be included in this
              simulation level through a coupled mesh/particle force model to assess the
              fluctuation in device operating characteristics based on random impurity
              distributions. Collaboration with industrial partners will be undertaken for
              comparison and calibration with state of the art device technologies. Due to
              the computational demands of 3D semi-classical modeling, the proposed research
              will be supported by investigation of high-performance computing environments
              based on multi-processor systems, and clusters of workstations. Distributed
              algorithms for both the transport simulation tools and the coupled field
              solvers will be developed and applied for high-end computing as developed under
              previous funding.
We will focus on comparison and calibration of the
              simulation tools with three particular technology areas in collaboration with
              industry and experimental groups, although the scope of the project goes far
              beyond these. One area involves EEPROM device technology, where 3D effects are
              prevalent, and where elevated electric fields necessitate full-band
              consideration as well. Another effort will focus on scaled Si MOS devices below
              0.1 gm gate length, where a variety of new problems arise in terms of device
              scaling. Finally, we will consider newer material systems such as SOI and
              Si/SiGe technology, where little is known for example about hole transport, and
              improved transport models including full-band effects' are necessary.
***

