Title       : IRCEB: Molecular Evolutionary Ecology of Developmental Plasticity in Arabidopsis
               thaliana
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  1999     
File        : a9976997

Award Number: 9976997
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Samuel M. Scheiner                      
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1798958            (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael D. Purugganan michaelp@unity.ncsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Trudy F C. Mackay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Johanna M. Schmitt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1174      POPULATION BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0312000   Population                              
Program Ref : 1356,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              9976997
Purugganan et al.

Phenotypic plasticity, the ability of the same
              genotype to express different phenotypes in different environments, is a major
              component of organismal adaptation. In plants, as in other sessile organisms,
              the ability of developmental systems to respond to variations in ecological
              cues permits flexibility in the face of changing environmental conditions. This
              plasticity may be considered adaptive if differing phenotypes confer high
              relative fitness in the specific environments they experience. For adaptive
              plasticity to evolve, natural selection on the trait of interest must differ
              among environments, and there must be genetic variation in the plastic response
              of that trait to those environments. Very little is known, however, about the
              specific genes underlying variation in morphological phenotypes to diverse
              ecological cues or how natural selection acts upon those genes in the wild.
              Understanding the genetic architecture of developmental plasticity is critical
              to resolving the current debate among evolutionary biologists regarding the
              genetic mechanisms that lead to adaptive evolution of plasticity. Dissecting
              the genetic mechanisms underlying morphological plasticity is equally important
              for gaining insight into the evolution of developmental pathways currently
              under intense scrutiny at the molecular level.

An integrated, comprehensive
              research program to study the molecular evolutionary ecology of plasticity. We
              will focus on the changes in inflorescence architecture and life history traits
              associated with ecologically relevant variation in photoperiod in the model
              wild plant Arabidopsis thaliana is proposed.  They will identify genes
              associated with naturally-occurring variation in inflorescence development and
              its ecological plasticity under different light regimes, examine the population
              dynamics of these loci at the molecular level, and explore the genetic
              architecture of these traits in natural environments. In this integrated
              research program, they  will specifically: (1) examine the genetic architecture
              of inflorescence traits in Arabidopsis thaliana and its plasticity under
              differing photoperiod regimes, (2) use QTL mapping approaches to identify
              positional candidate loci that affect these traits both under controlled
              conditions and natural environments, (3) examine the molecular population
              genetics of the developmental pathway that underlie inflorescence
              differentiation, (4) probe the extent to which naturally occurring variation at
              the molecular level among specific loci are associated with diversity in trait
              phenotypes in wild populations, (5) explore the role of individual loci in
              plasticity responses, and (6) test for natural selection at specific loci in
              the wild. Their  efforts will integrate QTL mapping, molecular population
              biology, ecological genomics, evolutionary ecology and developmental biology by
              examining selection at both phenotypic and molecular levels.

