Title       : Atomistic and Holistic Learning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 15,  2000      
File        : a9976739

Award Number: 9976739
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Bruce E. Seely                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  1999      
Expires     : June 30,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $121444             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert C. Cummins rcummins@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1353      SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY STUDIES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9179,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Learning is typically characterized as the acquisition of new beliefs, and an
              assumption that is usually made is that these beliefs can be acquired one at a
              time. To the extent that we learn in this atomistic fashion, this poses a
              threat to models of learning that use fully distributed neural nets. However,
              fully distributed neural nets are effective at learning to perform certain
              tasks that have been intractable in classical AI, e.g., tasks relating to
              perception and motor control. The goal of the research proposed here is to
              investigate the properties of these two types of learning and their relation to
              each other. We intend to do so by identifying the appropriate task domains of
              atomistic and holistic learning, by characterizing atomistic and holistic
              increases or decreases in knowledge, and by working toward a better
              understanding of whether and how atomistic and holistic learning are
              related.

This research is important both in psychology and the philosophy of
              science. Many psychological explanations of cognitive processes assign a
              central role to learning. If we are to eventually understand these explanations
              in neural terms, we must be able to say not only how, in general, knowledge is
              acquired, e.g., whether this acquisition is holistic or atomistic (or a
              combination thereof), but under what conditions this acquisition takes place.
              Our research proposes to advance current naturalistic understanding of science
              by detailing the relation between science, which is a paradigmatic example of
              an atomistic learner, and its cognitive basis, which, if our previously funded
              research is to be believed, is only partly capable of atomistic learning. We
              hope this investigation will shed light on some issues in epistemology since we
              cannot hope to even articulate an epistemology appropriate to neurally based
              cognition until we have a viable account both of its proprietary forms of
              learning and of their relation.


