Title       : Patenting and it's Impact on Innovation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a9976384

Award Number: 9976384
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : March 31,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $200100             (Estimated)
Investigator: Wesley Cohen wc02@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John P. Walsh  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ashish Arora  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program, this research focuses on the impact of patents
              on the generation and use of innovation. It seeks to provide an empirical basis
              on which to address questions of patent policy. The project will study a series
              of related questions. First, what factors influence the patenting behavior of
              firms? Second, what is the effect of patenting on the incentives to conduct R&D
              at firm and industry levels? Patents not only confer protection, but through
              disclosure also make public information that, while diminishing protection, may
              contribute to the R&D of rivals. Finally, the work will consider how and why
              firms' intellectual property strategies have changed over the past two
              decades.

The researchers will develop three models. A firm-level model will
              explore the impact of patenting strength on both R&D and patenting decisions.
              An industry-level simultaneous equation model will address the role of patents
              in affecting industry-level R&D spending and information flows. A firm-level
              model will address determinants of licensing. Interview-based field studies
              will provide robust qualitative testing of the quantitative models' results, as
              well as suggesting further insights. Quantitative models will make use of
              existing data sets, the Carnegie Mellon Survey on Industrial R&D, a "sister"
              survey of R&D in Japan conducted by the National Institute for Science and
              Technology Policy, and Securities Data Corporation's database of licensing
              agreements and other "knowledge transactions." 

The project is being
              conducted in close cooperation with the Science and Technology Policy Board of
              the National Research Council.

Patenting, licensing and other agreements
              affecting the protection and sharing of intellectual property clearly relate to
              innovation activities broadly construed. The work promises a thoughtful
              empirical exploration of patents and their effects on how organizations address
              research and innovation, while offering informative comparisons between
              practices and impacts in the United States and Japan.

