Title       : Development of a Variable Temperature Magnet Scanning Evanescent Microwave
               Microscope for Studying Novel Nanostructures and for the Training of Students
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 18,  1999    
File        : a9976852

Award Number: 9976852
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  1999    
Expires     : July 31,  2001       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $135000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank Tsui ftsui@physics.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Yue Wu  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sean Washburn  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      300 Bynum Hall
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/962-5625

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9976852
Tsui

This award will provide partial support for the development of
              an ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) compatible scanning evanescent microwave microscope
              (SEMM) with a variable temperature sample stage and a superconducting magnet to
              study structural, magnetic, and conduction properties of novel nanometer scale
              materials. It is a collaborative effort between researchers at the
University
              of North Carolina at Chapel Hill (UNC-CH), Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
              (LBNL), and Ariel Technologies, Inc.

The proposed instrument is a
              one-of-the-kind scanning probe microscope (SPM) capable of measuring microwave
              response with nanometer scale resolution in a magnetic field and at low
              temperatures. The ability to modulate magnetic field and to vary
temperature
              will expand the capabilities of the current SEMM technique significantly,
              including scanning probe magnetic resonance experiments. The instrument will
              provide powerful but versatile capabilities for the materials research
              community and it also will serve as a vital part of the nanometer scale
              materials activities at UNC-CH.  Proposed research activities include (1)
              spatially resolved microwave resonance experiments on metallic thin films and
              multilayers synthesized using combinatorial approach, (2) spatially resolved
              dielectric and conduction properties of doped perovskites, (3) SEMM as a probe
              of quantum effects in mesoscopic and nanometer conductors, (4) magnetic
              topology of photosynthesis complex of plants. The goal is to elucidate the
              structural and magnetic excitations in nanometer scale materials.

This award
              will provide significant opportunities for strong interactions between
              students, researchers, and private sector
partners, and for participants to
              get involved with and to make significant contributions to significant advances
              in science and technology. 
&&&
This multi-institutional collaborative
              activity is expected to significantly impact science, education, and
              partnerships.

