Title       : IA Understanding the Effects of Choice Set Complexity in Stated Preference
               Methods
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 28,  1999 
File        : a9976541

Award Number: 9976541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $109557             (Estimated)
Investigator: George M. DeShazo deshazo@ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Trudy Ann Cameron  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1369,5209,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
                   Economists employ stated preference methods to measure the use and non-use
              value that consumers derive from a variety of environmental programs. Recently,
              economists and federal agencies have begun to explore the feasibility of
              generalizing stated preference methods by moving from the contingent valuation
              method to so-called conjoint methods. The contingent valuation method presents
              consumers with only one alternative, for which the price varies, while conjoint
              methods present consumers with a choice set that contains several alternatives
              that each vary along a number of attributes. Proponents of conjoint analysis
              argue that this allows a more complete characterization of the benefits derived
              from the project's attributes, and may do so with greater statistical
              efficiency and lower financial costs than traditional stated preference
              methods. However, several prominent economists have expressed concern that the
              highly complex choice sets used in conjoint analysis may overwhelm the
              cognitive capacities of consumers and thus lead to unreliable estimates of use
              and non-use value. This debate continues because there is very little research
              about the effects of choice set complexity on estimates of economic benefits.
              As a result, public agencies such as EPA and NOAA are still uncertain as to the
              relative merits of conjoint methods versus other non-market valuation
              techniques. This uncertainty impedes the acquisition and use of information on
              economic benefits in judicial, regulatory and public investment decisions.
   
               We step into this debate with some rigorous and systematic research on the
              core issue: How does the complexity of a choice set affect the way in which a
              consumer reveals his value for environmental amenities? To answer this
              question, we vary the complexity of the choice set in an elaborate stated
              preference experiment and then evaluate choice outcomes with regard to several
              dimensions of the experiment. First, how does choice inconsistency (i.e., the
              propensity to make mistakes) vary with complexity? Second, do consumers'
              information processing strategies vary with the level of choice set complexity
              in a way that significantly changes their choices (and thus
              economists'estimates of benefits)? Third, how do the personal characteristics
              of consumers interact with choice set complexity to affect choice consistency
              and information processing strategies? Fourth, how are consumers' subjective
              assessments of choice set complexity related to the measures of complexity that
              we, as researchers, can objectively quantify?
     Answering these substantive
              questions will enable us to identify the limits of current practice and to
              extend the frontiers of research on stated preference methods. At the center of
              our analysis is a behavioral model of choice that integrates several strands of
              existing literature in the fields of psychology, economics and marketing. From
              this model, we develop a set of hypotheses that we can test statistically in
              order to provide answers to the above questions. By testing these hypotheses,
              we will develop methods to identify and control for choice set complexity in
              stated preference applications. We believe these methods will become standard
              tools for future research in this area. In this proposal, we seek funding only
              for the analysts of a newly created data set. As part of a recently completed
              Harvard University research project, the principal investigator designed and
              implemented conjoint experiments that were peer-reviewed by highly respected
              experts in the fields of economics and marketing research. However, a strategic
              decision was made to invest this original research support in obtaining the
              highest possible quality of data and to answer only the requisite policy
              questions in the initial analyses. We have now exhausted this original funding
              and are seeking additional support to address the important methodological
              issues that can be examined using these innovative stated preference survey
              experiments.

