Title       : Directional Recrystallization Processing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 23,  2001       
File        : a9976509

Award Number: 9976509
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Julie Chen                              
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $319385             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ian Baker ian.baker@dartmouth.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Harold J. Frost  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Dartmouth College
	      11 Rope Ferry Road #6210
	      Hanover, NH  037551404    603/646-3007

NSF Program : 1467      MATERIALS PROCESSING & MANUFCT
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9146,MANU,
Abstract    :
              A fundamental study of directional recrystallization processing will be
              performed with the goal of understanding how key microstructural parameters,
              principally the interparticle spacing and grain size, interact with the
              processing conditions (rate of hot zone movement and temperature) to control
              the microstructure.  The study covers both primary recrystallization and grain
              growth.  Initial work is on model systems of copper (single crystals and
              polycrystals) containing fine hard particles introduced by internal oxidation. 
              For recrystallization, a key question is whether a particle-containing alloy
              should show accelerated recrystallization or retarded recrystallization
              (compared to unalloyed copper) in order to be amenable to directional
              recrystallization processing into a single crystal or columnar-grained
              structure.  For grain growth, determining the role of particle coarsening is
              key to understanding how elongated grains or single crystals can be produced. 
              

The work will involve a close coupling of experiments with computational
              microstructural simulation.  With this fundamental understanding of directional
              recrystallization, modeling can then be used to guide directional
              recrystallization of commercially-useful aerospace materials.  Thus, the
              project will also apply the fundamental understanding and modeling expertise
              developed to directional recrystallization of a nickel-based superalloy.  A
              predictive capability for materials processing is sought regarding what volume
              fraction, size or spacing of particles should a material include to make it
              amenable to directional recrystallization.  In addition, the state-of-the-art
              of microstructural simulation will have been advanced.


