Title       : The Evolution of Globally-Distributed Teams: Organizational Learning and the
               role of Information Technology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 11,  2002   
File        : a9976503

Award Number: 9976503
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299262             (Estimated)
Investigator: Julia Gluesing gluesing@teamcci.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marietta L. Baba  (Principal Investigator former)
              David W. Britt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hilary H. Ratner  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Olugbenga Mejabi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Leslie F. Monplaisir  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Wayne State University
	      656 W. Kirby
	      Detroit, MI  48202    313/577-2424

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With Support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program, this research focuses on social and
              technological factors that contribute to organizational teaming in virtual
              global teams. It is framed around several broad questions that address both
              theoretical and practitioner concerns:

How do global teams evolve to share
              cognitive experience, exchange and internalize one another's tacit knowledge,
              and collaborate in ways that contribute to performance?  What conditions enable
              this transformation?

What roles do advanced information technologies play in
              the evolution of global teams, and especially in the processes of
              organizational teaming?

What technological designs and implementation
              processes best enable the development of collaborative practices on global
              teams, and support new knowledge creation and organizational
              teaming?
	
	These questions are explored through a combination of
              qualitative, comparative, and quantitative methods that are employed to study
              global teams at Ford, Motorola, and Procter & Gamble.  Methodologies include
              ethnographic fieldwork and direct observation of team practices, qualitative
              comparative analysis, survey research and statistical analysis, and simulation
              modeling.

The results will help global teams communicate and coordinate
              their activities across boundaries of culture, time, and space.  The findings
              may also be applied to collaborative teams in an educational context, with
              insights for multi-cultural collaborations and the utilization of information
              technology.

