Title       : Theoretical Condensed Matter Physics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2001       
File        : a9976665

Award Number: 9976665
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  1999       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elihu Abrahams abrahams@physics.rutgers.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Rutgers Univ New Brunswick
	      ASB III, 3 Rutgers Plaza
	      New Brunswick, NJ  08901    732/932-0150

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award will support theoretical research on condensed matter physics which
              is concerned with explaining and predicting the physical properties of a number
              of interesting electron systems which are currently subjects of experimental
              studies, and, in their realization in new materials, of  technological promise.
               In general, what distinguishes the systems to be studied is that their
              behavior is largely determined by the fact that the interaction between the
              electrons is unusually strong, indeed often the largest energy of the electron
              system in question.  From the experimental point of view, this leads to unusual
              behavior in thermodynamic and transport properties.  At the same time, the
              presence of the strong electron-electron correlations often requires new
              theoretical approaches and techniques.  In this project, various
              strong-correlation systems will be studied theoretically using methods based
              primarily on the methods of quantum statistical mechanics.  Thus the research
              to be carried out has both intrinsic theoretical importance and immediate
              experimental relevance.  The research will impact materials science, solid
              state physics and quantum chemistry.

The materials to be investigated
              include new strongly correlated metals, especially those showing
              metal-insulator transitions, high temperature and other unconventional
              superconductors, disordered electronic substances, and quantum solids and
              liquids.  In all of these subjects, the interactions between elementary
              constituents play a fundamental role.  The theoretical approach will introduce
              and elaborate models and methods which deal directly with that central
              issue.
%%%
This award will support theoretical research on condensed matter
              physics which is concerned with explaining and predicting the physical
              properties of a number of interesting electron systems which are currently
              subjects of experimental studies, and, in their realization in new materials,
              of  technological promise.  In general, what distinguishes the systems to be
              studied is that their behavior is largely determined by the fact that the
              interaction between the electrons is unusually strong, indeed often the largest
              energy of the electron system in question.  From the experimental point of
              view, this leads to unusual behavior in thermodynamic and transport properties.
               At the same time, the presence of the strong electron-electron correlations
              often requires new theoretical approaches and techniques.  In this project,
              various strong-correlation systems will be studied theoretically using methods
              based primarily on the methods of quantum statistical mechanics.  Thus the
              research to be carried out has both intrinsic theoretical importance and
              immediate experimental relevance.  The research will impact materials science,
              solid state physics and quantum chemistry.
***

