Title       : IB. Estimating the Cost Savings from Incentive-Based Environmental Policies when
               Costs are Heterogeneous
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 8,  2002    
File        : a9976512

Award Number: 9976512
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $187408             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Newell newell@rff.org  (Principal Investigator current)
              William A. Pizer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jhih-Shyang Shih  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Resources For Future Inc
	      
	      Washington, DC  20036    /   -

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              	Recent experience with the SO2 trading program, ongoing discussions of possible
              carbon trading programs, and other policy reforms and proposals (e.g., regional
              NOx trading) suggest that incentive-based environmental regulation will likely
              play an increasingly important role in the United States.  The desirability of
              these options lies in the possible reduction in the cost of abating pollution,
              with the single most important factor affecting the relative cost of economic
              incentive-based versus other approaches likely to be the degree of
              heterogeneity among pollution sources in their marginal costs of pollution
              abatement.  Yet, there have been insufficient attempts to use existing data to
              rigorously measure cost heterogeneity and hence the potential gains from such
              programs over the status quo or alternative performance standards.

	The
              investigators will develop econometrically estimable, structural models of
              plant-level pollution abatement costs that explicitly allow for significant
              heterogeneity. After estimating these models using Census data, they will first
              assess the degree and sources of cost heterogeneity, and then use simulations
              to measure the potential gains from using economic incentives relative to other
              regulatory approaches. This research both develops methods for measuring the
              gains associated with incentive-based regulation and applies the methods to
              historical data in the manufacturing sector.

	The researchers' development
              and application of a methodology for estimating cost heterogeneity and
              measuring the potential gains from incentive-based regulation will result in
              important tools for policymakers who must decide when and where such policies
              are most important to apply and how they should be designed. Since the
              implementation of these incentive-based programs can involve both
              administrative and political costs, the results of this research will provide
              valuable guidance for deciding which directions for policy reform offer the
              greatest opportunity to improve regulatory cost-effectiveness.

