Title       : IIA-Social Vulnerability Analysis: Spatial and Hazard Screening of Toxic
               Chemical Releases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2002      
File        : a9976483

Award Number: 9976483
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149002             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kingsley E. Haynes khaynes@gmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Troy D. Abel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Somik V. Lall  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas M. Dietz  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : George Mason University
	      4400 University Drive
	      Fairfax, VA  220304443    703/993-1000

NSF Program : 1369      DECIS MAKING & VAL FOR ENVIRON
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1094,1239,1321,1369,9278,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Two kinds of analysis have recently been prominent in the academic literature on
              environmental justice. First, numerous empirical efforts have examined the
              relationship between the location of environmental hazards and socially
              vulnerable populations. These quantitative studies continue to produce
              contradictory and contentious findings on environmental equity, due in large
              part to different definitions of the appropriate scale of analysis.  A second
              group of studies have focused on the development of hazard ranking indices to
              evaluate and compare the potential risks of chemical releases. These efforts
              have produced a variety of techniques to develop toxicity weighting algorithms.
              These current efforts have raised interesting questions, but are limited
              because: (1) they have not paid proper attention to issues of spatial scale,
              (2) they have mostly looked at singular hazards and not at risk indices, and
              (3) they have not properly considered multiple indicators of social
              vulnerability such as race/ethnicity, age, education, rurality, income, and
              unemployment. Working with the Risk-Screening Indicator Model in the EPA Office
              of Pollution Prevention and Toxics, this project will introduce methodological
              innovations that bridge these lines of environmental justice research. In
              particular, the methods will help develop an empirical tool that combines both
              spatial and hazard screening techniques. The primary hypothesis is that scale
              issues have a major impact on environmental equity analysis and play a large
              part in confounding results across different studies. Spatial scale and issues
              of aggregation have not been the focus of much critical examination in the
              academic literature on environmental equity. The proposed project will address
              the following questions. How does change in scale affect the analysis and
              outcomes of correlation between environmental hazard locations and
              socioeconomic variables? Are spatial clusters of environmental hazards and
              community socioeconomic variables evident in metropolitan areas? Can a
              hierarchy of metropolitan hazards be discerned across the metropolitan
              riskscape? By combining spatial and hazard screening tools, decision-makers and
              citizens can begin to determine clusters of varying hazards that may be
              impacting socially vulnerable populations. These techniques can move analysts
              towards methods to identify high environmental impact areas for further
              pollution prevention efforts or more focused risk assessments.
