Title       : PGE/LCP : Agents for Change: Robotics for Girls
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 27,  2001      
File        : a9976527

Award Number: 9976527
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Margrete S. Klein                       
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $874767             (Estimated)
Investigator: Christine M. Massey massey@linc.cis.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gerald F. Weaver  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              James P. Ostrowski  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomasennia Amos  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1544      GENDER DIVERSITY IN STEM EDUCA
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              	This 3-year project involves a collaboration among the Institute for Research
              in Cognitive Science, including the GRASP robotics lab, at the University of
              Pennsylvania and two Clusters in the School District of Philadelphia.  In
              response to current statistics documenting the extreme underrepresentation of
              girls and women in physical science and technology fields, the Agents for
              Change:  Robotics for Girls Project undertakes to develop school-based and
              informal education projects and curriculum materials for middle school students
              designed to increase girls' participation rates, achievement, and motivation in
              these domains.  Robotics is the organizing theme that provides a progressive
              sequence of hands-on learning experiences; has interesting and comprehensible
              applications; and integrates multiple areas of science, math, and technology in
              a seamless fashion.
	Project activities will a) emphasize connections to role
              models and mentors, b) provide extensive professional development for teachers
              and support staff to create equitable learning environments for
              underrepresented students, and c) involve families and community organizations
              in a support system helping girls to pursue education and careers related to
              science, mathematics, engineering, and technology.  The project will also be
              used as a research site to study current questions in gender and education with
              a large, multicultural pool of participants.

