Title       : FRG: Materials Computation Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 28,  2003     
File        : a9976550

Award Number: 9976550
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2000    
Expires     : December 31,  2003   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1110000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard M. Martin rmartin@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Duane D. Johnson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1589,9162,9216,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9976550
Martin
This Focused Research Group award supports research and
              education in computational materials theory and associated algorithm
              development.  It assists in establishing a  Materials Computation Center at the
              University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for interdisciplinary materials
              research. The award is jointly funded by the Divisions of Materials Research,
              Chemistry, Physics, Mathematical Sciences and the Office of Multidisciplinary
              Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, and by
              the Division of Advanced Computational Infrastructure and Research in the
              Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering.  The Center
              will provide a stimulating environment for state-of-the-art computational
              materials research and for development of new algorithms and computational
              approaches. The intellectual thrust of the research will be organized around
              broad research themes that will be coupled to experiment. The PIs will develop
              and maintain well-structured modular codes, educate students in the most modern
              computational materials science techniques, and apply computational methods to
              important materials problems.   Algorithmic developments will span the range
              from programs for teaching to forefront programs for research. Included are
              programs for molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulations, density functional
              theory calculations, and linear-scaling algorithms for large complex systems. 
              The PIs aim to work toward defining common analysis tools, input/output data
              structures, and well-defined interfaces between programs written by different
              people.  This helps enable compatibility and coupling in multi-scale
              applications, as well as heterogeneous computing via portable browser-type
              interfaces. The PIs intend to benchmark results on test problems and compare
              results with experiments.  The Center will have a core group of faculty from
              different disciplines committed to a program of collaborative research with
              shared postdoctoral associates and students. The Center will provide
              educational training and thesis research themes that address national needs for
              computational scientists with experience in applications to real problems and
              materials research.   In conjunction with the Computational Science and
              Engineering program at UIUC, students will acquire comprehensive computer
              science experience as well as basic science and engineering training, and they
              will gain valuable experience working in teams across disciplines. 

This
              award supports research and education in computational materials theory and
              associated algorithm development.  It assists in establishing a  Materials
              Computation Center at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign for
              interdisciplinary materials research. The award is jointly funded by the
              Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry, Physics, Mathematical Sciences and
              the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical
              and Physical Sciences, and by the Division of Advanced Computational
              Infrastructure and Research in the Directorate for Computer and Information
              Science and Engineering. The Center will provide a stimulating environment for
              state-of-the-art computational materials research and for development of new
              algorithms and computational approaches. The intellectual thrust of the
              research will be organized around broad research themes that will be coupled to
              experiment. The PIs will develop and maintain well-structured modular codes,
              educate students in the most modern computational materials science techniques,
              and apply computational methods to important materials problems.   Algorithmic
              developments will span the range from programs for teaching to forefront
              programs for research. Included are programs for molecular dynamics and Monte
              Carlo simulations, density functional theory calculations, and linear-scaling
              algorithms for large complex systems.  The PIs aim to work toward defining
              common analysis tools, input/output data structures, and well-defined
              interfaces between programs written by different people.  This helps enable
              compatibility and coupling in multi-scale applications, as well as
              heterogeneous computing via portable browser-type interfaces. The PIs intend to
              benchmark results on test problems and compare results with experiments.  The
              Center will have a core group of faculty from different disciplines committed
              to a program of collaborative research with shared postdoctoral associates and
              students. The Center will provide educational training and thesis research
              themes that address national needs for computational scientists with experience
              in applications to real problems and materials research.   In conjunction with
              the Computational Science and Engineering program at UIUC, students will
              acquire comprehensive computer science experience as well as basic science and
              engineering training, and they will gain valuable experience working in teams
              across disciplines. 



