Title       : Collaborative Research: Policy Evolution within an Organization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 17,  1999    
File        : a9976307

Award Number: 9976307
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $204345             (Estimated)
Investigator: James H. Hines jimhines@interserv.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program, this research focuses on organizational learning
              using an evolutionary model to provide managers with a set of rules or
              guidelines that will permit their companies and organizations to evolve more
              rapidly in desirable directions.  These rules might deal with the appropriate
              number of business units, promotion policies, or team-based decision making,
              among other organizational characteristics, and apply in a range of
              organizations from business to schools and universities.

The researchers see
              a useful analogy between genes and decision rules.  A decision rule produces a
              continuing stream of decisions that direct activity and in some sense determine
              the identity of an organization. This work involves understanding how abstract
              evolutionary mechanisms are (or can be) actually embodied in organizations and
              shaped by managers

The researchers will perform evolutionary audits to
              collect data on the evolutionary potential of several partner companies and a
              local school  The evolutionary audits will aid in the development of a computer
              simulation model of organizational evolution. The data collected and the model
              built will form a foundation for in-depth explorations of how managers can
              create an organization that will evolve quickly in the direction they desire.
              Partners including Price Waterhouse Coopers, Arthur Andersen, Pugh Roberts
              Associates, Eastman Chemicals, General Motors and  in Providence, Rhode Island.
              

The results of this study would provide a set of guidelines that will
              permit organizations to evolve more rapidly in desirable directions.

