Title       : Fabrication and Characterization of High Temperature Nanostructures
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a9976577

Award Number: 9976577
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 15,  1999 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gregory L. Snider snider.7@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              9976577
Snider

For decades the microelectronics industry has enjoyed growth
              that is unparalleled in history.  The engine of this growth is the field effect
              transistor (FET), and while the FET of today is a far cry from that of 1970 it
              is still an FET.  Transistors in modem integrated circuits are used as current
              switches not unlike the electromechanical relays used by Konrad Zuse in the
              1930s.  The Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) roadmap calls for
              continued dependence on FETs until the year 2010, but after that time the path
              is unclear.  To achieve ever higher integration levels will require an approach
              that avoids the undesirable effects that appear in very small FETs.  One
              possible path for the industry is a switch to a paradigm based on
              nanostractures rather than FETs. In nanostructures, the device performance
              typically improves as the size decreases.  Operating temperature is perhaps the
              greatest obstacle to the adoption of nanostructures.  Most nanostructure
              function only at temperatures near that of liquid helium.  A second obstacle is
              the need for new circuit architecture, since nanostructures make poor
              transistors.

This proposal seeks to address both of these obstacles.  A
              novel fabrication technique based on AFM oxidation is proposed, to produce
              nanostructure devices with an operating temperature in the range of 20 to 77K. 
              In this process a metal film is patterned by anodic oxidation, controlled by
              the AFM, and then reacted with the underlying silicon layer to form a silicide.
               The silicide undercuts the oxide line from each side, narrowing the line and
              in effect increasing the resolution of the patterning.  This process will
              produce nanostructures with narrower tunnel barriers than are possible using
              conventional AFM oxidation.  Narrower barriers give a lower junction resistance
              and increased device speed.

The new process will be used to fabricate
              quantum-dot cellular automata (QCA) cells.  QCA is an architecture which builds
              upon the strengths of nanostructures, using them to store charge rather than to
              switch currents.  In the QCA paradigm information is encoded by the positions
              of electrons in a cluster of quantum dots forming cell.  The state of a QCA
              cell is determined by the state of its neighboring cells through the Coulomb
              interaction, and proper arrangements of cells can implement any logic function.
               Previous experiments have demonstrated the operation of a basic QCA cell, a
              line of cells, and an AND/OR gate.  Application of the new AFM silicide process
              will make it possible to demonstrate larger arrays of QCA cells operating at
              higher temperatures.
***



