Title       : Experimental Studies of Organic Crystals, Metals and Superconductors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a9976576

Award Number: 9976576
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: H. Hollis Wickman                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : February 1,  2000   
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $450000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Chaikin chaikin@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              9976576
Chaikin

This project uses a combination of magnetic fields, low
              temperatures, unusual materials, and novel lithographies to test some of the
              basic ideas of condensed matter physics. The Bechgaard salts (TMTSF)2 X (X=PF6,
              ClO4, etc.) are highly anisotropic electronic conductors, which exhibit many of
              the most interesting ground states in nature: metallic, superconducting, spin
              density wave, and quantum Hall effect. In addition, they show unique properties
              in a magnetic field where the magnetic length competes with the Fermi
              wave-vector to produce a cascade of phase transitions. These commensurability
              effects are also present in flux quantization experiments that are performed on
              patterned superconducting networks on a micron length scale, comparable to the
              coherence length. Similar coherent interference effects may occur in
              semiconductors and metals when patterned on the nanometer length scale. Our
              fabrication of patterns on this length scale, using diblock copolymers as
              lithographic masks opens up new possibilities for device experiments where the
              modulation potential is much smaller than the elastic mean free path.
%%%
The
              aim of this research is to make fundamental studies of electronic systems and
              the development of new cross-disciplinary techniques for using polymers to
              control electronic properties. Conventional lithography is presently limited to
              structures on the scale of tenths of microns whereas self-assembled polymers
              have spacings on a 5-50 nanometer scale. Diblock copolymers have been used by
              these researchers as lithographic masks to pattern semiconductors and metals at
              a density of trillions of structures on a 3-inch wafer. Studies will be made on
              the induced periodic structure to monitor their effect on the electronic
              properties of metals, semiconductors, and superconductors. Devices that may
              result from such studies include quantum dot lasers and ultra-dense memories.
              It is anticipated that some of the ways that electrons can adjust to periodic
              structures will be seen on the molecular level in the organic conductors where
              electrons form a charge density wave, and at the micron level where the
              magnetic flux locks into particular patterns on a superconducting grid.
              
***




