Title       : Connection to NSF's vBNS Network: A Proposal submitted by University of Puerto
               Rico Research Institutions and the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 9,  2002   
File        : a9976006

Award Number: 9976006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Gregory E Monaco                        
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1400000            (Estimated)
Investigator: Guy Cormier guy@hpcf.upr.edu  (Principal Investigator former)
              Brad R. Weiner  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
              Oscar Moreno  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : University of Puerto Rico
	      
	      San Juan, PR  00931    /   -

NSF Program : 4091      NETWORK INFRASTRUCTURE
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1072,4091,9150,9217,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              This high performance connections award provides support for three research
              
institutions and an NSF astronomy facility on the Island of Puerto Rico to
              
establish a very high performance connection to a gigapop on the mainland
              
(likely in Florida). The involved institutions include three major research
              
campuses of the University of Puerto Rico (Rio Piedras, Medical Sciences,
              
and Mayaguez) and the National Astronomy and Ionospher Center at Arecibo.
              
Included in the engineering plans is an aggregation point for island
              
connectivity and a high performance link from that aggregation point to the
              
mainland. Involvement of the Arecibo facility represents significant
              
opportunity for the entire national astronomy community to gain remote
              
access to an important telescopic resource. The addition of the University
              
of Puerto Rico to the community of universities involved in NGI, Internet2,
              
and advanced high performance networking brings into play important
              
research activities in the biological sciences, medicine, geophysical
              
sciences, physics, astronomy, and other fields. Of special note is the
              
Luquillo Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) project. Many collaborative
              
relationships with other U.S. universities are expected to be enhanced by
              
this network access.

