Title       : PPD: Disseminating Information on Accessible Laboratory Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : HRD 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 11,  2000      
File        : a9976086

Award Number: 9976086
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      HRD  DIVISION OF HUMAN RESOURCE DEVELOPMENT  
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $152502             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen Milchus karen.milchus@arch.gatech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : GA Tech Res Corp - GIT
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Atlanta, GA  303320420    404/385-0866

NSF Program : 1545      EHR ACT IN SEM FOR PER WITH DI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9179,SMET,
Abstract    :
              Students with disabilities who study science face a variety of barriers in
              accessing laboratory activities.  The Center for Rehabilitation Technology
              (CRT)  is proposing a dissemination project to train special education teachers
              and science teachers about modifying laboratory experiments for students with
              disabilities.  CRT is completing an NSF project, Developing Accessible
              Laboratory Experiments (HRD-9700150), that is developing a reference guide and
              instructional materials that can be used to train teachers on the use of
              adapted lab equipment.  The project is using several strategies for making
              science experiments accessible, including:

 Interfacing computer access
              technologies with computer-based laboratory equipment;

 Interfacing computer
              access technologies with computer simulations of experiments; and

 Adapting
              traditional laboratory equipment for use by people with disabilities.

The
              project has been presented at five conferences to date, but the presentations
              provided a project overview rather than detailed, hands-on instruction.

The
              project is expanding the resource guide created under HRD-9700160.  Under the
              previous project, CRT is creating a resource guide on the Internet.  Those
              efforts have been funded, in part, by grants from the NEC Foundation and Toyota
              Foundation.  We are in the process of teaming with EASI to be their primary
              Internet link for information on laboratory accessibility.  We would like to
              include additional illustrations, audio, and video demonstrations (captioned
              and with audio description) on this site.  Educators will be able to read
              through the experiment descriptions, then see a video explanation of how the
              equipment was set up and conducted.  These video clips will also be made
              available to other NSF projects for use in their outreach activities to
              educators.

The project is creating an interactive CD version of the resource
              guide.   Although more schools are becoming connected to the Internet, not all
              teachers currently have access.  We would like to create an interactive CD
              version of the resource guide that would include the audio, video, and
              illustrations described above.  Other NSF laboratory access projects will be
              invited to contribute materials to the CD.  One thousand copies of the CD will
              be distributed for free, with additional copies available at cost.  Publishers
              of the science materials that we tested will be contacted to help with the
              dissemination of these materials.  Vernier Software has already agreed to
              include information about the resource guide in the materials that they send to
              their customers.

The project is conducting instructional workshops.  Project
              staff will conduct workshops at ten national conferences that are attended by
              special education or science teachers (e.g., National Science Teachers
              Association, Closing the Gap).  Two workshops will be developed, one on using
              modified laboratory equipment and one on using computer-controlled labs.  A
              "train-the trainer" approach will be used, so that teachers will be able to
              train their co-workers on how to make accommodations in the science classroom. 
              We expect about 25 teachers per workshop, for a total of 250-500 teachers.


