Title       : Heme Regulation of Mannoprotein Expression in S. cerevisiae.
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  1999     
File        : a9976571

Award Number: 9976571
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2001  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $49952              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles V. Lowry cvlowry@aol.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Albany Medical College
	      47 New Scotland Avenue
	      Albany, NY  122083412    518/445-5582

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lowry
	The dan/tir mannoprotein genes are induced during anaerobiosis and
              repressed during aerobic growth by the signal molecule,  heme.  At the same
              time  the main vegetative cell wall proteins Cwp1 and Cwp2 are down-regulated, 
              by some of the same regulatory factors.    The mechanism of  anaerobic
              induction and heme repression of the Dan and Tir proteins will be studied using
              molecular genetic and biochemical strategies.    The aerobic induction of the
              cwp mannoprotein genes will not be studied directly in this project,  though
              insight about the regulatory mechanism will be obtained during analysis of the 
              reciprocally related dan/tir system.    The principal objective  is elucidation
              of the  mechanism of heme regulation through the Mox4 activation factor;
              molecular genetics will be used to delineate the main features of the
              regulatory pathway and to lay the groundwork for biochemical analysis in
              subsequent  years. Two likely modes of regulation through Mox4 are
              hypothesized: the Mox repressors may mediate the heme repression signal through
              their effect on MOX4 expression, or  they may function in conjunction with
              Mox4, or both.   The working mechanistic hypothesis is that Mox4,  which is
              somewhat homologous to Gal4 in sequence, is also functionally homologous, 
              targeted by a repressor ligand analogous to Gal80.     Over-expression of Mox4
              has been found to partially bypass  heme repression,  suggesting that normal
              anaerobic induction of the dan/tir genes is partly due to the observed
              anaerobic induction of MOX4 ;   at the same time moderate expression
              (sufficient to repress CWP2) did not cause constitutive DAN1 expression, 
              suggesting that heme-sensitive repression factors do play a direct regulatory
              role when they are not overwhelmed by excess Mox4.    Initial experiments will
              focus on the functional domains of Mox4 which are involved in DNA binding, 
              transcriptional activation,  and response to heme inhibition.   A set of pGAL
              expression plasmids encoding forms mutated within these presumptive domains
              will be tested.   Among the constructs is the dominant G888D ("upc2-1") allele
              which is reported to impose constitutive expression,  presumably because it has
              lost affinity or sensitivity to the hypothetical repressor (the phenotype of
              this mutation is a key argument for the Gal4:Gal80 analogy).    Competition
              experiments using non-functional forms of Mox4 containing the presumptive
              regulatory domain in wildtype or mutant form will be used to determine whether
              a repressor ligand can be titrated away from the native Mox4 protein and
              relieve aerobic repression  ( recalling that C-terminal fragments of Gal4 also
              cause constitutive expression),  and if so, whether mutations in the G888
              domain affect this competition.     After being cloned, the MOX1,  MOX2, and
              MOX3 genes,  which encode dan/tir repression factors,  will be manipulated
              genetically to assess their regulatory function,  and to look for interactions
              with Mox4.   To begin to define the regulatory mechanism biochemically, gel
              shift experiments using cell extracts from cells expressing wildtype and mutant
              factors will be used to identify DNA-Mox4 complexes and possibly
              DNA-Mox4-repressor hetero-complexes. 
	The  switch from one set of cell wall
              proteins to another- a change of skin- during anaerobiosis,  and to some extent
              during cold shock, is an interesting  developmental phenomenon involving groups
              of genes responding in an opposite way to a common signal,  and mediated by a
              common set of transcription factors.   Such well-defined systems in yeast, 
              with its genetic tractability,  have proven to be of great value as paradigms
              for differentiation in higher eukaryotes.  This system shows many of the
              complexities of higher systems- signal crosstalk,  multiple factors, 
              antagonism between activation and repression factors,  differential response to
              common signals,  etc. - but is still highly amenable to thorough analysis.  
              The signalling mechanism involved in the reciprocal regulation of the two gene
              families by heme is also of general interest in understanding the biological
              response to oxygen.   Throughout the history of biochemistry,  S. cerevisiae, 
              as an eminently facultative organism, has provided an invaluable model in
              understanding the biological role of oxygen.  Here the model will be extended
              to the role of oxygen in gene expression. 	




