Title       : Perception and Control: A Dynamic Perspective
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  1999    
File        : a9976174

Award Number: 9976174
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Radhakisan S. Baheti                    
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bijoy K. Ghosh ghosh@netra.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 1518      CONTROL, NETWORKS, & COMP INTE
Fld Applictn: 0112000   System Theory                           
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              An intelligent system needs to control the flow of information through judicious
              choice of its scarce resources.  In Biology and in Engineering, Motion and
              Shape Estimation is probably the most important subtask that the visual pathway
              needs to perform.  In this research, we concentrate on MOTION and study how an
              Artificial Turtle might visually attend to its prey or in engineering, how a
              robot might control its gaze and lock on to a moving target.  Our starting
              problem is the engineering problem of generating reasonable motion models that
              describe the optical flow on the retina, how the retinal flow is represented by
              neural signals and how these motion parameters can be estimated using robust
              filters operating on a sequence of noisy observed spikes.  Our second problem,
              is to study how the optical flow is internalized by the visual pathway.  This
              involves representation of an analog signal by the neural circuit, stable
              communication of the neural code, from retina to cortex and finally computation
              at each stage but predominantly at the cortex.  Our third problem is to view
              the cortex dynamically and study the feedback and feedforward interconnection
              of the various cells.  We introduce a new neurodynamical system with Automatic
              Gain Control and plan to compare our model with known experimental data.  We
              would like to know under what condition the cortex remains a stable dynamical
              system.  We also propose to study the frequency response of the cortical
              interconnection.  Our last problem is to study the motor control problem
              pertaining to the eye movement.  If the turtle has to stare at its prey, both
              the instantaneous position of  the prey and in input to the eye-movement
              control system are analog signals that have to be represented by neural codes. 
              Such a tracking problem with both the tracking signals and the control signals
              are represented neurally has never been studied.  Specifically, we would like
              to design a neural circuit that would generate the required control inputs to
              maintain a given eye position or to gaze at a given target.
This research is
              about Dynamics and Control with neural encoding, interneuron communication and
              computation with the eventual goal to perceive and act intelligently in a
              dynamic environment

