Title       : Lignins, (Oligo)lignans, and
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 30,  2001       
File        : a9976684

Award Number: 9976684
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1999  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $270000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Norman G. Lewis lewisn@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Laurence B. Davin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Lewis

	This particular project will establish as the first objective whether
              an entire class of dirigent proteins exists in Eucommia, Linum, Schizandra and
              Larrea species, and which individually differ in the distinctive 8-8' coupling
              modes stipulated.  It is anticipated that each selected plant species harbors a
              distinct dirigent protein which differs in either preferred substrate utilized
              and/or stereoselectivity engendered during radical-radical coupling.  Using
              either cDNA library screening and/or RT-PCR approaches, the dirigent protein
              homologues from each species will be obtained, with specific coupling modes
              encoded determined through heterologous expression of functionally competent
              recombinant dirigent proteins.  Additionally, this phase of the study will
              include identifying the tissues and developmental stages involved in dirigent
              protein gene expression/protein localization in these particular species, at
              tissue and (sub)cellular levels.  In the second objective of this study, we
              will seek to demonstrate that lignification in the plant cell wall is
              stipulated through the participation of arrays of dirigent protein sites (or an
              equivalent thereof) which control both linkage type and monomer(s) involved. 
              Particular attention will be given to demonstrating formation of the so-called
              8-O-4' linkage in lignins obtained in vitro, since this linkage predominates in
              lignins in vivo.
	The lignin biopolymers and (oligomeric) lignans account for
              nearly 30% of organic carbon circulating in the biosphere, being major
              constituents of vascular plants.  The lignins are structural cell wall
              constituents without which plants would be unable to either stand vertically
              and/or form their woody tissues; the (oligomeric) lignans, while derived from
              the same precursors as lignins, are employed in plant defense roles (e.g. as
              antioxidants, bactericides, antiviral and antifeedant compounds, etc.).
	The
              current project builds on our recent discovery of dirigent proteins which, in
              turn, gives incisive insight into at least one of the principal mechanisms
              whereby living organisms (plants) can control the outcome of radical-radical
              coupling.  Until this discovery, such conversions had been considered as solely
              in the realm of non-specific oxidative conversions, such as those catalyzed by
              O2/laccases and peroxidases/H2O2.

