Title       : Integrating Suppliers and Customers into Environmental Management Efforts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  1999    
File        : a9976530

Award Number: 9976530
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John L. Naman                           
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : October 1,  1999    
Expires     : September 30,  2003  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark P. Sharfman sharfman@aardvark.ucs.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Anex  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Teresa M. Shaft  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 5376      INNOVATION & ORGANIZATIONAL CH
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With support from the National Science Foundation's Innovation and
              Organizational Change Program and GOALI, this project tests competing political
              economy models of the changes required to develop and maintain the cooperation
              with suppliers and customers necessary for successful life cycle oriented
              environmental management (LCOEM). Firms are under increasing pressure from
              market and legal forces to change their approach to environmental management a
              more innovative one where they reduce pollution inside the firm and beyond
              their own boundaries.  Firms do so by managing the entire physical system life
              cycle of their products or services from the creation of inputs to the final
              disposal of outputs.  LCOEM requires that for a firm to improve its overall
              environmental performance, it must consider the effects both up and downstream
              from its own efforts. 

To address these life-cycle effects, the
              environmental activities of suppliers and the environmental needs of customers
              must become part of the focal firm's environmental management efforts. Data
              from a multi- informant, mailed survey will be used to test the competing
              theoretical models of inter firm cooperation against each other, as well as
              provide data for the benchmarking study. 

With the results of this study,
              firms will be able to better develop and maintain the inter firm relationships
              necessary for LCOEM by overcoming the barriers to change that such cooperation
              requires.  As firms improve their inter firm environmental cooperation, society
              benefits from the improved environmental performance.

