Title       : New Roles for Soluble Polymers in Homogeneous Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 12,  2001     
File        : a0010103

Award Number: 0010103
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  2001      
Expires     : March 31,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $378500             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Bergbreiter bergbreiter@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1950,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor David E. Bergbreiter, of the Department of Chemistry at Texas A&M
              University, is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              for his studies of new roles for soluble polymers in homogeneous catalysis. By
              designing polymer supports with tunable solubility, Professor Bergbreiter will
              develop schemes permitting the facile separation, recovery, and reuse of the
              polymer-bound catalysts for various metal-catalyzed reactions, including the
              Heck reaction, Suzuki coupling, and alkene isomerization. Polyvalent
              interpolymer hydrogen-bonding will be examined as an approach to the formation
              of insoluble, recoverable polymer gels. The conditions for minimal interpolymer
              interaction of two different supported catalysts or metal complexes will be
              defined by variable temperature 31P NMR spectroscopy, studies which will also
              provide insight into intrapolymer complexation. The results of these studies,
              coupled with  the solubility control afforded by soluble polymers, will be used
              to develop new combinatorial approaches to catalyst testing.

While soluble
              catalysts offer many advantages over their insoluble counterparts, they are
              often difficult to separate from the desired products of their reactions, a
              problem with regards to both contamination of the products and difficulty in
              recovery or reuse of the catalyst. By exploring polymeric supports for
              catalysts which are soluble under desired reaction conditions but are rendered
              insoluble or easily separable under appropriate conditions by their detailed
              structures, and with the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry
              Program, Professor David E. Bergbreiter, of the Department of Chemistry at
              Texas A&M University, is developing schemes permitting the facile separation,
              recovery, and reuse of polymer-bound catalysts for a variety of metal-catalyzed
              reactions.
