Title       : The Impact Project: Determining the Impact of Software Engineering Research upon
               Practice
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 9,  2000   
File        : a0010041

Award Number: 0010041
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank D. Anger                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : November 15,  2000  
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24500              (Estimated)
Investigator: Alexander L. Wolf   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Assoc For Computing Mach
	      1515 Broadway, 17th Floor
	      New York, NY  100365702    212/869-7440

NSF Program : 2880      SOFTWARE ENGINEERING AND LANGU
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9216,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Impact Project:  Determining the Impact of Software Engineering Research
              upon Practice 

The goal of the Impact Project, an international
              collaboration among U.S. and European Union software engineers, is to study the
              impact that software engineering research has had upon software development
              practice. The reasons for doing this include: identifying contributions that
              have had substantial impact, determining research modalities that have been
              relatively more successful, and anticipating the directions that software
              engineering research might most effectively pursue, based upon its history and
              positioning. Impact Project research will be useful to the software engineering
              research and development communities, as well as to other academic disciplines,
              government funding agencies, and the public at large in helping with the
              objective assessment of the software engineering community's record of
              achievement. The project is to be carried out as a special initiative of ACM
              SIGSOFT, which will provide partial support. The research work is to be
              coordinated by steering committee, led by an Executive Committee. The work
              itself will have two organizational thrusts: 1) to seek on a
              technology-by-technology basis, the source of the ideas, designs, and working
              prototypes of widely used software technologies, and 2) to examine the ways in
              which software engineering research directions and areas have stimulated or
              been amalgamated into commonly used technologies.  The output of the project
              will be series of documents and briefings targeted to different audiences.

