Title       : Nonlinear Dynamics in Semiconductor Lasers Due to Filtered Optical Feedback:
               Fundamental Issues, and Applications to Chaotic Encryption and Signal Routing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0010092

Award Number: 0010092
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gautam Vemuri   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Indiana University
	      P O Box 1847
	      Bloomington, IN  474021847    812/855-0516

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This proposal proposes a three year program of studies on nonlinear dynamics in
              diode lasers
that arise from filtered optical feedback (FOF). FOF differs from
              conventional feedback (COF)
in that the feedback light is spectrally filtered
              by an optical element that is external to the laser,
before coupling back into
              the laser. The alterations in the dynamics due to FOF, when compared to COF are
              quite dramatic; more significantly, the proposal provides clear evidence of how
              FOF can be used to control the dynamics of the laser. Such control can be used
              to force the laser into regions of the dynamical phase space where it exhibits
              a desired dynamical response.

In addition to the fundamental scientific
              issues that are inherent to FOF in diode lasers,
the application of the
              control capability towards two ends will be explored. These are
              chaotic
encryption and signal routing. In case of the former, the emphasis
              will be on making the
wavelength of the laser light chaotic, and then
              controlling the bandwidth of the chaotic
fluctuations. 

The direct impact
              of the work will be on telecom systems, and the infrastructure that
              is
critical to all-optical communication systems. A successful completion of
              the project may spur
the telecommunications industry to view FOF as a possible
              control mechanism for tailoring the
dynamical response of diode lasers. The
              broader impact will be on the laser dynamics
community, and especially those
              that are studying issues like COF, optical injection, and
bifurcations in
              diode lasers. In addition, because FOF is a prototypical laboratory example
              of
logistic maps, and a test bed for mathematical models that rely on
              time-delayed equations, it's
anticipated that the applied mathematics and
              nonlinear dynamics community will be influenced by this work.
