Title       : Experimental and Theoretical Investigation of Deformation in Granular Materials:
               A Micromechanics Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 16,  2002   
File        : a0010124

Award Number: 0010124
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Fragaszy                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : March 15,  2001     
Expires     : February 28,  2005   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $288221             (Estimated)
Investigator: Balasingam Muhunthan muhuntha@wsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Eyad A. Masad  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Hussein M. Zbib  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1634      GEOMECHANICS & GEOTECHNIC SYST
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              The deformation of soils in the field and laboratory are commonly observed to
              concentrate into shear bands formed during strain localization.  While this
              mechanism is widely appreciated by engineers and researchers, it remains
              difficult to model, predict and analyze. The main difficulty can be attributed
              to the fact that while classical continuum mechanics models that do not include
              microstructure length scales can predict the onset of instability, they cannot
              predict the size and evolution of the shear bands.  In particular, the
              classical theories of plasticity break down in the post-bifurcation regime.
              

The main objective of this study is to develop a microstructure based
              continuum model to study deformation and localization in granular materials.
              The model is based on crystal plasticity but includes two microstructure length
              scales; one associated with the plastic curvature (orientation re-distribution)
              and the other related to the porosity re-distribution, both of which can be
              directly quantified by experiments. 

The study is unique in that the
              microstructure model parameters are determined directly from measurements. 
              Granular specimens are hardened by impregnation with resin and their
              microstructure captured by means of non-invasive x-ray computer tomography. 
              Evolution of the microstructure model parameters is monitored at various stages
              of shear deformation.  The model will be implemented into a 3-D finite element
              code and used to identify deformation patterning, softening, and instabilities
              (shear banding and liquefaction) in boundary value problems.

The
              experimental and analytical program will lead to a better understanding of the
              phenomenon of bifurcation and localization and to analytical methods for
              analyzing strain localization not only in laboratory specimens, but also in
              practical boundary value problems in geotechnical engineering.  The outcome of
              this work would also have implications to the modeling of other type of
              materials such as metals and composites that exhibit deformation instabilities
              and shear banding.

