Title       : Statistical Geometry of Weaves in Quantum Gravity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : PHY 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2001      
File        : a0010061

Award Number: 0010061
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Beverly K. Berger                       
	      PHY  DIVISION OF PHYSICS                     
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $30000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luca Bombelli bombelli@olemiss.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Mississippi
	      
	      University, MS  38677    662/915-7482

NSF Program : 1244      GRAVITATIONAL THEORY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project is part of an ongoing effort by a large number of 
researchers to
              develop a quantum gravity theory, which fully 
incorporates quantum principles
              into general relativity and 
gravitation.  Many approaches have been proposed
              over the years; 
currently, the two that are widely regarded as the most
              promising 
ones are superstring theory, which emphasizes the relation of other
              
forces with gravitation, and quantum geometry, which emphasizes the 
need to
              understand the fundamental structure of space and time. 
These two approaches
              may be related to each other and lead to 
complementary views of the same
              theory, but at present they are being 
independently pursued.  This project
              will contribute to the quantum 
geometry approach, which uses the Ashtekar
              variables for general 
relativity and "weaves" or networks of points to
              replace smooth 
space.  The goal is to use statistical techniques and computer
              
simulations to study in detail (i) which combinations of such 
networks are
              the ones we ordinarily observe as smooth space, and (ii) 
how large the
              uncertainties or fluctuations of space are as a result. 
While calculations by
              other researchers have given approximate, 
preliminary results on the first
              part, the techniques that will be 
used in this project are unique in enabling
              us to address the second 
one.

From the point of view of our basic
              understanding of nature, the 
quantum gravity program is often listed as one
              of the top outstanding 
problems today.  Both quantum theory and general
              relativity are 
supposedly applicable to all physical phenomena, and this can
              only be 
true if they are compatible with each other.  We have reason to
              
believe that, once we understand their connection well, quantum 
gravity
              will have applications in many different areas, similarly to 
what happened
              with quantum theory almost 100 years ago.  The 
suggestion has been made, for
              example, that quantum gravity sets the 
ultimate limits for information
              storage and computation capabilities. 
For the time being, however, we need to
              test the theory with simpler 
predictions that can be verified, such as the
              effect of these 
fluctuating "weaves" on particles and radiation that reach us
              from 
distant galaxies across billions of light years.  Successfully
              
predicting effects such as this one will lead to progress in quantum
              
gravity, and will also give us a new tool for the analysis of 
information
              from the most distant parts of the universe.  This 
project at the University
              of Mississippi will contribute by helping 
develop a reliable working model
              for the fluctuating weaves that make 
up space, as well as using the excellent
              computational facilities of 
the University and helping train students in the
              use of computational 
techniques.
