Title       : A Confocal Microscope for Biological Research and Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0010080

Award Number: 0010080
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2003      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $196952             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jesus Garcia-Martinez garmar@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Sergey V. Popov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mark M. Rasenick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              R. John Solaro  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to aid in the purchase of a laser confocal microscope
              and related imaging equipment for use by faculty and students at the Chicago
              campus of the University of Illinois.  The instrument will be placed in
              separate room where students, postdoctoral fellows and faculty will have ready
              access.  Among the research areas that will benefit from availability of the
              instrument are studies of calcium channels in muscle, cardiac myofilament
              responsiveness to calcium, microtubule translocation in growing axons, and G
              protein signaling by tubulin.  The instrument will also be used to train
              students at all levels in use of confocal microscopy, a key technology in
              modern cell biology.  Over the last decade, the availability of the confocal
              microscope has revolutionized study of three-dimensional structure in living
              tissues and, together with a variety of injectable reporter molecules, of the
              intracellular location of calcium and other molecules important in the
              regulation of cellular function.  The planned uses for the instrument are
              typical of the types of studies that have been made possible by the development
              of the confocal microscopy.
