Title       : Query Processing in Pervasive Location Aware Computing Environments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 25,  2001 
File        : a0010044

Award Number: 0010044
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $220000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Susanne E. Hambrusch seh@cs.purdue.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Walid G. Aref  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sunil K. Prabhakar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Purdue University
	      610 Purdue Mall
	      West Lafayette, IN  47907    765/494-4600

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              Abstract:
This proposal centers on research challenges arising from the
              realization of Pervasive Location-Aware Computing Environments (PLACE). In
              PLACE, mobile objects are aware of their own locations as well as
those of
              surrounding objects. Such an environment enables (i) the navigation of moving
              objects, (ii) the execution of continuous queries about moving objects, and
              (iii) services for groups of moving 
objects. The pervasive nature of
              location-aware objects, the need for timely responses to numerous concurrent
              continuous queries dependent upon continuously arriving data pose new
              challenges for scalable query processing.

The proposed research investigates
              query processing, data management, and broadcasting techniques for the
              efficient execution of continuous queries. The proposed techniques include (i)
              the use of data filters and indexing techniques to reduce the amount of data
              the queries need to analyze, and (ii) the development of techniques for
              executing continuous queries in an environment characterized by differences in
              bandwidth, communication costs, and computational capabilities of the objects.
              The proposal includes building a prototype system to validate and evaluate the
              proposed techniques and solutions.
