Title       : Computing Education for Every Student in Secondary Schools
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ESI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 27,  2002      
File        : a0010064

Award Number: 0010064
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Michael Haney                           
	      ESI  DIV OF ELEM SECONDARY & INFORMAL SCI ED 
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1895957            (Estimated)
Investigator: Matthias Felleisen matthias@ccs.neu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Kathi Fisler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew R. Flatt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen Bloch  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Shriram Krishnamurthi  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northeastern University
	      360 Huntington Avenue
	      Boston, MA  021155096    617/373-5600

NSF Program : 7300      TEACHER ENHANCEMENT PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9177,SMET,
Abstract    :
              This project emphasizes the principles of problem solving and program design
              using Scheme.  Students learn to solve problems in a systematic manner and are
              able to use those skills in many domains, not just computing.  The pedagogical
              approach is based on the belief that the conventional approach to computer
              science in high school is inappropriate, and, with an emphasis on code
              generation and successive modification by steps, is more consistent with
              computer science from the early 1980s.  The emphasis on grammar rules is
              inconsistent with current methods.  The results-dated methodologies have been
              that secondary schools have small computer science enrollments and encounter
              diminishing interest even by the more mathematically inclined students.

The
              project is based on the introductory computer science curriculum developed at
              Rice University, and the PIs have tested these methods in high schools and
              found the students to be more receptive and to learn more about computational
              problem solving.  The approximately 310 participating teachers learn a
              dramatically different and more applicable approach through workshops at
              Northeastern University, Adelphi University, Brown University, the University
              of Utah, and Worcester Polytechnic Institute.  Teachers are introduced to the
              new content, approaches and software.  A central Web repository is maintained
              for distribution and exchange.  The teachers receive forty contact hours and
              extensive follow-up activities and supports plus 3 graduate credits.


