Title       : Nitride -based Cold Cathodes for Microdevice Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2001       
File        : a0010100

Award Number: 0010100
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Usha Varshney                           
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $209962             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nacer Badi nbadi@att.net  (Principal Investigator current)
              Abdelhak Bensaoula  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Houston
	      4800 Calhoun Boulevard
	      Houston, TX  772042015    713/743-9222

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
               
The project develops nitride-based cold cathode electron emitters capable of
              operating under near-atmospheric pressure and in chemically active
              environments, and works out commercially feasible fabrication techniques for
              these devices. 
Efforts will be concentrated on nanocrystalline boron/carbon
              nitride (BN/CN) materials. These are excellent candidates for field emitter
              devices, with low turn-on field strengths and high emission currents, even in
              relatively high-pressure regimes. Both show excellent chemical, thermal, and
              mechanical stability, high sputtering resistance, and, therefore, longer
              cathode lifetimes. They are compatible with conventional silicon substrates,
              allowing straightforward device integration with excitation circuitry,
              amplifiers, and signal conditioners. They are superior alternatives to diamond
              and other carbon-based thin films, being easier to deposit and pattern, and
              more resistant to attack by oxygen and water vapor. 
Some of the critical
              electronic properties will be optimized by post-growth modification techniques.
              Ion implantation and irradiation with x-rays and excimer lasers will be used to
              lower the threshold voltage, without detrimental changes to emission
              stability.
We will also model the electron emission process in these films.
              Our model will cover electron injection from the substrate to the emitting
              layer, electron transport through the material, and finally emission into the
              vacuum. Naturally, we expect the modeling and characterization phases of the
              study to feedback to each other, ultimately resulting in an effective tool for
              device design.
The final stage of the project will be development of a
              nitride-based pressure sensor. In contrast to current technologies, these
              microsensors should allow precise, accurate and reproducible pressure
              measurements over many decades of pressure. They also have the potential for
              integration in corrosive and high temperature environments. Finally, the drive
              and sensing electronics, which could be integrated on the same chip, can be
              significantly simpler than what is currently needed by conventional capacitive
              and piezoelectric sensors. 

