Title       : Model Decomposition for Multiple Time-Scale Nonlinear Dynamical Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0010085

Award Number: 0010085
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Alison Flatau                           
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $216898             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth D. Mease kmease@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1632      DYNAMIC SYSTEMS AND CONTROL
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1039,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              As the requirements for machines, structures, vehicles, and other mechanical
              systems become more ambitious and more demanding, the order and complexity of
              the mathematical models that must be confronted for analysis and design
              increases. Physical insight and analytical methods become less effective. Yet
              as the system dimension increases, so does the likelihood of multiple
              time-scales. The presence of two or more widely separated time-scales offers
              the opportunity for system decomposition and consequent simplified analysis and
              design. For a linear time-invariant system, both time and frequency domain
              methods are available to exploit this opportunity. For a nonlinear system, the
              analytical singular perturbation method is available. But this method is only
              applicable to a mathematical model in singularly perturbed form, and this form
              is not generally obtainable without a priori knowledge of the multiple
              time-scale structure.

The research objective is thus to develop a
              methodology for time-scale identification and reduced-order model development
              for application to finite dimensional nonlinear dynamical systems. Under
              previous NSF funding, the foundations of the methodology, which is based on
              finite-time Lyapunov exponents and vectors, have been developed. In the current
              project the methodology is used to investigate the time-scale structure in
              nonlinear dynamical systems that model mechanical systems. Exemplary systems
              that have yielded to the analytical singular perturbation method, and thus are
              known to have two or more time-scales, are investigated first to further refine
              the methodology. Next systems either known or suspected to have multiple
              time-scale behavior are investigated. An approach is then developed for using
              the time-scale information to construct a state transformation that will bring
              the system model into a form amenable to reduced-order analysis and control
              design.  The research will establish a significant new capability for nonlinear
              system analysis and design. The order reduction, better conditioning, and
              physical understanding -- previously obtainable only for low-order systems by
              clever analysts applying the analytical singular perturbation method -- will be
              obtainable for general nonlinear dynamical systems

