Title       : NSF-EC Activity: Nanometer Scale Induced Structure Between Amorphous Layers and
               Crystalline Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0010062

Award Number: 0010062
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $1709218            (Estimated)
Investigator: W. Craig Carter ccarter@pruffle.mit.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roger H. French  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wai-Yim Ching  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Yet-Ming Chiang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen H. Garofalini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : MIT
	      77 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021394307    617/253-1000

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1022,1589,1682,5914,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This combined experimental and computational effort investigates novel
              properties of stable intergranular films.  Stable films have nanoscale
              structures and compositions which would not be stable as a bulk phase and,
              therefore, can have physical properties that are not found in bulk phases.  For
              instance, the dielectric constant and the observed atomic structure of the
              intergranular films cannot be extrapolated from bulk behavior.  Furthermore,
              some physical attributes that are normally tailored by engineering processes,
              such as film width, become equilibrium quantities that are naturally uniform
              and highly tunable with composition.  Their stability is assumed to be
              associated with remnant order induced into their molecular structure from the
              crystalline materials proximate to them; we seek to characterize experimentally
              these films in silicate and titanate systems and find theoretical and
              computational models to categorize their behavior.  The thin films will be
              processed with controlled composition and characterized by combined
              experimental techniques (EXAFS, EXELFS, ELNES, VEELS and VUV spectroscopies,
              and HREM).  Models will be developed and correlated with experiments by
              combined ab-initio, density functional theory, OLCAO, molecular dynamics, and
              interface thermodynamics.
%%%
The production of new technological devices
              often depends on the development of a novel material or a new way to process
              materials that generate novel properties.  With ever smaller devices, there is
              an increased demand on precise material properties---as well as an increased
              technological reward.  In some materials, such as the silicates and titanates
              we investigate, the properties of materials undergo acute changes as the size
              of the material system (i.e. the materials and their architecture within a
              device) shrinks.  These changes can have profound effects on our ability to
              enhance and control properties. For instance, the electronic properties of very
              thin films may be modified for particular devices and our ability to engineer
              them may be enhanced due to the physical effects of their small size.  We will
              attempt to characterize and understand these effects with an integrated
              experimental, theoretical, and computational approach.  We expect that our
              results may used directly to enhance the properties of existing electronic
              devices and that our research may illuminate specific material properties that
              result in the production of new technologies.

This proposal was submitted in
              response to the solicitation "Proposals for Cooperative Activities in Materials
              Sciences between the National Science Foundation and the European Commission:
              NSF (00-18)".

