Title       : Purchase of an Oligonucleotide-Based Microarray System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 21,  2001      
File        : a0010019

Award Number: 0010019
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222309             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda K. Hanley-Bowdoin LINDA@BCHSERVER.BCH.NCSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
              Spencer V. Muse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Clouse  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : North Carolina State U
	      Lower Level Leazar Hall
	      Raleigh, NC  276957514    919/515-2444

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides funds to aid in purchase of an oligonucleotide microarray
              system together with computer equipment and software that will aid in analysis
              of data obtained with microarrays.  Equipment of this type can be used to
              determine the rate of expression of selected genes in an organism, or even that
              of all genes if the sequence of the organism's genome is known.  The equipment
              will be shared by seven faculty and by their students and research associates. 
               Of the seven, five will use the GeneChip technology to study plant development
              and pathogenesis using the arabidopsis model, one will use it for studies of
              the mouse, and one will develop improved informatics tools for analysis of
              microarray data. The equipment will be placed in a core facility that will
              allow its use by faculty other than the seven mentioned in the proposal, as
              well as its use in advanced courses for students.
The analysis of global
              patterns of gene expression made possible by use of microarrays can be used to
              identify genes associated with developmental stages, different tissues,
              response to environmental stimuli or to infection. Such studies facilitate the
              assignment of function to uncharacterized genes, and will lead to the
              identification of the regulatory networks responsible for normal and altered
              control of growth and differentiation.  

