Title       : Dynamics of Equilibrium Liquids, Supercooled Liquids, and Glasses
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0010117

Award Number: 0010117
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : May 1,  2001        
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $536400             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hans C. Andersen hca@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hans Andersen of Stanford University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to continue development of theoretical methods
              to calculate dynamical properties of liquids, supercooled liquids, and glasses
              at the molecular level.  The basic strategy is to use a formally exact theory
              to create approximate kinetic theories of liquids, and then perform molecular
              dynamics computer simulations to test the accuracy of these approximations. 
              Practical and accurate approximations capable of describing important physical
              processes that take place in low temperature liquids will be developed through
              this research.  The specific objectives of this project include: (1)
              understanding and describing quantitatively the change that occurs in the
              dynamics of molecules as a liquid material is cooled and molecules become
              trapped for an extended period of time in a "cage" formed by its neighbors, (2)
              developing an understanding of how structural changes that take place in
              supercooled liquids can affect the dynamics, (3) understanding the variety of
              relaxation processes that take place and the relationships among them, and
              ultimately (4) understanding the very slow relaxation processes at very low
              temperature that lead to the formation of a glass at the glass transition. 
              

Glasses are technologically important materials made from a variety of
              components, both organic and inorganic, both low molecular weights substances
              and polymers.  Examples include ordinary materials such as window glass and
              food containers, as well as advanced materials such as fiber optics for
              telecommunications, optical electronics, and solid electrolytes.  The
              properties of these materials depend on how they are made, using methods that
              usually involves preparation of a high temperature liquids followed by various
              cooling and processing steps.  The creation of optimal performance materials is
              currently guided largely by empirical observations.  Design of rational
              processing procedures is expected to be enhanced by the increased understanding
              of dynamics of these materials and their corresponding liquids that will emerge
              from this research effort.
