Title       : Microarray Scanner and Phosphoimager as Capital Improvements for Plant Genomic
               Infrastructure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DBI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 25,  2001       
File        : a0010091

Award Number: 0010091
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Gerald Selzer                           
	      DBI  DIV OF BIOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE        
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 15,  2001      
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $62686              (Estimated)
Investigator: Harold N. Trick trick@plantpath.ksu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Judith L. Roe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Bikram S. Gill  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Xuemin Wang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Scot H. Hulbert  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Kansas State University
	      2 Fairchild Hall
	      Manhattan, KS  665061103    913/532-6222

NSF Program : 1108      INSTRUMENTAT & INSTRUMENT DEVP
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9184,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This award provides support for purchase of a phosphor-imager to be placed in
              the University's Plant Biotechnology Center. There are already several items of
              genomics-related equipment in the Center, but there is no shared-use imager, a
              workhorse instrument in modern molecular biology.  Among the uses planned are
              research on the structure and function of expressed genes, functional and
              comparative genomics, gene mapping, plant cell-cycle studies, investigation of
              non-host disease resistance mechanisms, and regulation and function of
              lipid-based signaling. In addition to advancing research, the instrument will
              broaden the training of students, post-doctoral fellows, and visiting
              scientists by providing greater access to the latest and most up-to-date
              equipment. Imagers of this type replace the use of film in many research
              procedures that require localization of radioactively-labelled proteins and
              nucleic acids after polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis.  Use of the imager
              speeds up detection and measurement, as well as avoiding the need for chemicals
              and equipment used in film processing.
