Title       : GOALI/Collaborative Research: Capacity and Flexibility Investment Decisions in a
               Make-to-Order Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0010032

Award Number: 0010032
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janet M. Twomey                         
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2004        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149964             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ebru K. Bish ebru@vt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen R. Biller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1786      Manufacturing Enterprise Sys
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 1049,1465,1504,9102,9147,MANU,
Abstract    :
              This Collaborative Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
              project will study strategic capacity planning decisions and their impact on
              the supply chain in a make-to-order environment.  The project  will construct
              analytical models and develop analytical, numerical, and simulation methods
              that will be tested in General Motors' environment to guide the research
              direction and ensure their practicality and ease of implementation.  To provide
              their customers with customized products within reasonable lead-times at
              competitive prices, firms need to shift to make-to-order production where
              adequate capacity decisions are even more important than in the past. For a
              make-to-order strategy to be successful, supply and demand need to be
              reasonably balanced. This can be achieved through: (1) manufacturing
              flexibility, so that capacity can be shared among different products, (2) price
              flexibility, so that demand can be managed, and (3) delivery-time flexibility,
              so that demand coming from time-sensitive customers can be shifted in exchange
              for a price break.  The project will study the effect of each of these levers
              on supply chain performance and on capacity requirements to offer guidance to
              companies on the design and management of their make-to-order production
              systems.  In addition, the plan is to integrate the capacity investment
              decisions for products and additional features or options (e.g., vehicles and
              leather seats). Several issues need to be considered in the capacity analysis
              for these options: (1) The option and vehicle model capacity decisions are
              interdependent. (2) Demand for the various options might be correlated. (3)
              Customers have a different attitude towards different options. For example,
              they might not buy a car without an automatic transmission, but may accept
              other missing options, such as a vanity mirror. This leads to very different
              risks of over- and under-capacitizing for each particular option. Thus, the
              project will develop models that address capacity-pricing decisions considering
              customers' preferences.

The research will provide: (1) Analytical results
              and insights for better capacity planning in a make-to-order environment, and
              (2) Tools for vehicle and option capacity planning that consider uncertainty,
              demand management techniques, and the impact on operational supply chain costs.
                Also, the projected outcome is to develop general models that can be used in
              a wide range of industries and demonstrate their practical impact by
              implementing/testing them at General Motors.
