Title       : Aperiodic order: spectral theory, combinatorics, and dynamics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 14,  2001  
File        : a0010101

Award Number: 0010101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Roger T. Lewis                          
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : October 31,  2001    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $40899              (Estimated)
Investigator: David Damanik   (Principal Investigator current)
              Svetlana Jitomirskaya  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1281      ANALYSIS PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The central object of study are Schrodinger operators with
              potentials
displaying aperiodic order. In one dimension there have been
              recent
advances in the understanding of their spectral and quantum
              dynamical
properties, particularly in the case of the Fibonacci potential
              and
related models, so-called Sturmian potentials, which are the
              standard
models of one-dimensional quasicrystals. It is the goal of the
              proposed
research to extend the theory to larger classes of potentials in
              one
dimension and to tackle the higher dimensional case. A crucial tool in
              one
dimension is the trace map, an energy-indexed dynamical system which
              can
be used to characterize and study the spectrum of the operators.
              Along
with combinatorial partition results and Gordon-type criteria one
              can
obtain good bounds on generalized eigenfunctions from which one can
              deduce
spectral and quantum dynamical consequences. It appears feasible that
              this
approach is applicable to potentials beyond the class of
              Sturmian
potentials -- sufficiently low complexity should suffice to
              induce
partitions and trace maps. In higher dimensions the main goal is to
              find
an analog of Gordon's criterion which can serve as a link
              between
combinatorics and spectral theory.

The mathematics of aperiodic
              order is a young emerging field that has
sparked a lot of research activity
              since the mid-nineties. Researchers
from disciplines as diverse as spectral
              theory, group theory, dynamical
systems, combinatorics, and algebraic topology
              have found a common
ground that was motivated by the discovery of
              quasicrystals in 1984
and the subsequent reconsideration of the nature of
              order and ordered
structures. By now, quite a number of structural models for
              quasicrystals
have been proposed. Joint efforts are being undertaken to
              investigate
their properties and shed light on why quasicrystals exist, how
              they form,
why they are stable. Regarding their electronic transport
              properties, it
is expected that quasicrystals may exhibit anomalous behavior.
              It is
therefore planned to study transport properties of Sturmian and
              related
models from this perspective.

