Title       : Microscale Adaptive Optical Wavefront Correction
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 8,  2001     
File        : a0010026

Award Number: 0010026
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Gert Cauwenberghs gert@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Andreas G. Andreou  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Mikhail Vorontsov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph Etienne-Cummings  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Johns Hopkins University
	      3400 North Charles Street
	      Baltimore, MD  212182695    301/338-8000

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Phase distortions due to inhomogeneities in the optical path severely limit the
              perforinancc of a large class of optical systems for ground-to-ground and space
              communications, imaging through the atmosphere, medical laser beam focusing,
              among others. Demands on increased spatial resolutions and larger bandwidths
              call for an integrated approach to adaptive optics that modulates the wavefront
              in parallel at microscopic scale.

This collaborative effort combines
              expertise in adaptive optics, analog parallel very-large scale integrated
              (VLSI) niicrosys-tems, microfabrication and liquid-crystal molecular systems to
              create a new generation of adaptive micro-optical systems for high-resolution
              wavefront correction, with over 10,000 fully autonomous control elements
              integrated on a single, hybrid opti-cal/electronic chip. Autonomy is essential
              for high-bandwidth operation, and is obtained by integrating all adaptive
              functions directly on-chip.

At the architectural level, model-free adaptive
              control is implemented using parallel perturbation stochastic gradient descent
              optimization of an arbitrary, externally provided metric of system performance.
              At the physical level, high-speed wavefront control at micro-scale resolution
              is obtained by integrating a new type of fast nematic liquid-crystal (LC),
              operating at kilohertz- range bandwidths, onto the adaptive control chip.
              Silicon-on-sapphire (SoS) technology with ultra-thin silicon (UTSi)
              transis-tors provides a high-quality, low-noise, transparent active medium for
              high-density optical and electronic integration. We will investigate microscale
              structures of LC material sandwiched in between two transparent SoS wafers,
              implementing arrays of phase modulators with active electrodes implementing the
              adaptive algorithms in parallel. directly interfacing with the wave- front. The
              architectural and technological innovations combine to yield a projected system
              performance in excess of 108 control updates/sec. at least a factor 1,000
              better than presently existing adaptive optics systems in speed, density and
              cost.

This program integrates research and education in a sequence of
              project-intensive courses, where teams of graduate and undergraduate students
              learn to design. prototype and test adaptive optics co-processors, implemented
              in analog VLSI and fabricated through MOSIS. The adaptive co-processors will be
              configured to externally control a variety of fast LC and other spatial light
              phase modulators, available for experimentation at the Army Research Laboratory
              (ARL). In addition, we will make use of full-size UTSi SoS wafers provided by
              Peregrine Semiconductor, custom-fabricated in a special arrangement with
              Hopkins, to prototype a fully integrated version of consistent optical quality.
              The already polished SoS wafers will be post-processed at the JHU
              Microfabrication Laboratory and at Boulder Nonlinear Systems. Inc.. to pattern
              and deposit fast nematic LC in contact with SoS for fast spatial light phase
              modulation. The prototyped adaptive micro-optical systems will be
              experimentally demonstrated on various adaptive optics and imaging tasks
              including laser beam focusing and stabilization for optical communications.

