Title       : Meta-Analysis of Facial Identification Research: A Reappraisal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 18,  2001      
File        : a0010140

Award Number: 0010140
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $140560             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brian H. Bornstein bbornstein2@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Steven D. Penrod  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will examine mistaken eyewitness identifications as a principal
              source of erroneous convictions. Although a growing body of empirical research
              by psychologists provides insights into the factors contributing to mistaken
              identifications, and with increasing frequency, psychologists are called upon
              to provide courtroom testimony about those factors. Such expert testimony,
              however, is often criticized as unreliable. This project will examine the
              empirical questions of reliability and generalization of findings using a
              meta-analysis of existing studies of face recognition, in both the eyewitness
              and laboratory research paradigms.  In particular, the project will examine the
              strength and reliability of research findings concerning a large number of
              factors thought to influence identification accuracy and the relationships
              among research methods and the magnitude of effects produced by manipulations
              of substantive variables. Factors to be addressed include stable (e.g., sex,
              race) and malleable characteristics (e.g., stress, disguise) of both
              participants and targets, as well as situational (e.g., exposure duration) and
              procedural (e.g., lineup presentation) variables. Careful attention will be
              given in the meta-analysis to the different types of study characteristics,
              independent variables, and their operationalization employed in the research. 
              The project, as a result, will identify research and theoretical domains where
              findings are on the strongest and weakest footings and, most importantly, will
              test a series of hypotheses about methodological and substantive factors that
              enhance or limit the generalizability and theoretical implications of research
              results.
