Title       : Modeling and Optimization of Ultrafast and Low-Noise Thin Avalanche Photodiodes
               for Optical Communications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ECS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 7,  2001       
File        : a0010047

Award Number: 0010047
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Filbert J. Bartoli                      
	      ECS  DIV OF ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATIONS SYS
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : June 1,  2001       
Expires     : April 30,  2004      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $299830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Majeed M. Hayat   (Principal Investigator current)
              Yi Pan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Joe Campbell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Dayton
	      300 College Park
	      Dayton, OH  454690104    937/229-2919

NSF Program : 1517      ELECT, PHOTONICS, & DEVICE TEC
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program is a theoretical and experimental interdisciplinary effort
              that will lead to the design of a new generation of ultrafast and high-accuracy
              photodetectors. The program will focus on the widely-used class of
              photodetectors known as thin avalanche photodiodes (APDs). This program is
              motivated by the need to meet the increasing demand for bandwidth in
              next-generation optical core networks, where there is a need to develop a new
              generation of low-noise and high responsivity photodetectors with
              gain-bandwidth products that are far beyond the current state-of-the-art.
              Moreover, since the capability of a lightwave network is ultimately limited by
              its architecture and the performance of its components, a thorough
              understanding of the fundamental performance limits of applicable
              photodetectors significantly impacts the design of future communication
              networks. In addition, with the emerging int~rest in using
              wide-bandgap-material technology in various high- accuracy and ultrafast
              sensing applications, there is a need for the development of high-performance
              photodetectors using wide-bandgap materials such as CaN.
The first goal of
              this project is to develop and validate a rigorous renewal-theory-based model
              for the joint statistics of the gain and the response time of APDs. The model
              will be applicable to APDS with various structures and materials with special
              emphasis on thin APDs, which exhibit low multiplication noise and high
              bandwidth. The theory will specifically capture the important effect of dead
              space, which plays a principal role in the performance of thin APDs and
              significantly affects the performance of both ultrafast
              (intersymbol-interference limited) and lot-power (gain-fluctuation limited)
              applications. Significant improvements in the noise and bandwidth
              characteristics is to be achieved by reducing the thickness of the APD's
              multiplication layer, which is responsible for the device gain. To date, the
              fundamental limits of the statistics of the gain-bandwidth product for thin
              APDs, and more notably, the effect of reducing the thickness of the
              multiplication layer on the fluctuations in the response time remain unknown.
              These questions will be thoroughly addressed in this research and the
              fundamental limits of APD performance will be established.
The second goal of
              this project is to utilize the developed model to design and develop next-
              generation high-performance APD's. Device fabrication and characterization will
              be carried out at the existing facilities at the Microelectronics Research
              Center at the University of Texas in Austin. The role played by the thickness
              of the avalanche multiplication layer of the device will be thoroughly
              investigated in an effort to design devices with application-specific optimal
              charac-teristics. Low-noise devices with gain-bandwidth products well beyond
              500 CHz (bandwidths of 50-100 GHz) are to be developed in this program.
              Optimization criteria will include a) maximizing the data transmission rate
              subject to a fixed bit-error rate, which is applicable to
              intersymbol-interference-limited communication systems, and B) maximizing the
              receiver signal-to-noise ratio in power-limited sensing applications. As a tool
              in accomplishing the above objectives, a CAD tool will be designed consisting
              of custom-made parallel-computing algorithms intended for the high-performance
              implementation of the model and the optimization process.
The synergy between
              the investigators in this project, who have a demonstrated record in
              opto-electronic device modeling and fabrication, can lead to the development of
              devices with superb per-formance characteristics. The devices developed in this
              program will be useful for next-generation lightwave systems operating at 40
              0Hz (per channel) and beyond.

