Title       : The Discovery Approach to Undergraduate Introductory Physics Experiments
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 29,  1990      
File        : a9052194

Award Number: 9052194
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 15,  1990      
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $27455              (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Gastineau   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Lawrence University
	      Box 599
	      Appleton, WI  549120599    414/739-3681

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              13        Physics                                 
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Standard laboratory exercises in introductory physics courses have             
              little in common with actual research, and are not particularly                
              effective at developing the students' physical intuition.  This                
              project is reshaping the introductory physics laboratory exercises             
              to allow students the freedom and creativity to discover physical              
              phenomena and the laws that govern them.  When learning occurs by              
              discovery the development of physical intuition is greatly enhanced            
              when compared to traditional approaches.  Since there are no fixed             
              procedures for students to follow, students must have general purpose          
              and powerful laboratory tools.  Central to the implementation of               
              discovery experiments is the introduction of microcomputer based               
              laboratories (MBLs).  A network of eleven Macintosh SE computers               
              served by an SE/30 file server is the central tool.  To acquire data           
              from almost any experiment, each machine has an interface and sensor           
              assortment.  The sensors include photogates, ultrasonic rangers,               
              Geiger detectors, and force probes.  For example, with these tools             
              students may acquire the position of a moving object (perhaps                  
              themselves) as a function of time, and immediately see a graph of the          
              object's velocity or acceleration.  To analyze the computer acquired           
              data students again use general purpose tools. Computer spreadsheets,          
              graphing, and communication software are being used to quickly find            
              final results.  These software and hardware tools allow students to            
              investigate physical phenomena with a minimum of tedium, maximizing            
              the time spent doing physics.  The University is matching the award            
              with an equal amount of funds.
