Title       : Laboratory for Excellence in Undergraduate Research in Computer Science
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 18,  1990       
File        : a9052346

Award Number: 9052346
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : May 15,  1990       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $37020              (Estimated)
Investigator: Naveed A. Sherwani   (Principal Investigator current)
              Ajay K. Gupta  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John A. Kapenga  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Western Michigan Univ
	      1903 West Michigan Avenue
	      Kalamazoo, MI  49008    616/387-8298

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses a very critical problem of declining                    
              enrollments faced by all undergraduate computer science programs               
              across the nation.  Many key factors contributing to this decline              
              have been identified.  One important element is the lack of                    
              challenging research and project opportunities for the students.               
              Undergraduate studies in computer science is perceived by students             
              as long hours spent in text book reading and doing mundane                     
              programming assignments.  This is at a time when exciting                      
              discoveries are being made and the discipline is expanding at an               
              ever increasing rate.  It appears that the problem of declining                
              enrollment is a reflection of the gap which exists between                     
              research/development and undergraduate studies in computer science.            
              This project approaches the declining enrollment problem by                    
              introducing a challenging research/project component to the under-             
              graduate computer science courses.  The laboratory associated with             
              the project is exclusively for undergraduate research.  Principal              
              equipment necessary for this facility includes 6 SPARC1                        
              workstations, a plotter, a printer, and a tape drive.  The                     
              laboratory will be used by students to work on research projects               
              with faculty in the areas of Computer Chip Design (VLSI), Computer             
              Graphics, and Parallel/Distributed Processing projects.  The award             
              is being matched by an equal amount from the principal                         
              investigator's institution.
