Title       : An Undergraduate Parellel Processing Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 26,  1990      
File        : a9052113

Award Number: 9052113
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : July 1,  1990       
Expires     : December 31,  1992   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $68026              (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. Ben-Avi benavi@cooper.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cooper Union
	      Albert Nerken School of Engrg
	      New York, NY  100037120    212/353-4177

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Computers with traditional architectures suffer from an inherent               
              limitation known as the "von Neumann bottleneck."  Instructions are            
              retrieved from memory and are then executed sequentially, one-by-              
              one, by the Central Processing Unit (CPU).  However, the CPU is                
              generally capable of higher speeds than the memory sub-system in               
              which the program resides, so the system as a whole is slowed by               
              the rate at which instructions can be "fetched."  Furthermore, many            
              algorithms have portions which could be executed at the same time              
              or in "parallel" if facilities to do this exist.  Except for a few             
              expensive special-purpose machines, computers have been Single                 
              Instruction Single Data (SISD) processors, performing commands one             
              at a time without the possibility of concurrency.  There are                   
              applications which cannot be computerized without simultaneous                 
              execution of many instructions involving separate vectors or                   
              partitions of the data.  A modern Electrical Engineering curriculum            
              should include the application of parallel techniques to problems              
              at the frontiers of computing speed, including image and speech                
              analysis, high speed arithmetic, waveform synthesis and signal                 
              processing.  Therefore, this project establishes a laboratory                  
              dedicated to parallel computing using general purpose PCs as hosts             
              to multiprocessor boards.  This provides maximum flexibility in                
              configuring systems, the opportunity for incremental growth and the            
              immediate ability for undergraduates to take advantage of new and              
              emerging technology.  The award is being matched by an equal amount            
              from the principal investigator's institution.
