Title       : Upgrading and Integration of Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectroscopy (GC/MS) in the
               Undergraduate Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  1990     
File        : a9052319

Award Number: 9052319
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Bonnee Groover                          
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $26478              (Estimated)
Investigator: James J. Leary FAC LEAR@JMUVAX1  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gary P. Crowther  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas N. Gallaher  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : James Madison University
	      MSC 1502
	      Harrisonburg, VA  22807    540/568-6872

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              Throughout this decade our expertise in gas chromatography/mass                
              spectroscopy (GC/MS) has greatly increased and, as a result, so                
              has interest in, and anticipated utilization of this powerful                  
              instrumentation.  This project enabled the Chemistry Department                
              to purchase a gas chromatograph/mass spectrometer to replace                   
              unreliable instruments that no longer met the department's                     
              growing demands.  The acquisition gave the Department a modern,                
              expanded GC/MS capability and has enabled the faculty to                       
              significantly improve the research and basic laboratory                        
              experiences of students in the following courses:  Organic                     
              Chemistry Lab, Integrated Organic-Inorganic Lab, Instrumental                  
              Analysis, Introduction to Research, Problems in Chemistry, and                 
              Undergraduate Chemical Research.  Non-majors enrolled in the                   
              introductory organic laboratory also gain exposure to GC/MS.                   
              Chemistry majors have extensive hands-on experience with state-                
              of-the-art instrumentation enabling them to investigate,                       
              characterize and identify compounds related to their courses and               
              research.  The project also allows the department to include                   
              GC/MS in a new continuing education program which brings to                    
              campus high school chemistry teachers.  In summary, all of the                 
              capabilities of the instrument are utilized to provide the best                
              possible educational experience, on several levels, for students.              
                                                                                             
              The institution contributed to the project in an amount equal to the           
              NSF funds.
