Title       : A Laboratory for Advanced Cognitive Modeling
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DUE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 11,  1990     
File        : a9052361

Award Number: 9052361
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Duncan E. McBride                       
	      DUE  DIVISION OF UNDERGRADUATE EDUCATION     
	      EHR  DIRECT FOR EDUCATION AND HUMAN RESOURCES
Start Date  : April 15,  1990     
Expires     : September 30,  1992  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25845              (Estimated)
Investigator: Neil A. Stillings nstillings@hampshire.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Hampshire College
	      West Street
	      Amherst, MA  01002    413/549-4600

NSF Program : 7400      UNDERGRAD INSTRM & LAB IMPROVE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              71        Psychology Biological Aspects           
Program Ref : 9267,
Abstract    :
              A laboratory is being established for advanced cognitive                       
              modeling.  In recent years, large-scale computer models have                   
              revolutionized the techniques of theory construction in cognitive              
              science.  The undergraduate who has been exposed only to                       
              traditional qualitative conceptual models and tractable                        
              mathematical or formal models can no longer be said to know how                
              contemporary research in cognitive science is done.  Computer                  
              modeling has been greatly accelerated by the introduction of                   
              powerful computer workstations and associated software.  The new               
              laboratory has a network of four workstations that have enough                 
              computing power and memory capacity to handle both large scale                 
              symbolic models, such as rule-based problem solving models and                 
              natural language processing models, and large-scale connectionist              
              or neural network models for cognitive processes, such as word                 
              recognition and low-level vision.  The laboratory is stocked with              
              a number of running models and tools for model development, which              
              are employed in two advanced courses on cognitive modeling, and                
              intermediate course in experimental cognitive psychology, and in               
              undergraduate thesis projects.  The models are also used for                   
              demonstrations throughout the cognitive science curriculum.  The               
              college will contribute an amount equal to the award.
