Title       : Science in Developing Countries Program: The Systematics andEvolution of the
               Genus Coreopsis (Asteraceae) in South America
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 16,  1994  
File        : a9025030

Award Number: 9025030
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Emily B. Rudin                          
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : February 15,  1992  
Expires     : January 31,  1995    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19900              (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel J. Crawford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Rd
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 5926      LATIN AMERICA, SDC
Fld Applictn: 0510102   Role-Terrestrial Ecosystem              
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 5926,
Abstract    :
              This project will support collaborative                                        
              studies in systematic biology by Dr. Daniel                                    
              J. Crawford of Ohio State University, Dr.                                      
              Edwin B. Smith of the University of Arkansas                                   
              and Dr. Aundio Sagastegui of the Universidad                                   
              Antenor Orrego de Trujillo, Peru.  The                                         
              project will initiate studies of the                                           
              systematics and evolution of South American                                    
              representatives of the Genus Coreopsis                                         
              (Asteraceae).  Thirty four species are                                         
              described from South America with the vast                                     
              majority occurring in the northern Andes of                                    
              Peru and all assigned to the sect.                                             
              Pseudoagarista.  Little is known about the                                     
              species beyond the alpha-level, with most of                                   
              the taxa described primarily on leaf                                           
              morphology.  The collaborative effort will                                     
              involve the following methods: field studies                                   
              to assess morphological variation within and                                   
              among the described species, specimen                                          
              collection to document this variation,                                         
              gathering of floral buds and collecting seeds                                  
              and dried leaf material; determination of                                      
              chromosome numbers for each species; the use                                   
              of enzyme electrophoresis to estimate genetic                                  
              variation within and divergence among                                          
              species; and the use of morphology and                                         
              chloroplast DNA restriction site variation to                                  
              construct phylogenic hypotheses for South                                      
              American Coreopsis and for all of Coreopsis.                                   
                                                                                             
              The project will provide insight into                                          
              systematic-evolutionary aspects of the genus                                   
              Coreopsis and will allow a synergistic                                         
              relationship to develop among the three well-                                  
              qualified investigators.  The project will                                     
              present resources and research opportunities                                   
              currently unavailable to the Peruvian                                          
              principal investigator and will involve                                        
              Peruvian students.  Since this type of                                         
              research also provides for the rapid exchange                                  
              and dissemination of knowledge, the project                                    
              will fulfill the goals of the Science in                                       
              Developing Countries Program.
