Title       : Post-earthquake Rebuilding-an Exercise for Planners (PREP)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 30,  1994     
File        : a9025125

Award Number: 9025125
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William A. Anderson                     
	      CMS  DIV OF CIVIL AND MECHANICAL SYSTEMS     
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 15,  1991      
Expires     : May 31,  1994        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $150000             (Estimated)
Investigator: George G. Mader   (Principal Investigator current)
              Martha B. Tyler  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Spangle Associates
	      3240 Alpine Road
	      Portola Valley, CA  94028    /   -

NSF Program : 1638      INFRASTRUC SYS MGMT & HAZ RESP
Fld Applictn: 0304010   Earthquake                              
              54        Engineering-Civil                       
Program Ref : 1499,
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              When earthquakes strike, federal, state and                                    
              local emergency response and disaster                                          
              assistance systems move into place.  The                                       
              responders are periodically trained through                                    
              response exercises which provide realistic                                     
              simulations of possible disasters.  The                                        
              exercises prepare participants to make                                         
              decisions, coordinate with others and face                                     
              extreme situations under extraordinary                                         
              pressure.  However, after the emergency                                        
              responders have gone back to normal                                            
              operations, the tasks of rebuilding are just                                   
              beginning.  A new set of players faces                                         
              extreme and unanticipated circumstances which                                  
              can dominate work for years to come.  This                                     
              project is designed to help planners across                                    
              the country who someday may be faced with the                                  
              immense challenge of guiding the rebuilding                                    
              of a community damaged by an earthquake.                                       
                                                                                             
              The proposed project is to draw upon and                                       
              expand past work of the principal                                              
              investigators and others to develop a model                                    
              timeline of rebuilding after earthquakes.                                      
              This model timeline will be synthesized from                                   
              actual timelines of rebuilding constructed                                     
              for 15 to 18 communities damaged by                                            
              earthquakes.  It will show the sequence and                                    
              relationships of key rebuilding actions and                                    
              decisions pertaining to clearance, repairing                                   
              infrastructure, rehousing, business recovery,                                  
              restoration of public facilities, and                                          
              reconstruction planning.  The model timeline                                   
              will then be used as the basis for creating a                                  
              simulation exercise telescoping 10 to 20                                       
              years of rebuilding activity into a two-day,                                   
              realistic, interactive learning experience                                     
              for local planners.  The simulation exercise                                   
              will be tested with a group of planners                                        
              invited from around the country, revised, and                                  
              then described in a report for use by local                                    
              planning departments.
