Title       : The Role of Religious Missions in the Development of Colonial Health-Care
               Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 28,  1991   
File        : a9025009

Award Number: 9025009
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Thomas J. Baerwald                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 15,  1991       
Expires     : October 31,  1992    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19911              (Estimated)
Investigator: Charles M. Good   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : VA Polytechnic Inst & St U
	      301 Burruss Hall
	      Blacksburg, VA  240610249    540/231-6000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0313000   Regional & Environmental                
              88        Geography                               
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   Explanations of modern geographic patterns frequently must be             
              grounded in examinations of the historical developments that                   
              established and modified processes at work on antecedent patterns.             
              Many new insights about the operation and spatial arrangement of               
              service-delivery systems have come from studies of the historical              
              evolution of those system.  Health-care delivery in modern Africa, for         
              example, continues to be strongly impacted by the pattern of facilities        
              established by Protestant and Catholic religious orders in early               
              periods of European colonization in the 19th and early 20th centuries.         
              This project will use perspectives and techniques of medical and               
              historical geography to assess how the health of African people and the        
              conditions of the places they inhabited were changed by the activities         
              of religious medical missions.  It also will examine the ways that             
              native Africans responded to the different medical, social, and                
              technological features associated with the missions.  The analysis will        
              focus on two longitudinal, comparative case studies of missions in             
              Kenya and Malawi.  Information for use in this analysis will be                
              gathered from government and institutional archives, from informal             
              interviews and field observations in the study areas, and from oral            
              histories of people who were involved with mission facilities over the         
              last 70 years.  NSF funding will complement support for this project           
              provided by the National Geographic Society through its Committee for          
              Research and Exploration.                                                      
                   This project will provide specific information about the                  
              development of religious medical missions in the study areas.  The             
              analyses of this information will contribute not only to focused               
              understandings about the historical geography of medical care in these         
              nations; it also will enhance general understandings of the ways that          
              institutional activities originating in foreign cultures interacted            
              with indigenous populations to alter ways of life and standards of             
              living.
