Title       : Data Development for International Research: Event-Data Collection and Software
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 25,  1992    
File        : a9025130

Award Number: 9025130
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : May 1,  1991        
Expires     : October 31,  1994    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $350982             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dina A. Zinnes   (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard L. Merritt  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              85        Political Sciences                      
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                                                                                             
              The subfield of International Relations has seen a proliferation               
              of exciting new theories over the past twenty years.                           
              Important theories have been advanced to account for the                       
              onset and diffusion of war among both superpowers and smaller                  
              states, the dynamics of international arms races, the structure                
              and operation of the international economy including trade flows               
              and international development, and the causes of internal                      
              violence including revolutions, rebellions, coups d'etat, and                  
              assassination to cite only a few of the fronts on which social                 
              science theory has been advanced.  Although considerable energy                
              also has been devoted to efforts to test these theories                        
              empirically, the absence of an extensive body of reliable time-                
              series data on international events has impeded progress.                      
                                                                                             
              This award supports continuation of a long term project -- Data                
              Development in International Research (DDIR) -- to maintain,                   
              extend and improve the quality of major databanks for the study                
              and analysis of cross-national and international political                     
              events.  The first stage of DDIR filled in and updated major                   
              international data sets.  This second stage will continue to                   
              update the collections while establishing a more permanent base                
              for future data collection efforts.  Specifically, the project                 
              has two principal thrusts: 1) to update and extend the four main               
              event datasets, COPDAB, WEIS, BCOW, and SHERFACS, and 2) to                    
              develop the computer technology that will simplify data                        
              collection efforts and reduce their costs to levels that do not                
              require continuing federal support.                                            
                                                                                             
              When completed this project will provide a much larger, more                   
              complete, and more reliable set of data with which to test and                 
              refine existing theories in international and cross-national                   
              politics.
