Title       : Networking and Control Issues for Mobile Radio Communications Systems
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 16,  1994      
File        : a9025131

Award Number: 9025131
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Aubrey M. Bush                          
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : February 28,  1995   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $198329             (Estimated)
Investigator: Stephen S. Rappaport rappaport@sunysb.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : SUNY Stony Brook
	      
	      Stony Brook, NY  117943362    631/632-9949

NSF Program : 4096      COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
              31        Computer Science & Engineering          
              55        Engineering-Electrical                  
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
                   The overall objective of the proposed research is to develop              
              suitable networking concepts for mobile networks, along with                   
              analytical models and methodology that permit both theoretical                 
              prediction of system performance and examination of parameter                  
              tradeoffs. Of particular interest are techniques that provide                  
              intelligent features in the sense that they enable mobile networks             
              to maintain performance levels by adjusting and adapting to changes            
              in the communications environment.  Dynamic control, assignment,               
              and reallocation of communication resources due to changes in                  
              traffic loading, interference, and topology will be investigated               
              for cellular and non-cellular configurations.  Areas to be                     
              investigated include: techniques for managing hand-offs of                     
              communicating platforms; use of spatial macro-diversity features;              
              and dynamic control and assignment of communications assets -                  
              including both borrowing and sharing of channels and gateways.                 
              Procedures to accomplish this may involve mixtures of central and              
              distributed control.  Appropriateness of the techniques for various            
              settings will be considered.                                                   
                   Analytical modeling and computer simulation will provide the              
              primary underlying bases.  It is expected that as a result of this             
              investigation new techniques will be devised that will allow                   
              improved communications with large numbers of mobile platforms over            
              wide geographical areas.  In addition, the analytical models and               
              approach will provide tan enhanced foundation for understanding,               
              modeling, and designing mobile communications networks.
