Title       : Arthropod Diversity in a Lowland Tropical Rainforest
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DEB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  1993      
File        : a9025024

Award Number: 9025024
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: James E. Rodman                         
	      DEB  DIVISION OF ENVIRONMENTAL BIOLOGY       
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  1991  
Expires     : August 31,  1995     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $326113             (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald E. Stone nao@acpub.duke.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John T. Longino  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert K. Colwell  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Ralph W. Holzenthal  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Henry A. Hespenheide  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duke University
	      327 North Building
	      Durham, NC  277080077    919/684-3030

NSF Program : 1171      SYSTEMATIC BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              61        Life Science Biological                 
Program Ref : 
Abstract    :
              As a collaborative project between the Organization for Tropical               
              Studies (a consortium of 45 U.S. Costa Rican universities and                  
              museums) and the National Biodiversity Institute (INBio, a Costa               
              Rican nongovernmental organization), a biodiversity inventory of               
              tropical rainforest insects, spiders, and mites will initiated for             
              La Selva, a biotically rich and scientifically active biological               
              station situated in the Atlantic lowlands of Costa Rica.  This                 
              stage of the project aims to produce full, species-level                       
              inventories for several focal groups of insects, spiders, and                  
              mites, including some of the most important groups in rainforest               
              habitats.  These inventories will be based on ecologically                     
              structured, repeatable sampling methods, as well as on less-                   
              structure supplemental collecting.  A must broader range of survey             
              groups, each including a focal group, will be inventoried using the            
              structured sampling techniques alone.  Statistical methods will be             
              explored for estimating the total number of insect, spider, and                
              mite species in the study areas, using the full inventory data for             
              the groups to evaluate these methods and to calibrate estimates of             
              species number for the broader survey groups.  The sampling design             
              will permit evaluation of the contributions of habitat would type              
              vegetation structure species, and season to overall species                    
              richness.  These estimated promise to provide the most realistic               
              and comprehensive data yet available on the diversity of insect and            
              spider species of tropical rainforests, and diversity estimates for            
              any rainforest mite fauna.  These groups or organisms, while                   
              representing well overall the species on earth, are still among the            
              most poorly known.  Specimens will be integrated into the national             
              biodiversity inventory already underway at INBio, thus placing the             
              La Selva survey material in a larger geographical and biological               
              context, promoting further study of this material by INBio's                   
              growing international network of specialists, and ensuring                     
              permanent accessibility of the specimens.  The project is                      
              structured  to promote extensive new avenues of collaboration                  
              between North American and Costa Rican scientists.
