Title       : Organometallic Mediated Reactions in Organic Synthesis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 11,  1993   
File        : a9025126

Award Number: 9025126
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : April 1,  1991      
Expires     : September 30,  1994  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip D. Magnus p.magnus@mail.utexas.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Texas Austin
	      P.O Box 7726
	      Austin, TX  787137726    512/471-6424

NSF Program : 1948      SYNTHESIS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              12        Chemistry                               
Program Ref : 9161,
Abstract    :
              This research involves two major areas of organic synthesis.                   
              The first is the synthesis of dynemicin, which is the most                     
              biologically interesting of the diynene natural products. Based                
              on model studies of the azabicyclo?7.3.1.!diynene core                         
              structure, the synthesis of the more complex dynemicin will be                 
              carried out by a route that incorporates the remaining oxygen                  
              substituents and allows the crucial epoxide functionality to be                
              installed. The second area of research is synthetic methodology                
              using the chemistry of triisopropylsilyl enol ethers, which                    
              react with electrophiles and retain the triisopropoylsilyl enol                
              ether group.In contrast to the more commonly used                              
              trimethylsilyl group, proton loss is apparently faster  than                   
              attack at silicon in the triisopropylsilyl system which opens                  
              up a whole new range of silyl enol ether chemistry. The overall                
              transformation proceeds with remarkable stereoelectronic                       
              control. The electrophiles (Br, SePh, TsNCO, etc.) enter                       
              axially and the newly introduced substituent remains in an                     
              axial configuration. Besides the development of general                        
              methodology, the synthesis of chiral triisopropylsilyl enol                    
              ethers and their subsequent reactions will be studied.                         
                                                                                             
              %%%                                                                            
                                                                                             
              With this award the Synthetic Organic Program of the Chemistry                 
              Division will support the research of Dr. Philip D. Magnus of                  
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of Texas at                      
              Austin. The research involves two major areas of organic                       
              synthetic methodology. The first is the synthesis of dynemicin                 
              which is the most biologically interesting of the diynene                      
              natural products. The second area of research is the                           
              development of the chemistry of the triisopropylsilyl enol                     
              ether functionality and the production of useful synthetic                     
              methods based upon these studies.
