Title       : Adaptive Learning With Indirect Payoff Information
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2001      
File        : a0111781

Award Number: 0111781
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : May 31,  2003        (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Dana Heller dana-heller@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Adaptive learning refers to a process where agents learn about the value of
              their actions from their direct experience with the actions. There is evidence
              that variants of adaptive learning well describe subjects' behavior in
              experiments. This project investigates decisions made by agents learning
              adaptively from their own experience but also from indirect information about
              actions they did not take. In particular, we investigate the effect that
              distortions of such indirect information, which we interpret as representing
              attitudes towards the source of information, have on the quality of the
              decisions. We find that the pattern of behavior depends on whether the agent
              inflates or deflates indirect payoff information relative to the objective
              payoffs. If the agent inflates indirect payoff information, actions that have
              not been played for a while tend to look better than they truly are, leading
              the agent to revisit them every so often. As a result, behavior ``cycles''
              through more than one action. On the other hand, if the agent tends to deflate
              indirect information, he will settle to playing a single action. Since the
              unplayed alternatives are perceived to be worse than they objectively are, the
              limit action, which the agent perceives to be the best, can be objectively
              suboptimal. The former pattern resembles variety seeking while the latter
              resembles ``lock-in'' behavior.  Marketing research suggests that both patterns
              are observed in consumer choice.
	The second key feature of the learning rule
              is the degree to which past observations are discounted. In particular, whether
              the weight put on last period's payoff becomes arbitrarily small or not. We
              provide preliminary results on the role of discounting, suggesting the effect
              depends crucially on whether indirect payoff information is utilized or not.
              While discounting leads to suboptimal behavior in a stationary environment, we
              look for justifications for it in decision situations which involve limited 

