Title       : Structure of the Photoreceptor Complex of Photosynthetic Bacteria
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0111255

Award Number: 0111255
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $364549             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul A. Loach p-loach@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,1166,9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              A supramolecular complex exists in the membranes of photosynthetic bacteria,
              which is responsible for absorbing light and converting this energy into an
              electrochemical gradient of protons.  Macromolecular components of this complex
              include the core light-harvesting complex (LH1), the photosynthetic reaction
              center, most likely ubiquinol/cytochrome c oxidoreductase and possibly several
              other components.  The major focus of this research is on the interaction of
              LH1 with the reaction center. A newly isolated protein, PufX, is found in
              Rhodobacter species and has been implicated to interact with LH1 to allow
              reducing equivalents from the reaction center in the form of ubiquinol to reach
              the bc1 complex.  The interactions between LH1 and PufX can be studied under
              equilibrium conditions using reconstitution methodology.   PufX will be
              chemically synthesized as well as various core segments.  Fluorescent probes
              will be covalently attached to selected positions of these PufX polypeptides as
              well as to the LH1 alpha and beta polypeptides.   Association constants for
              interactions between bacteriochlorophyll, the LH1 alpha polypeptide and PufX
              will be determined.  Cross-linking reagents will also be employed in order to
              determine proximity and composition of interacting systems.   The structure of
              chemically synthesized core regions of PufX will be determined in organic
              solvent by NMR spectroscopy.  Experiments probing interaction of LH1 and PufX
              with the reaction center will also be initiated.  It is expected that the
              results obtained in these studies will be important for understanding the
              fundamental process of energy capture, not only in all photosynthetic bacteria,
              but also in oxygenic photosynthetic organisms as well.
