Title       : Contractual issues in the financing of new firms: macroeconomic and policy
               implications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 18,  2002     
File        : a0111518

Award Number: 0111518
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $357556             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas F. Cooley tcooley@stern.nyu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Vincenzo Quadrini  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : New York University
	      
	      New York, NY  10012    212/998-2121

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The research described in this proposal is directed to understanding the link
              between the contractual arrangements used to finance new firms and their growth
              and the volatility of the aggregate economy. The ability to attract external
              financing is crucial for the creation of new firms and the expansion of
              existing ones. For that reason the nature of the financial arrangements between
              lenders and firms has important consequences for the growth of firms.  It also
              can have important consequences for the propagation of aggregate shocks and the
              volatility of the aggregate economy. This research project has three
              objectives. First, it studies how contractual problems affect the optimal
              financing of new firms and their subsequent growth. Second, it evaluates the
              welfare costs of these contractual problems that result because they induce an
              inefficient allocation of resources and studies the type of policies or
              institutions that alleviate these welfare consequences. Third, it studies how
              contractual problems affect the propagation of new investment opportunities in
              the macro-economy.

To pursue these objectives, the project integrates the
              two main approaches to studying the impact of financial frictions on the
              investment behavior of firms. The first approach focuses on the primary sources
              of frictions that prevent market completeness, and the implications of this
              incompleteness for the behavior of individual firms. It fails to consider,
              however, issues of macroeconomic relevance. The second approach is concerned
              with the aggregate implications of market incompleteness. Given its aggregate
              focus, in this approach market incomplete-ness is exogenously imposed, rather
              than derived endogenously. Because the properties of these models depend
              critically on the type of financial frictions assumed, it is desirable that
              these frictions are endogenously generated in the model rather than imposed by
              assumption. This is especially important for the design of policies and
              institutional arrangements aimed at improving the inefficiencies generated by
              limited contractability.

The project integrates the existing approaches to
              the study of financial market incompleteness, by developing a general
              equilibrium model with a solid micro-foundation for the incompleteness.
              Entrepreneurs have the ability to run an entrepreneurial project over a long
              time but need external funds to finance investment. Entering into a long-term
              relationship with a lender through an optimal long-term contract solves the
              financing problem. Market incompleteness derives from the ability of the
              entrepreneur to repudiate the financial contract (i.e. from the limited
              enforceability of contracts).  By integrating the existing approaches to the
              study of market incompleteness, the model is able to address theoretical and
              policy-related questions. The general equilibrium structure facilitates the
              evaluation of the welfare costs of market incompleteness, while the
              micro-foundations permit the analysis of the type of policies or institutional
              arrangements that can support a superior allocation of resources.

