Title       : RUI: Dynamics of European Buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica L.) Invasion in the
               Northeastern United States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 3,  2002       
File        : a0111743

Award Number: 0111743
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $107296             (Estimated)
Investigator: Deanna H. McCay dmccay@mail.colgate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy S. McCay  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colgate University
	      13 Oak Drive
	      Hamilton, NY  13346    315/228-1000

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9169,9229,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Invasive non-native plants threaten the ecological integrity and economic value
              of natural areas throughout the world.  Despite the severity of this growing
              problem, our understanding of how exotic plants become established in new areas
              and move across the landscape is weak.  The objective of this research is to
              describe the process by which European buckthorn (Rhamnus cathartica), a shrub
              native to Eurasia, colonizes new areas in North America and how that process
              varies with ecological context.  Field observations and experiments will be
              used to examine each stage of the colonization process in second-growth
              deciduous forests, conifer plantations, and abandoned agricultural fields. 
              Differences in microclimate, soils, and resident fauna will be considered as
              potential sources of variation in colonization.  Spatial configuration of the
              environment also will be considered as a factor affecting colonization. 
              Detailed stand-level maps relating species composition, canopy gaps, edges, and
              streams to European buckthorn distribution will reveal factors facilitating
              colonization and spread.  Aerial photographs and geographic information systems
              will allow measurement of size, shape and spatial context of areas occupied by
              this plant.  This research will demonstrate whether fragmentation of North
              American forests serves to promote or inhibit the spread of European
              buckthorn.

European buckthorn competes with native plants and is a host of
              oat crown rust fungus, a disease that attacks oat crops.  Native birds nesting
              in this shrub experience high rates of predation, and leaves of European
              buckthorn may be toxic to native mammals.  This research will lead to a greater
              knowledge of the physiology and ecology of this relatively unstudied species of
              conservation concern.  In addition, this research will contribute to
              understanding of how invasion success is affected by the properties of invaded
              ecosystems.  This study also will quantify how forest fragmentation due to
              timber harvest and abandonment of agricultural lands affects the movement of an
              exotic species across the landscape.  Although many invasive species are found
              in human-modified environments, there is growing concern about the presence of
              invasive species within pristine natural areas.  Understanding the effect of
              environmental context, within particular settings and among settings in the
              landscape, will guide land managers and scientists to identify potential
              threats to natural environments.

