Title       : Development of Algorithms for DFT Calculations of the Rate of Transitions In
               Ground and Excited States
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0111468

Award Number: 0111468
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Hannes Jonsson hannes@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Hannes Jonsson of the University of Washington is supported by the Theoretical
              and Computational Chemistry Program to develop methods for calculating
              transition rates in materials in combination with a plane-wave-based density
              functional theory (DFT) description of the energetics.  Methods for finding
              mechanisms and transmission rates, such as the dimer method, climbing
              image-nudged elastic band method, and optimal hyperplanar transition state
              theory, will be explored and implemented.  Methodologies will be applied to
              study diffusion and growth in semiconductors, in particular the growth of
              silicon/germanium surface mounds that may be useful in opto-electronic
              applications.  Simulations that combine DFT estimates of transmission rates and
              kinetic Monte Carlo simulations of long time dynamics will be carried out to
              enable careful comparisons to new experimental data.  This project will also
              begin developing techniques to calculate excited states in condensed matter.  A
              many-body perturbation expansion that builds in corrections to the DFT mean
              field description will be tested on small molecules, and then applied to study
              optical properties and photoinduced catalysis on titanium dioxide surfaces. 
              

The first principles prediction of technologically important material
              properties is a longstanding goal.  The combination of efficient theoretical
              chemistry techniques and implementation on computer clusters or parallel
              computers finally can bring this elusive goal within reach.  The outcomes of
              this research are anticipated to contribute to new knowledge of quantum dots,
              which have technological promise for use as optical switches.  As well, studies
              of titanium dioxide photocatalysis are expected to improve understanding of
              important applications for this material that include harmful microorganism
              destruction, cancer cell inactivation, and oil spill cleanup.
