Title       : Chemical and Genetic Studies of the Nonactate Polyketide Synthase
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0111054

Award Number: 0111054
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Nigel D. Priestley priestle@selway.umt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Montana
	      
	      Missoula, MT  59812    406/243-0211

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The soil microorganism Streptomyces makes over half of the antibiotics that are
              obtained from all microorganisms.  The study of how antibiotics are made is a
              basic prerequisite for developing new antibiotics and new methods of producing
              antibiotics, as well as for understanding basic ecological processes in the
              soil microbiota.  Nonactin is an antibiotic that is active against Gram
              positive bacteria, mycobacteria, and fungi and also blocks one of the major
              processes by which cancer cells are resistant to anti-cancer drugs.  The
              microorganism Streptomyces griseus makes nonactin in fermentative culture
              although the exact details of this process are not presently understood. 
              Current evidence suggests that nonactin is assembled by a number of proteins
              which work together as a large protein complex known as a polyketide synthase. 
              The structure of nonactin is quite unusual in that it is made up of two forms
              of a precursor that are mirror images of each other.  It is also not known how
              the organism achieves the synthesis of both mirror images of this precursor. 
              The objectives of the research are to gain an understanding of how nonactin is
              made by a polyketide synthase and to determine how the formation of two
              mirror-image compounds is achieved and controlled.  The project will use a
              multidisciplinary approach to study the polyketide synthase genes from
              Streptomyces griseus as well as the basic chemistry of the natural synthesis
              pathway.  The research will determine which genes in the organism control the
              synthesis of each of the mirror image precursors and the exact manner in which
              these precursors are formed from simple organic acids.  The basic information
              gained in the study of this unusual system will add to the body of existing
              knowledge of natural product synthesis.  The long term goal of the research is
              to understand the natural synthesis pathways in sufficient detail that an
              organism can be rationally altered to produce any designed, target antibiotic
              by a fermentation process from cheap starting materials in an environmentally
              friendly manner.

 







