Title       : Uncharted Territory: A Qualitative and Quantitative Analysis of Inter-district
               Variation in the Federal Criminal Justice System
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : December 18,  2001  
File        : a0111774

Award Number: 0111774
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James Eisenstein j3e@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John H. Kramer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Lisa L. Miller  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey T. Ulmer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will advance theoretical understanding of criminal courts by
              applying the concepts of court community and decision makers' focal concerns to
              the Federal Criminal Justice System (FCJS). Its central working hypothesis is
              that differences in federal criminal court communities help account for
              inter-district differences in case disposition procedures and outcomes. With
              few exceptions, existing quantitative empirical research on the FCJS has
              focused only on the sentencing stage. It usually ignores inter-district
              variation in disposition procedures and outcomes. As the first empirical,
              theoretically oriented study of the FCJS, this study will achieve a second
              purpose: It will significantly expand our knowledge of the FCJS by looking at
              decision stages prior to sentencing and assessing the nature and causes of
              inter-district differences.  This research employs analysis of quantitative
              data and interviews with FCJS officials. Phase I includes pretest interviews
              with key decision makers in a large federal court community and with key staff
              in the Department of Justice and quantitative examination of differences in
              outcomes and disposition modes by district. Phase II will involve interviews in
              six districts selected for variation by size of court and by case disposition
              techniques and in Washington, DC. Interviews will be conducted in two stages:
              The first will explore decision-making patterns informed by knowledge gained
              from the phase I quantitative analysis; in the second, re-interviews in these
              districts will focus on questions and hypotheses generated by analysis of the
              first stage.
