Title       : Assessing the Efficacy of the Laws of War
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2001      
File        : a0111787

Award Number: 0111787
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $180022             (Estimated)
Investigator: James D. Morrow jdmorrow@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project tests a formal model of the laws of war-formal treaties that seek
              to limit violence during wartime. These international laws are of particular
              interest because they shape behavior to the extent that the parties can enforce
              them on one another or respect their limits on their own. They form the extreme
              case of the self-enforcing nature of political institutions. 

The project is
              a formal treatment of war where there is a strategic competition between two
              states. They contend for a prize in a war of attrition model where the costs
              they pay each round depend on the current military balance between the two. In
              each round, they fight a "battle" where a fixed strategic-form, zero-sum
              represents the contest of each battle. The outcome of the "battle" game depends
              on their chosen strategies  This determines the shift in the military balance
              in this round. In equilibrium, a side quits if the military balance moves
              against them beyond its "break point", which is endogenous to the game. A
              variant of this game has the costs in a given round depend on the strategies
              played in the battle game as well as the current military balance.

In this
              model the laws of war are represented as a prewar agreement by both players not
              to play a set of strategies of the battle game. The question is when such
              agreements hold in equilibrium. A side considering defecting from such an
              agreement weighs the short-run benefits of using a banned strategy when: a) the
              other side cannot retaliate; b) the long-run consequences of both sides being
              free to use any strategy covered by the agreement; and c) any audience costs it
              suffers for being the first violator of the agreement. The incentive to defect
              is assessed by how the "break points" of the two sides shift as a consequence
              of a defection. 

The project tests these conclusions by collecting a data
              set on violations of the laws of war in the 20th century.  These data include
              the major treaties in effect, addressing issues like prisoners of war and
              chemical weapons, and candidates for agreements that were not legalized in a
              treaty, such as aerial bombardment.  Coding rules for extent and degree of
              violations are created and compliance with these agreements by warring states
              in the set of Singer-Small wars during the 20`h century are assessed through
              consultation with historical sources, primarily secondary sources.  This data
              collection leads to two empirical tests of the models: first, a comparison of
              whether enforceable agreements as judged by the model are actually observed
              more often than limits judged unenforceable, and second, a test of the timing
              of violations, whether they tend to fall early during a war and whether the
              winning side is more likely to be the violator when they occur when it appears
              that one side is about to lose.

