Title       : Reading and Speaking Words in Two Languages: A Psycholinguistic Approach to
               Bilingualism
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0111734

Award Number: 0111734
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Guy Van Orden                           
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $283197             (Estimated)
Investigator: Judith F. Kroll JFK7@PSU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 7252      PERCEPTION, ACTION & COGNITION
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              How does a bilingual read and speak words in one language when words in the
              other language are available and potentially compete for selection?  Recent
              psycholinguistic research suggests that information in both of a bilingual's
              two languages is active during language comprehension and production.  The
              bilingual is thus a model system to examine the conditions that give rise to
              competition and the manner in which that competition is resolved.  This problem
              will be investigated in a series of experiments in which bilinguals read and
              speak words in one or both of their languages.  The research has two aspects,
              comprehension and production of language.  In each, experiments will examine
              the activation of alternative lexical candidates and the factors that modulate
              the resulting cross-language competition.  In experiments on comprehension,
              word naming will be compared in the first and second languages.  By
              manipulating the properties of the words to be named and the contexts in which
              they occur, it should be possible to identify the factors that induce and
              control language selection.  In experiments on production, performance on
              picture naming and translation tasks will be compared to examine spoken word
              production in two languages.  Using cued naming and task-switching paradigms,
              it should prove possible to examine the effects of requiring both languages to
              be active prior to speaking.  The approach is intended to provide complementary
              methods for examining the activation of words in each language when a bilingual
              is required to speak a word in one language and to suppress or ignore
              information in the other language.  The goal of this research is to develop
              converging approaches to study language comprehension and production in
              bilinguals.  Together with existing research on monolingual language
              performance, the data generated by these studies should provide the basis for a
              more complete model of the bilingual lexicon.  The mechanism of language
              selection that is the focus of the bilingual research has the more general
              potential to illuminate current debates about the type and timing of
              information available during comprehension and production.  In this sense,
              bilingualism provides a useful tool for investigating universal cognitive
              constraints.  The outcomes of this work also hold important implications for
              the more general problem of learning and using two languages.
