Title       : Discriminating Between Children's Accounts of True and False Events
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0111240

Award Number: 0111240
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $229807             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathy Pezdek Kathy.Pezdek@cgu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Claremont Graduate Univer
	      152 Harper Hall
	      Claremont, CA  91711    909/607-9406

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines the utility of several validity assessment techniques for
              differentiating between children's accounts of true and false events. Several
              techniques have been developed to assess the validity of people's accounts of
              events, however most of these techniques (a) have been developed for use with
              adults and not children, (b) have not been extensively tested with children,
              and (c) do not incorporate relevant principles of cognitive development.  This
              project tests the hypothesis that with children, validity assessment techniques
              are more successful at discriminating between accounts of familiar versus
              unfamiliar events than between accounts of true versus false events. Two
              studies will be conducted to test the utility of several validity assessment
              techniques for discriminating between true and false events with events that
              are familiar or unfamiliar to children. In the first study the event recalled
              is one experimentally introduced to the participants. In the second study the
              event recalled is a forensically relevant one -- a stressful and invasive
              medical procedure that has been experienced by each participating child or not.
              This research will contribute to the development of theories of cognitive
              development that apply to a wide range of memory tasks that operate during
              every-day cognition. More immediately, the proposed research will help
              researchers, legal professionals, and social service agents discriminate
              between children's accounts of real-world events that did occur versus those
              that did not occur.
