Title       : Structural Features of Transmembrane Signaling in Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 1,  2003      
File        : a0111589

Award Number: 0111589
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329850             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven R. VanDoren vandorens@missouri.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              John C. Walker  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Jeffrey Skolnick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Missouri Columbia
	      Office of Sponsored Prgm Admin
	      Columbia, MO  65211    573/882-7560

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Switching of signals at the surface of plant cells controls plant development,
              hormone response, avoidance of self-pollination, and disease resistance. 
              Transmembrane signaling in plants is exemplified by the interactions of the
              receptor-like kinase (RLK) CLAVATA1 with kinase-associated protein phosphatase
              (KAPP).  This pair interacts on the inner surface of the plasma membrane to
              guide the development of the shoot and flower meristems of the model plant
              Arabidopsis. The fundamental question of how the KAPP FHA domain interacts with
              an RLK kinase domain will be investigated in this project.  The FHA domain is a
              newly described class of phosphoserine / phosphothreonine-binding domain which
              is ubiquitous among eukaryotes in diverse protein-protein signaling contexts. 
              No three-dimensional atomic structures of KAPP or of an RLK have been reported.
              NMR will be used to determine high quality structures of the distinctive FHA
              domain of KAPP in two forms: free and bound to a phosphopeptide. Sequence
              determinants of the specificity of phosphopeptide interactions with the KAPP
              FHA domain will be explored using site-directed mutagenesis, screening of
              phosphoser/thr peptide binding, and thermodynamics of the binding of
              phosphopeptides most avid for the FHA domain.  To further probe how KAPP
              interacts with CLAVATA1, the structure of the serine kinase domain of this RLK
              will be modeled. The training of PhD students will be enhanced by exposure to
              complementary plant genetics studies in the lab of John Walker and to protein
              modeling in the lab of Jeff Skolnick.  This project will provide insights into
              how a class of plant signaling proteins interacts specifically during the
              process of signal switching. It will also add perspective to FHA-mediated
              protein-protein interactions in other organisms.


