Title       : SYNTHESIS OF NOVEL MARINE MACROLIDES
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 8,  2003      
File        : a0111292

Award Number: 0111292
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Horacio F. Olivo horacio-olivo@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Professor Horacio F. Olivo, of the Medicinal Natural Products Chemistry
              Department at the University of Iowa, is supported by the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his studies of the synthesis of novel
              marine macrolides. Professor Olivo is exploring the efficacy of the
              Ireland-Claisen rearrangement of products derived from biocatalytic
              desymmetrization of cyclopentenediesters to prepare substituted bicyclic
              lactones. Mild methods for the generation of enynes via palladium-catalyzed
              coupling of 1,1-dihalo-1-alkenes with vinylstannanes and the chemoselectivity
              of bis-haloalkenes in Ni/Cr coupling reactions are also being examined. Newly
              developed methodologies are applied to the synthesis of callipeltoside-A and
              auriside-A.

Much current effort in the field of organic synthesis is
              directed toward the selective preparation of molecules with precisely defined
              three-dimensional structures. Biological catalysis is an attractive approach,
              given its potentially low cost and minimal environmental impacts. By developing
              new methodologies for the conversion of products of biocatalysis to useful
              organic molecules, Professor Horacio F. Olivo, of the Medicinal Natural
              Products Chemistry Department at the University of Iowa, is demonstrating
              biocatalysis as an efficient and low-cost method for the generation of valuable
              intermediates in organic synthesis. With the support of the Organic and
              Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Olivo is exploring general
              synthetic methodology utilizing products of biological catalysis and applying
              this methodology to the synthesis of several complex natural products of marine
              origin.
