Title       : Character Acquisition During the Transition to Amphibious Life in the Oxudercine
               Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 25,  2001      
File        : a0111241

Award Number: 0111241
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $114830             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jeffrey B. Graham jgraham@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal SD Scripps Inst
	      9500 Gilman Drive
	      La Jolla, CA  92093    858/534-1293

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1171,9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0111241  Graham

This study investigates the specializations for amphibious
              life and air breathing of fishes in the goby subfamily Oxudercinae.  Included
              among the oxudercines are species such as the mudskippers, which are highly
              amphibious and air-breathing, as well as several less- and entirely
              non-amphibious species.  

The research studies the characters associated
              with mudskipper terrestriality and the sequence of change these characters have
              undergone within the Oxudercinae.  DNA sequence analyses will confirm the
              phylogenetic relationships among the oxudercine species.  Comparative study of
              different oxudercines examines the functional relationship between the gills
              and auxiliary air-breathing surfaces considering, for example, such questions
              as how the presence of dual respiratory surfaces affects properties such as
              respiration, ionic and acid-base balance, and nitrogenous waste excretion. 
              Also studied will be how the gills and auxiliary air-breathing structures
              function in oxudercine recovery from exhaustive exercise.  Comparisons of
              oxudercine eyes will reveal how changes related to aerial visual acuity
              developed.  Fieldwork in both Japan and Australia will correlate
              species-specific specializations with behavior and microhabitat distribution in
              order to establish how different degrees of terrestrial adaptation affect
              oxudercine distribution and natural history. 

The oxudercines are unique
              among the vertebrates in providing evolutionary "snap-shots" along the
              phylogenetic continuum extending from aquatic to amphibious life, and are thus
              ideal for studying the sequence of character changes that occurred over the
              course of this transition. This study therefore contributes to an understanding
              of the suite of changes that occurred during the invasion of land by the
              vertebrates in the Devonian Period, 360 million years ago. 

 

