Title       : Collaborative Research: Sunspots in the Laboratory
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 6,  2001  
File        : a0111315

Award Number: 0111315
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $45707              (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric Fisher fisher.244@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Economists have developed a theory of "sunspot" equilibrium to describe
              situations
where economic fluctuations are not driven by changes in market
              fundamentals, but are
instead due to extrinsic, non-fundamental factors. This
              project involves the design of an
experiment that will explore whether and how
              such extrinsic factors can result in market
fluctuations, and whether the
              particular market institution also plays a role.
The experiment consists of
              two main treatments. In the first, human subjects participate
as buyers or
              sellers in a computerized "double auction", where goods can be bought and
sold
              continuously over a fixed trading period at mutually agreed upon prices that
              are
observable as they occur to all participants. In the second "call market"
              treatment,
subjects submit private bids and offers, and a centralized
              mechanism determines the
single, market clearing price, as well as the
              quantities that each participant can buy or
sell. Thus, the only information
              subjects receive in this environment is the resulting
market price and the
              quantity they were able to buy or sell at this price.
In both treatments,
              subjects face uncertainty in that they are given two sets of values or
costs
              for the goods they can buy or sell; these two sets correspond to the"state" of
              the
economy, and are referred to as "high" or "low" in reference to the
              equilibrium price in
the two states. (the equilibrium quantity is the same in
              both states). Initially, subjects are
told the state of the economy in
              advance, so that they become familiar with the two states
for prices. After
              several rounds, subjects are informed that the true state of the economy,
will
              henceforth be determined expost, after all trading is completed. Furthermore,
              the rule
for the determination of the state will depend on the median trade
              price in the double
auction environment or on the analogous market clearing
              price in the call market
environment. If this price lies within a proscribed
              domain of the equilibrium low price,
then the state is declared to be low and
              if it lies outside this domain, in that of the
equilibrium high price, then
              the state is declared to be high. Subjects are provided with a
potential
              coordination device (or sunspot realization) which takes the form of a
              random
announcement by the experimenter of the forecast for the state of
              prices in the current
period. Subjects are instructed that this announcement
              has no binding consequences.
Preliminary findings suggest that subjects
              coordinate perfectly on the announcement in
the highly centralized call market
              environment but fail to do the same in the more
decentralized double auction
              environment. These experimental findings if replicated,
have significant
              implications for the architecture of real financial markets.

