Title       : The Politics of Identity and Democratic Values
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0111715

Award Number: 0111715
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108145             (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul M. Sniderman paulms@stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award is an Accomplishment Based Renewal and allows the principal
              investigator to continue a very productive stream of research on the general
              problem of prejudice and politics in Western Europe.   The researcher has
              conducted three large-scale general population public opinion surveys, one in
              Italy, one in the Netherlands, and one in France.   The surveys are uniquely
              cumulative in design.  The Dutch study was expressly designed to respond to
              theoretical and methodological questions in the measurement of cultural and
              economic sources of prejudice raised by the Italian study.   The French study
              was expressly designed to extend the Dutch analysis of the political
              consequences of intolerance.

The first extension of this research
              concentrates on the Dutch study and focuses on the contemporary strains over
              multiculturalism.  It focuses particularly on three strands: the clash over
              group interests, the concern over national identity, and conflicts over values
              built-in to modern liberal democratic societies.  It aims to show both how
              these three sources of strain are tied together, yet nonetheless have distinct
              political consequences.

The second study, which concentrates on the French
              investigation, focuses on democratic values under strain.  Using a new
              generation of experiments imbedded in opinion interviews, it explores in a way
              not previously possible the willingness of citizens to abandon or qualify their
              commitment to democratic values in the face of different forms of political and
              social pressure.

The third study, which takes advantage of virtually all the
              data sets collected by the investigator, focuses on a theory of political
              choice. As an alternative to the standard "bottom up" approach, it aims to
              develop an explicitly political "top down" perspective, emphasizing the role of
              strategic political actors and institutions in structuring the party system and
              thereby the alternatives on offer to the general public.

The investigator
              has made numerous outstanding contributions to social and behavioral science
              literature on the topic of prejudice and politics in Western Europe.  His
              contributions have substantially enhanced our understanding of the topic and
              this current award allows the investigator to pursue further high quality
              research opportunities via the Accomplishment Based Renewal mechanism.

