Title       : Basic Research in Mathematics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0111298

Award Number: 0111298
Award Instr.: Cooperative Agreement                        
Prgm Manager: Christopher W. Stark                    
	      DMS  DIVISION OF MATHEMATICAL SCIENCES       
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2002       
Expires     : June 30,  2008       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $5996300            (Estimated)
Investigator: Enrico Bombieri eb@ias.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jean Bourgain  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Pierre Deligne  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Thomas Spencer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Robert P. Langlands  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Inst For Advanced Study
	      Einstein Dr.
	      Princeton, NJ  08540    609/734-8000

NSF Program : 1260      INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The School of Mathematics of the Institute for Advanced Study
(IAS) was formed
              in 1930 at the founding of the IAS.  The initial
goal of the School was to
              provide a haven for scholars where they
could work in an environment that was
              exceptionally favorable for
conducting research.  Over the years, other roles
              have emerged
and the School has assumed additional responsibilities
              including
guiding junior visitors in their research and organizing
              special
programs that widen the School's coverage of mathematics.
Although it
              has functioned in an international context, the main
impact of the Institute
              has been on the U.S. mathematical
community, with a majority of its visitors
              having come from or
been absorbed by it.  The Institute frequently conducts
              programs
in special areas of mathematics. Topics of some recent
              and
forthcoming programs include symplectic geometry and holomorphic
curves,
              theoretical computer science and discrete mathematics,
motivic homotopy
              theory, computational complexity, and stochastic
partial differential
              equations and models of turbulence.

This project will support postdoctoral
              and mid-career visiting
researchers at the School of Mathematics of the
              Institute for
Advanced Study with the goal of supporting a wide spectrum
              of
mathematical research at the highest level.  This activity will
provide
              these researchers unique opportunities for consultation
and collaboration.

