Title       : MRPG: Type of Information Processing and Attitude-Behavior Relations
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0111646

Award Number: 0111646
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Steven J. Breckler                      
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patrick Vargas pvargas@uiuc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Ill Urbana-Champaign
	      801 South Wright Street
	      Champaign, IL  61820    217/333-2186

NSF Program : 1332      SOCIAL PSYCHOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9135,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              For over 70 years psychologists have sought different ways to measure attitudes,
              and to understand the relationship between attitudes and behavior. This project
              adds to the extant body of knowledge by examining four classes of attitude
              measures, and by demonstrating how these measures relate to different types of
              behaviors. Contemporary attitude measures are generally of two types: explicit
              and implicit. Explicit attitude measures ask people to report their attitudes
              by drawing on evaluations stored in memory; implicit attitude measures
              similarly assess evaluative tendencies, but they do not require intentional
              recollection of stored information. Further, contemporary theories of
              attitude-behavior relations posit that explicit measures reliably predict
              deliberative, consciously-chosen behaviors; and that implicit measures reliably
              predict spontaneous, automatic behaviors. It is proposed that the previous
              failure of explicit measures to predict spontaneous behaviors, and of implicit
              measures to predict deliberative behaviors, may be due to a confounding of the
              type of attitude measure and the level of cognitive processing required by the
              attitude measure. By untangling these variables (type of measure, type of
              cognitive processing), four categories of measures are proposed: deliberative
              explicit measures, deliberative implicit measures, spontaneous explicit
              measures, and spontaneous implicit measures. The present research aims to
              demonstrate that the type of measure is secondary to the type of information
              processing in relating attitudes and behavior. That is, deliberative measures,
              whether they be explicit or implicit, should reliably predict deliberative
              behaviors. Similarly, spontaneous measures, whether they be explicit or
              implicit, should reliably predict spontaneous behaviors.

