Title       : The Role of Cultural and Economics in the Consumption of Bushmeat
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 7,  2001  
File        : a0111905

Award Number: 0111905
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Stuart Plattner                         
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $154659             (Estimated)
Investigator: David S. Wilkie dwilkie@rcn.com  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ricardo A. Godoy  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1390      CULTURAL ANTHROPOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
	Many residents of Central Africa's forested Congo Basin rely on the meat of
              wild animals as their primary source of dietary protein.  As a result over one
              million metric tons of antelope, monkeys, apes, elephants, pigs and rodents are
              killed and eaten each year.  As the human population is growing rapidly, the
              threat to forest animals is severe.  This research studies the reasons why
              people eat bushmeat, testing the proposition that it is not invariably a
              deeply-rooted cultural preference, but is subject to price preferences.  The
              researchers, including a human ecologist, a cultural anthropologist and an
              economist will collaborate with local researchers in a qualitative ethnographic
              study, household surveys of game consumption, and experiments designed to parse
              out the effect of culture and economics in consumption decisions.  The research
              will provide the most detailed ethnographic account of cultural attitudes
              towards and preferences for bushmeat consumption in a tropical rain forest;
              will be the first to assess the response of bushmeat consumption to changes in
              economic variables; will combine surveys and experiments in an innovative
              methodology to estimate empirical variables, and will provide a better
              understanding of the likely effectiveness of market-based approaches to
              mitigating the adverse impact of bushmeat consumption. The empirical results
              will be valuable to conservationists and policy makers as well as contributing
              to the theoretical debate about the role of culture and economics in behavior.
              
 

