Title       : Research in Microeconometric Methods and Their Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0111799

Award Number: 0111799
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $19999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Luojia Hu luojiahu@northwestern.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Northwestern University
	      633 Clark Street
	      Evanston, IL  602081110    847/491-3003

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              

The project proposes research on three related subjects in theoretical and
              applied microeconometrics. The first study deals with estimation of nonlinear
              dynamic panel data models. Panel data track individuals over time and therefore
              offer us an opportunity to study an individual's dynamic behavior while
              controlling for his/her (observed and unobserved) characteristics. Econometric
              techniques for linear panel data models are well developed, but, in general,
              our knowledge of nonlinear panel data models is still very limited. In most
              cases, the key assumption is that the explanatory variables are strictly
              exogenous, which essentially requires no dynamic feedback from the outcome
              variable in one period to the explanatory variables in the next period (e.g. it
              rules out the lagged dependent variable as an explanatory variable). This
              assumption is not plausible in many empirical applications. For example, in an
              earnings model, this assumption amounts to requiring that an individual's
              earnings today do not affect his/her earnings tomorrow. One theme of the
              proposed research is to relax this assumption for a particular nonlinear model,
              namely the censored regression model, which is the appropriate model in the
              presence of data top-coding. The proposed method is applied to the matched data
              from the Current Population Survey and Social Security Administration (CPS-SSA)
              Earnings Record to study the racial difference in earnings stability. In
              particular, I empirically investigate whether the relative earnings stability
              between black and white had changed before and after the Civil Rights Act of
              1964.

      Although a step forward, the first study considers only one
              special form of endogeneity, namely, the presence of the lagged dependent
              variable. As a result, the proposed method heavily relies on this special
              structure. The goal of the second element of the proposed research is to extend
              the basic theoretical idea to construct alternative estimators for models with
              more general forms of endogeneity (e.g. predetermined regressors in the panel
              data model and endogenous regressors in the cross-sectional model). The
              proposed method is relevant in many empirical applications. For example, if we
              are interested in estimating a life-cycle female labor supply model using panel
              data, then the fertility variables, such as the number of children, are
              predetermined instead of strict exogenous since a woman's labor supply decision
              for today can affect her fertility decisions for tomorrow.

      The third
              part of the project proposes a method for estimating duration models using
              repeated cross-section data. More specifically, we estimate the conditional
              probability of an individual leaving unemployment at a particular point in time
              using repeated cross-section data on uncompleted unemployment spells. The
              proposed method improves upon the existing estimators by relaxing a
              stationarity assumption (i.e. we allow the compositions of the inflow of
              individuals into unemployment to vary over time). We compare estimates between
              using single and repeated cross-section data (on uncompleted unemployment
              spells) as well as those using panel data to gauge the performance of our
              estimator. We also extend the theoretical results to the competing risk models
              that allow for multi-state exit at the end of an unemployment spell. Finally we
              apply the proposed method to the Spanish Labor Force Survey data to
              investigate, among other things, the effects of the introduction of the
              temporary contracts in the mid 1980s on women's labor market experiences.

  
                 In sum, the proposed research is mainly on the econometric methodology, but
              the problems it tackles are relevant to many empirical applications. Therefore
              the results from the proposed project will be important for our understanding
              of many issues in economics and other social sciences.

