Title       : Using Experimental Data to Validate a Dynamic Behavioral Model of Human Capital
               Investments in Children: Evaluating the Impact of Mexico's PROGRESA Program
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 12,  2002     
File        : a0111593

Award Number: 0111593
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $342371             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth I. Wolpin wolpink@ssc.upenn.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Petra E. Todd  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Pennsylvania
	      Research Services
	      Philadelphia, PA  191046205    215/898-7293

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
The project provides estimates of a behavioral model of parental
              decision-making about child schooling and fertility in order to evaluate the
              impact of a controlled social experiment in rural Mexico designed to augment
              completed schooling levels of children. The program provides subsidies to
              parents conditional on the school attendance of their children. Social
              experiments are often limited in their ability to evaluate variations in the
              characteristics of the experimental program as well as longer run effects that
              extend beyond the life of the experiment, and they cannot be used at all to
              evaluate radically different programs. In contrast, to the extent that the
              estimated behavioral model is valid it  can be used to evaluate the impact of
              counterfactual policies. The following analyses are performed. First, the
              impact of the program at subsidy levels not explicitly part of the program is
              assessed. The program itself did not experimentally vary the amount of the
              subsidy. Second, the impact of extending the program to some or all ineligible
              families is assessed. Third, because the program has been in effect for only
              two years, it is not possible by simply comparing the treated to the untreated
              households to evaluate the longer run impact of the program. For example, even
              if the program is viewed by the experimental group as permanent, the impact of
              the program on the existing families is conditioned on their current
              circumstances, e.g., the number of children they have. However, the longer-run
              impact of the program may be to affect those circumstances, e.g., the number of
              children new households will have. Fourth, we compare the impact of the subsidy
              program on schooling to the radically different policy of placing legal
              restrictions on the use of child labor.
	The project also makes a
              methodological contribution. Structural estimation of behavioral models
              requires auxiliary assumptions about functional forms, i.e., of preferences,
              technology and other constraints, and the distributions of unobservable random
              elements. Assessing the validity of such models by relying on tests of model
              fit to sample elements of the data used in estimation provides useful, but far
              from compelling, evidence on the validity of the model. Such models are often
              subject to a form of "pre-test" estimation in that the final formulation of the
              model is based on the fit of prior formulations to certain aspects of the data.
              In this research, we use a different approach to model validation. The validity
              of the model will be ascertained according to how well structural estimates of
              the model based on data from the randomized-out control group predict the
              experimental impacts of the program.	

