Title       : Structure and Thermodynamics of Quasicrystals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0111198

Award Number: 0111198
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: G. Bruce Taggart                        
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $210000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Widom widom@andrew.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1765      MATERIALS THEORY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0111198
Widom
Aluminum-rich alloys containing transition metals form intricate
              crystal structures and quasicrystals.  These alloys display unusual and useful
              mechanical properties such as low coefficients of friction, great hardness at
              low temperatures, and ductility at high temperatures.  Quasicrystals already
              strengthen surgical alloys and coat surfaces of frying pans.  Further
              applications such as coatings for ball bearings have been proposed.

The
              greatest interest in quasicrystals lies in the fundamental scientific issues
              they raise.  Coexistence of sharp diffraction peaks with crystallographically
              forbidden decagonal and icosahedral symmetry posed the paradox that initially
              drew researchers to the field.  After recognizing that quasiperiodicity allows
              such symmetries, interest turned to explaining the origin and nature of
              quasiperiodic order.  This problem, which remains unsolved today, is the focus
              of this theoretical research.

Prior research applied methods of total energy
              calculations using interatomic potentials and full ab-initio calculations to
              intermetallic alloys.  Total energy calculations were incorporated into
              sophisticated Monte Carlo computer techniques known as quasilattice gas
              simulations.  These methods were developed to predict structures of AlCuCo and
              AlNiCo decagonal quasicrystal phases, achieving excellent qualitative agreement
              with experimental structural data.  These methods reveal fundamental
              excitations in addition to optimal, energy minimizing, structures.  In
              principle, the entire thermodynamic evolution with temperature and composition
              can be obtained.

The current grant builds on this success by studying
              ternary decagonal phases.  Accurate atomistic models and reliable energy
              calculations will be used to examine matching rule energetics and the coupling
              of adjacent decagonal layers.  Detailed quantitative comparisons will be made
              of models with experimental data.  The basic techniques used for decagonal
              phases will be adapted to stable icosahedral phases.

Development of abstract
              random tiling models continues with study of high codimension tilings as model
              amorphous structures and study of codimension-1 tilings as models of stacked
              membranes.
%%%
Aluminum-rich alloys containing transition metals form
              intricate crystal structures and quasicrystals.  These alloys display unusual
              and useful mechanical properties such as low coefficients of friction, great
              hardness at low temperatures, and ductility at high temperatures. 
              Quasicrystals already strengthen surgical alloys and coat surfaces of frying
              pans.  Further applications such as coatings for ball bearings have been
              proposed.

The greatest interest in quasicrystals lies in the fundamental
              scientific issues they raise.  Coexistence of sharp diffraction peaks with
              crystallographically forbidden decagonal and icosahedral symmetry posed the
              paradox that initially drew researchers to the field.  After recognizing that
              quasiperiodicity allows such symmetries, interest turned to explaining the
              origin and nature of quasiperiodic order.  This problem, which remains unsolved
              today, is the focus of this theoretical research.

The current grant
              continues the study of ternary decagonal phases.  Accurate atomistic models and
              reliable energy calculations will be used to examine matching rule energetics
              and the coupling of adjacent decagonal layers.  Detailed quantitative
              comparisons will be made of models with experimental data.  The basic
              techniques used for decagonal phases will be adapted to stable icosahedral
              phases.
***


