Title       : Control of Pre-mRNA Metabolism in Drosophila
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0111821

Award Number: 0111821
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $494999             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lillie L. Searles lsearles@email.unc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Chapel Hill
	      440 West Franklin Street
	      Chapel Hill, NC  27514    919/966-3411

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project addresses the role of the Drosophila melanogaster gene called 
              suppressor of sable, su(s),in the control of pre-mRNA metabolism.  Recent
              studies from this laboratory indicate that the su(s)gene product, Su(s),
              associates with a hypophosphorylated form of RNA polymerse II (RNAP II) and
              performs a novel function in regulating both transcription and an early step in
              pre-mRNA processing.  The project has three main objectives.  The first is to
              gain a better understanding of how Su(s) regulates RNA production.  Northern
              blot and RT-PCR analyses will be used to examine the effect of su(s) mutations
              on  the synthesis and processing of transcripts from genes that have been
              defined in previous studies as probable targets of Su(s)-mediated regulation. 
              Drosophila genome microarrays will be used to examine the global effect of
              su(s) mutations on gene expression in embryos and to identify new genes that
              are regulated by Su(s).The second objective is to investigate the interactions
              of Su(s) with other proteins and with specific regions of genes.  Polytene
              chromosomes will be probed simultaneously with a polyclonal antibody that
              recognizes Su(s) and one of several different monoclonal antibodies that
              recognize specific phosphorylated forms of RNAP II.  The chromatin
              immunoprecipitation (ChIP) technique will be used to examine the distribution
              of Su(s) and different phosphorylated forms of RNA polymerase II in specific
              regions of genes.  The third objective is to characterize functional domains of
              Su(s) through in vivo analysis of su(s) transgenes with alterations at specific
              sites in the coding region.

Many cellular processes  once thought to be
              distinct events, separated by time and distance, are now believed to occur at
              the same time and in the same place, catalyzed by molecular complexes with at
              least some shared components.  This analysis of such a pair of processes,
              transcription and transcript processing, promises to provide novel insights
              into the mechanisms used to integrate various metabolic events in higher
              organisms.





