Title       : US-Turkey Cooperative Research: Calixarene Based Receptors for Site Reclamation
               by the Removal of Toxic Heavy Metals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0111170

Award Number: 0111170
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35280              (Estimated)
Investigator: D. M. Roundhill david.m.roundhill@ttu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas Tech University
	      203 Holden Hall
	      Lubbock, TX  794091035    806/742-2011

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
              0313000   Regional & Environmental                
Program Ref : 5940,9197,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0111170
Roundhill

Description: This project supports a collaborative project
              between Dr. D.M. Roundhill, Department of Chemistry, Texas Tech University,
              Lubbock, Texas and Dr. Mustafa Yilmaz, Department of Chemistry, Selcuk
              University, Konya, Turkey.  The focus of the collaboration is the synthesis of
              new chemically modified calixarenes, and their use as liquid-liquid phase
              extractants for heavy metal ions.  In particular, metal ions will be targeted
              that are presently causing environmental problems.  The researchers plan to
              study calixarene-based receptors designed for heavy metal clean up
              applications.  The work includes the generation of new ionophore polymer
              systems with specific binding strategies for Cs+ and selected cations and
              anions.  Specifically the calixarene known as calixcrown-6 polymer will be
              synthesized and incorporated into copolymer resins.  The material thus derived
              will be characterized, and will be used in liquid-liquid extractions with equal
              volume mixtures of metal and extractant analyzed for aqueous phase metals.  The
              solid-liquid extraction will be determined by batchwise column methods.  The
              plan of work involves three sequential components: synthesis of ionophores,
              characterization of ionophores and extraction studies that will assess the
              ability of the ionophores to extract metal ions.  

Scope: The project
              supports collaboration between two well-known scientists who have complementary
              expertise and resources to investigate an important material and environmental
              problem. There are substantial environmental implications of the research, as
              it may lead to new and improved means for decontamination of heavy metal
              polluted sites.  Both groups have independently studied the complexation of
              metal ions by calixarenes and both will conduct research on liquid phase
              extractants of heavy metals with the use of calixarene modified polymers.  Dr.
              Yilmaz is a synthetic organic chemist with extensive experience in calixarene
              chemistry, and Dr. Roundhill is an inorganic chemist who has considerable
              knowledge of the complexation chemistry of heavy metal ions.  The proposed
              collaborative effort will establish stronger international ties and provide
              scientific benefits.  This project meets the INT objective of supporting
              collaborative research in areas of mutual interest.

