Title       : Conserved Regulatory Elements from the Rpx/HesxI Homeobox Gene
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0111173

Award Number: 0111173
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $329396             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kathleen A. Mahon kmahon@bcm.tmc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Baylor College of Medicine
	      One Baylor Plaza
	      Houston, TX  770303404    713/798-6970

NSF Program : 1190      DEVELOPMENTAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The hypothalamic-pituitary axis influences multiple bodily functions, such as
              homeostasis, growth, and reproduction. The concerted development of the
              primordia of the hypothalamus and pituitary (Rathke's pouch) during early
              embryogenesis presages the integrated neuroendocrine functions these tissues
              later share. Studies on the homeobox gene Rpx/HesxI have allowed unique
              molecular access to these early developmental processes. Rpx/HesxI is one of
              the earliest markers for the anterior region of the mouse embryo, and it is
              dynamically and transiently expressed in the prechordal plate, anterior
              forebrain and, at later stages of development, in Rathke's pouch. Targeted
              mutagenesis has demonstrated that Rpx plays a key role in the development of
              both the forebrain and the pituitary. In addition, examination of Rpx
              expression in other mouse pituitary mutants has allowed Rpx and other homeobox
              genes to be ordered in a putative regulatory hierarchy controlling pituitary
              organogenesis. 
It has been determined that multiple regulatory elements
              interdigitated within the Rpx gene separately control the early expression in
              the anterior forebrain and the late expression in Rathke's pouch in the mouse
              embryo.  Dr. Mahon will undertake a further, more precise, delineation of the
              regulatory regions, focusing on sequences that are both structurally and
              functionally conserved between mouse and frog. Furthermore, based on the
              deletion analysis in frog and mouse, it will be possible to determine whether
              genes known to genetically regulate Rpx bind directly to Rpx regulatory
              sequences. This approach will further elaborate the genetic network involved in
              forebrain and pituitary development, and provide insight into the development
              of this important neuroendocrine system. 

