Title       : Infrared Laser Spectroscopy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0111125

Award Number: 0111125
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert F. Curl rfcurl@ricevm1.rice.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. Tittel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Marsh Rice Univ
	      6100 Main Street, MS-16
	      Houston, TX  772511892    713/348-4820

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Robert F. Curl of Rice University is funded for his research on infrarerd
              laser spectroscopy by the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.
               High resolution laser infrared spectroscopy of cyanomethylene (HCCN),
              hydroxymethyl, methoxy, vinoxy. and triplet vinylidene will be used to analyze
              the electronic structures, potential surfaces, and internal dynamics.  Interest
              in HCCN eminates from the low activation to bending about the HCC angle; an
              experimentally derived potential for this bending motion will be generated. 
              Jahn-Teller distorions in methoxy should be particularly evident in the
              unsymmetrical CH stretching modes.  The experimentally determined potential
              surface will be used to elucidate the Jahn-Teller effect.  Triplet vinylidene
              is a high energy isomer of acetylene.  The rotational spectrum will be measured
              so that the structure of this isomer can be unequivocally assigned.  The tuning
              range of cw quantum cascade lasers will be increased so as to make such lasers
              more ueful for general spectroscopic purposes by operating them in an extended
              cavity laser configuration.  The value of the wider tuning window in infrared
              laser spectroscopy will be demonstrated experimentally.

The use of high
              resolution infrared vibrational and rotational spectra in structure
              determinations of significant radicals provides important insight into basic
              bonding and structural questions.  Many such radicals are important in chemical
              processes and are highly reactive, and are therefore difficult to analyze
              because of fleeting lifetimes.  The studies by Dr. Curl at Rice University will
              provide novel measurements of such radicals that will advance our basic
              understanding of important chemical radicals, with respect to their structure
              and their reactivity.
