Title       : Genetic Dissection of the Specificity of Leucine Zipper Dimerization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 24,  2002       
File        : a0111000

Award Number: 0111000
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $366000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James C. Hu jimhu@tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1108,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Leucine zippers are formed when a pair of short alpha -helices in a pair of
              protein molecules bind in a
configuration called a coiled coil. Leucine
              zippers and other coiled coils are abundant in nature;
they are found in about
              10% of all proteins encoded in typical genomes, including many
              important
transcription factors. The project addresses two complementary
              questions about leucine zippers.
First, how do the subunit interactions in the
              context of a specific leucine zipper from the yeast
transcription factor GCN4,
              control the specificity and stability of zipper assembly.
              Different
interactions will be engineered into the GCN4 leucine zipper and
              characterized by biophysical
assays including equilibrium and stopped-flow
              circular dichroism, sedimentation equilibrium, and
X-ray crystallography. In
              addition, new biophysical assays for leucine zipper assembly will
              be
implemented based on analytical ultracentrifugation and fluorescence
              correlation spectroscopy.
Second, the project will explore the diversity of
              coiled coils in a whole genome. Using powerful
genetic methods, the project
              will examine the specificity of interactions among hundreds of
naturally
              occurring, predicted coiled-coils from the yeast genome that must coexist in
              the same cell.
Because of their small size and simple, repetitive structures,
              leucine zippers have provided useful
models for studying general issues in how
              proteins fold. By combining research on specific
interactions with genome-wide
              studies of the properties of many zippers, this project will test
whether our
              understanding of protein foldin is sufficient to illuminate the biology of a
              large and
widely distributed class of important proteins.
