Title       : Kinetics and Mechanisms of Oxygen and Peroxide Activation by Non-heme Iron
               Complexes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 3,  2001     
File        : a0111202

Award Number: 0111202
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Michael J. Clarke                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elena V. Rybak-Akimova elena.rybak-akimova@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Elena Rybak-Akimova of Tufts University  is supported by  the Inorganic,
              Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program to conduct research on
              kinetics and mechanisms of oxygen and peroxide activation by non-heme iron
              complexes. She has not previously been PI of  NSF research grants. A main aim
              of the proposal is to elucidate the difference between iron-mediated biological
              oxidations that involve free radicals and those that proceed through
              'radical-free' pathways. Kinetic and mechanistic studies of high-valent iron
              oxo species supported by tris-picolyamine (TPA) ligands will be carried out at
              low temperatures, using cryogenic stopped-flow techniques (single and double
              mixing) with spectrophotometric and EPR registration. 

Research under this
              project will clarify obscure aspects of important biochemical processes and
              provide insights that potentially will lead to development of environmentally
              benign processes using oxygen and/or hydrogen peroxide in chemical synthesis
              and oxidative detoxification of wastes. Sophisticated stopped-flow  kinetic
              studies, such as those proposed here, are necessary to demonstrate the
              relationship of synthetic models of enzyme active sites to actual biological
              function. Few laboratories now have the capability to carry out such studies.
              This program will provide especially valuable training for students and
              postdoctoral researchers.

