Title       : Interstrand Crosslink Repair in Drosophila Melanogaster
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 16,  2002      
File        : a0111011

Award Number: 0111011
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kenneth C. Burtis kcburtis@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1116      EUKARYOTIC GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The objective of this project is to understand the mechanism by which Drosophila
              and other multicellular eukaryotes repair covalent interstrand crosslinks
              between the two strands of the DNA duplex.  This type of damage, which can
              occur as a result of exposure to a number of compounds, has catastrophic
              implications for the ability of a cell to replicate its genome. It is unique in
              that crosslinking simultaneously damages sequences on both strands of the
              duplex, preventing use of either strand as a template for repair.  
From
              genetic screens for mutants uniquely hypersensitive to crosslinking agents, a
              small group of genes has been identified that appear to be play essential roles
              in crosslink repair, but to have no essential role in other repair pathways. 
              This phenotype distinguishes these genes from the majority of genes involved in
              crosslink repair, which are essential components of other major repair
              pathways. The specific roles in crosslink repair of the four crosslink-specific
              genes are unknown. The crosslink-sensitive genes, which include mus308, snm1
              and two novel mutations, will be studied at the genetic, molecular and
              biochemical levels to deduce their functional characteristics.  The novel
              mutations will be genetically and molecularly characterized. The snm1 gene, for
              which there is no mutant allele in Drosophila, will be subjected to targeted
              and classical mutagenesis until a mutation is obtained. When clones and
              mutations are available for each of the four genes, the DNA repair phenotypes
              of all four will be characterized. Epistatic interactions will be determined to
              position these genes in repair pathways.  Interactions at both the genetic and
              biochemical level will be determined to test the hypothesis that they function
              as components of a unique aspect of crosslink repair, and biochemical
              characterization will be performed to understand the molecular role they serve
              in this process. 

