Title       : The Impact of Television on Very Young Children
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 6,  2002       
File        : a0111811

Award Number: 0111811
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $282160             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Anderson anderson@psych.umass.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Massachusetts Amherst
	      408 Goodell Building
	      Amherst, MA  010033285    413/545-0698

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

The Impact of Television on Very Young Children

Daniel R.
              Anderson

	Little is known about the impact of television on children younger
              than three years.  Nevertheless, field studies indicate that exposure to
              television is associated with slower language and cognitive development.  This
              research considers the impact of two types of television to which very young
              children are exposed.  The first type is television as background, watched by
              others, to which the child pays little active attention.  The second type is
              television as foreground specifically designed for very young children and to
              which they actively attend.  
The first two studies test the hypothesis that
              background television disrupts toy play and parent-child social interactions. 
              If the hypothesis is correct, background television reduces the quality of
              these activities essential for healthy cognitive and social development.  In
              the first study very young children's toy play is observed in the presence of a
              television program for adults, a television program for older children, and
              with no television.  If background television disrupts play, it is expected
              that there will be systematic differences in both qualitative and quantitative
              aspects of toy play.  In the second study parent-child interactions are
              observed in the presence of a television program for adults and with no
              television.  If background television disrupts parent-child interactions, both
              qualitative and quantitative differences in parent-child interactions will be
              found.
	Increasingly, television programs are being developed specifically for
              very young children.  There has been no firm determination as to when very
              young children begin to comprehend such programs.  The third study is designed
              to assess the age at which very young children discriminate comprehensible and
              incomprehensible versions of Teletubbies.  The fourth study assesses whether
              Teletubbies influences the quality of toy play subsequent to viewing.
	The
              research will provide significant new information relevant to the current
              debate concerning the impact of electronic media on very young children. 
              Specifically, the research will indicate whether background television disrupts
              very young children's cognitive and social behaviors.  Additionally, the
              research will provide an initial determination of the earliest age at which
              conventional television can be plausibly educational, as well as whether play
              behavior is stimulated or otherwise influenced by a prominent television
              program specifically designed for very young children.  
The research will
              also cast light on the impact of two future trends in media.  One trend, the
              advent of high-definition and broadband television, will provide programming
              that is more salient as a background influence in young children's
              environments.  The second trend is that, with the economic success of
              Teletubbies, other programs for very young children will soon follow.  These
              studies will provide basic observations essential to evaluating the impact of
              television on very young children now and in the future.


