Title       : Information, Response Delays, and the Effects of Monetary Policy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 27,  2002   
File        : a0111861

Award Number: 0111861
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $239611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael Woodford   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project contributes to the understanding of the transmission mechanism of
              monetary policy, which is to say, of the way in which changes in monetary
              policy affect real activity and inflation. The primary aim of developing a more
              accurate model of these effects is to allow a more precise analysis of the
              consequences of adopting one or another monetary policy rule, and the
              calculation of an optimal rule. The analysis is grounded in optimizing
              private-sector behavior, in order to allow an analysis of the welfare
              consequences of alternative policies in terms of the extent to which private
              objectives are fulfilled.
A defect of existing optimizing models of the
              monetary transmission mechanism is that they are too exclusively
              "forward-looking": both inflation and real activity are predicted to be
              determined purely by current and expected future interest-rate policy, with no
              effect of past conditions. Empirical evidence on the effects of monetary policy
              instead indicate the existence of response delays, that imply both that the
              effects of policy changes are not observed immediately and that they persist
              longer than do the effects upon interest rates. The project considers the
              consequences of two kinds of modifications of standard models that allow for
              response delays while still assuming optimizing behavior on the part of the
              private sector.

The first class of models assumes that private
              decisionmakers do not continuously reoptimize in the light of current
              conditions, but instead only reconsider their actions after a certain interval.
               This allows a delay in the effects of a monetary policy change upon aggregate
              expenditure, on the ground that not everyone immediately revises their previous
              spending plans. When this model of intermittent optimization is applied to
              consumer expenditure, it has consequences for aggregate consumption similar to
              those of the recently popular hypothesis of "habit persistence", but without
              certain implications for individual household behavior that do not fit with
              panel data evidence.

The second class of models assumes that private
              decisionmakers do not continually monitor current conditions with complete
              accuracy, in order to economize on limited information-processing capacity. It
              is assumed that decisionmakers monitor their environment using a "noisy
              channel" in the information-theoretic sense.  This is not simply a metaphor,
              but provides a quantitative model of the sources of error in decisionmakers'
              perception of their environment, and in particular provides a useful way of
              quantifying the assumed constraint on information-processing capacity. This
              allows a delay in the effects of a monetary policy change, on the ground that
              decisionmakers are not immediately able to discern with certainty that the
              change has occurred.  The resulting theory has some similarities to
              asymmetric-information models of the 1970s, but is able to answer important
              objections that were raised to those theories because the asymmetric
              information is based upon limitations upon individuals' ability to pay
              attention to everything in their environment, rather than upon any claim that
              the relevant data are not publicly available.
An interesting feature of this
              type of model is that significant delays in price adjustment can result even
              when the information of individual price-setters about current aggregate
              conditions is relatively accurate.  It suffices that (because the errors in
              observation resulting from inadequate channel capacity) there be significant
              uncertainty about what others may believe that others may believe that others
              may believe ... about the aggregate state. In other words, it is not
              uncertainty about the state of the economy so much as the absence of common
              knowledge that results in response delays.  This approach to explaining
              response delays helps to explain aspects of the observed effects of monetary
              policy that optimizing models with sticky prices cannot, including differential
              speeds of response of prices to different types of shocks, and apparent
              stickiness of the rate of inflation (as opposed to the price level) under
              certain conditions.
A more sophisticated version of this class of models seeks
              to explain the degree of precision with which individual variables are
              monitored by decisionmakers, by assuming a global channel-capacity constraint
              (a constraint upon the overall number of bits per period of information that
              can be pro-cessed), subject to which decisionmakers choose an optimal
              information-collection strategy. This offers the prospect of a theory that
              yields very tight predictions, and at the same time allows for important
              changes in information structure in response to changes in economic conditions,
              including sufficiently dramatic changes in monetary policy. The project
              considers the design of optimal monetary policies, both when the information
              structure is taken as given, and when endogenous response of the information
              structure to the policy regime is taken into account.


