Title       : Studies of Motion Vision
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0111059

Award Number: 0111059
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Karen K. De Valois valois@socrates.berkeley.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Russell L. De Valois  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Berkeley
	      
	      Berkeley, CA  94720    415/642-6000

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              De Valois/ De Valois  (0111059)

Studies of Motion Vision

 Lay
              Abstract

This project is designed to increase our understanding of how the
              brain analyzes visual motion. Telling the difference visually between
              stationary and moving objects is a very difficult problem. The physiological
              responses of neurons in the visual system of macaque monkeys to stationary and
              moving objects will be examined and compared to the behavioral responses of
              human observers in similar tasks. Two major subtopics will be considered.
An
              early step in the analysis of visual motion is the creation in the first visual
              cortical area (V1) of directionally-selective neurons, neurons that respond
              only if an object moves in a particular direction within the limited visual
              region from which the cell receives inputs. One topic of investigation will be
              how these cells are created; in particular, where do their inputs come from and
              how are they combined to produce directional selectivity. A specific model will
              be tested by several experiments on both directional V1 cells and on the cells
              in the lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) that provide inputs to the directional
              cells. The results of these experiments will be compared to the results from
              related psychophysical studies on human observers.
A second topic will be the
              way the color-vision system provides input to or interacts with the visual
              motion system. Psychophysical experiments on human observers will examine the
              effects of color alternation on the discrimination of the direction of motion
              of a luminance-varying grating. Different chromatic combinations will be used,
              including those that preferentially excite specific classes of photoreceptors
              or neurons in the LGN. Earlier work predicts differential effects for different
              color combinations. Physiological studies will examine the effects of color
              alternation on the responses of directionally-selective neurons in V1 for
              comparison to behavioral responses from humans.
These studies will
              significantly advance our understanding of the initial mechanisms of the visual
              motion system in humans and other primates. In addition to increasing our
              knowledge of the brain and its organization, this work will contribute to the
              advancement of health and human understanding. The fuller understanding gained
              from these studies may also have direct application in the design of lighting
              systems, particularly for moving vehicles, and in other situations in which
              human factors concerns are significant. 
This project will contribute to the
              scientific education and training of both undergraduate and graduate students.
              Graduate students will be involved in the design, performance, analysis and
              publication of these studies. Undergraduate students will work as laboratory
              technicians and psychophysical subjects. When possible, they will also be
              involved in the design, performance, analysis and publication of the studies.
              Many former graduate students who have worked on similar projects in these
              laboratories have built distinguished careers in the study of vision. Several
              former undergraduates who have worked in these laboratories have become health
              workers or scientists. Students employed on similar projects in the past have
              come from both genders and many ethnic groups. This research, like previous
              work in these laboratories, is expected to increase the opportunities for
              students from minority groups to participate in scientific research and prepare
              for future careers of their own.

