Title       : Wavelets, Generalized Spectrum, and Nonparametric Analysis and Applications in
               Time Series Econometrics
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0111769

Award Number: 0111769
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $214710             (Estimated)
Investigator: Yongmiao Hong yh20@cornell.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Cornell University-Endowed
	      Office of Sponsored Programs
	      Ithaca, NY  148532801    607/255-5014

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project consists of three areas of research in econometrics: wavelet
              analysis in time series/dynamic panels; evaluation of out-of-sample forecasts
              for densities and confidence inter-vals; and asymptotic distribution theory for
              nonparametric entropy measures of serial dependence.  Wavelet analysis provides
              natural tools for estimating the spectrum of an economic time series, which
              typically has peaks/spikes, due to strong autocorrelation, seasonality and
              business cycles. One example is heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation
              con-sistent (HAC) covariance estimation. The popular Andrews-Newey kernel
              methods tend to underestimate the peak (and so the HAC), leading to
              overrejection in testing, and too narrow confidence interval estimates.  This
              project develops a class of wavelet-based HAC estimators.  Some simulation
              studies show that for the size of tests, the wavelet estimators outperform
              their kernel counterparts, particularly when serial correlation is strong. Two
              substantive extensions are pursued. The first is to refine the wavelet HAC
              estimators via a nonparametric frequency-domain prewhitening pro-cedure. This
              provides a faster convergent and more stable alternative than the commonly used
              parametric vector autoregression (VAR) prewhitening.  The second extension is
              wavelet HAC estimation for panel models. The cur-rent practice for kernel HAC
              estimation in panels uses a bandwidth depending only on the number of time
              periods. This project finds that for both kernels and wavelets, the optimal
              smoothing parameters in panels depend on both the numbers of time periods and
              individuals.  Wavelets are also used to distinguish a trend-stationary time
              series from a unit root process and to test serial correlation of unknown form
              in panel models.

Omnibus procedures for evaluating out-of-sample density and
              intervals forecasts are developed using a generalized spectral ap-proach. 
              These procedures are supplemented with a class of separate inference procedures
              that can reveal information on sources of suboptimal density- and intervals
              forecasts. Appli-cations to stock markets and foreign exchange markets evaluate
              a variety of popular density forecast models.

For a class of kernel-based
              smoothed nonparametric entropy measures of serial dependence, this project
              develops an asymptotic distribution theory and shows how it can be used to
              derive the limit distributions for the existing entropy measures in the
              literature.  The project develops tests that are either not available in the
              literature or are asymptotically more powerful than the existing procedures.
              Entropy measures can be used to test the random walk hypothesis, evaluate
              density- forecast models, identify significant lags of a time series and check
              the adequacy of dynamic likelihood models.

