Title       : Mechanism of PLP-Dependent beta-Eliminases
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0111024

Award Number: 0111024
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $90000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Paul F. Cook pcook@chemdept.chem.ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The long-term goal of our studies is to elucidate the mechanisms of pyridoxal
              5'-phosphate (PLP)-dependent enzymes that catalyze chemistry at the beta-carbon
              of amino acid. Studies have focused on the mechanism of the enzyme
              O-acetylserine sulfhydryase (OASS), which catalyzes the beta-replacement of the
              acetoxy group of O-acetyl-L-serine with SH to give L-cysteine.  Of interest, a
              fraction of the OASS is in the cysteine synthetase (CS) multienzyme complex
              with the first enzyme in the cysteine biosynthetic pathway, serine
              acetyltransferase(SAT). Thus, a complete mechanistic study of the component
              enzymes alone and in the CS multienzyme complex is being carried out. In this
              regard, mechanistic studies are planned to elucidate the kinetic and chemical
              mechanisms of serine acetyltransferase according to the following specific
              aims. 1) The kinetic and acid-base chemical mechanism of STA will be determined
              via the pH dependence of kinetic parameters, and isotope effects. 2) The
              mechanismof SAT regulation by L-cysteine will make use of initial velocity
              studies, isotope effects, spectral studies, and analytical ultracentrifugation
              beta-Replacement reactions catalyzed by PLP-dependent enzymes are of interest
              since they generate an beta-aminoacrylate external aldimine intermediate, a hot
              electrophile. In addition, there is the possibility that this class of enzymes
              catalyze the beta elimination and beta addition reactions in a concerted, E2 ,
              or stepwise, E1 , reaction. It is of interest to determine how OASS stabilizes
              its beta-aminoacrylate intermediate, and whether the mechanisms of elimination
              and addition are concerted or stepwise, that is whether a quinonoid
              intermediate is generated during the two halves of the reaction. In addition,
              the participation of the enzyme in the overall reaction in terms of catalytic
              advantage is of import. Finally, a new allosteric regulatory site for the
              binding of small anions has recently been identified, and a molecular mechanism
              of inhibition proposed that must be tested. The above questions will be
              answered via the following specific aims. 1) The reaction mechanism will be
              probed using presteady state and steady state kinetic techniques, and kinetic
              isotope effects to obtain information on the second half of the reaction. 2)
              Oligonucleotide-directed mutagenesis will be used to identify the function of
              enzyme residues that interact with the cofactor, and substrate. 3) The new
              mechanism of regulation will be tested using oligonucleotide-directed
              mutagenesis of residues along the pathway for transmission of the allosteric
              effect.
