Title       : RUI: Molecular Mechanisms for Physiological Variations in the Swimming
               Musculature of Fishes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 2,  2003      
File        : a0111112

Award Number: 0111112
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139777             (Estimated)
Investigator: David J. Coughlin coughlin@pop1.science.widener.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Widener Univ Main Campus
	      One University Place
	      Chester, PA  19013    215/499-4000

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              
Axial swimming in fishes is powered by the myotome, the musculature that
              usually constitutes the majority of the animal's mass.  The myotome is composed
              of both red or aerobic muscle fibers and white or anaerobic muscle fibers, with
              the white muscle often comprising 90% and red muscle 10% or less of the
              swimming musculature.  Slow, steady swimming is powered by the lateral strips
              of red muscle that run down each side of the animal.  Alternating waves of
              muscular contraction pass down the red muscle from head to tail, leading to
              oscillation of the body and/or tail and resulting in forward thrust. 
              
Research over the last decade on the function of red or aerobic muscle during
              steady, axial swimming has revealed a variety of patterns of power production. 
              In some fish species, the power for swimming is generated in equal amounts by
              each longitudinal position (e.g. eels, mackerel and tuna), while others are
              theorized to generate much higher mechanical power from the anterior myotome
              (e.g. carp).  Lastly, several species have been shown to power swimming
              primarily with the posterior myotome (e.g. scup, rainbow trout and bass).  In
              most of the species studied the anterior myotome experiences lower muscle
              strains, longer activation periods and shorter phase shifts of muscle
              activation relative to muscle shortening, as compared to posterior muscle. 
              These muscle activity conditions limit power production by the anterior myotome
              during steady swimming.  However, the contraction kinetics of the red muscle
              also vary along the length of most fishes, and these variations in the
              contractile properties can mitigate the impact of disadvantageous activation
              conditions.  For instance, faster kinetics (e.g. rates of relaxation and, in
              some species, rates of activation) allows anterior muscle to produce more power
              under a given set of activation conditions than posterior muscle.
	The goal of
              this research program is to understand the basis for variations in swimming
              form in different fish species.  This proposal focuses at the molecular and
              muscle physiology levels and addresses the relationship of contraction kinetics
              to the protein composition of muscle.  Since understanding the patterns of
              power production during swimming requires knowledge of the kinetics of that
              muscle, I propose to measure the contraction kinetics of fish red muscle and to
              determine the molecular correlates of longitudinal variations in kinetics.  The
              proposal will pursue two objectives.
First, what are the molecular mechanisms
              for physiological variations in the swimming musculature of rainbow trout? 
              Several molecular techniques will be used to determine if previously observed
              longitudinal variations in contraction kinetics and power production are
              associated with variations in the molecular structure of swimming muscle. 
              Molecular techniques will be developed to screen the aerobic swimming muscle of
              trout to see if longitudinal differences in both activation and relaxation
              rates correlate with variations in the protein composition of the muscle. 
              Several muscle proteins will be targeted, including troponin, tropomyosin and
              myosin.  
	Second, do the patterns of molecular variation in the red muscle
              vary between species?  Axial based swimming in fishes varies widely, from
              stiff-bodied swimming in tuna and mackerel to the high body curvature of
              swimming eels. This research proposal extends the analysis of both contraction
              kinetics and molecular structure to several new species that vary in swimming
              mode and patterns of power production.  Little is known of the patterns of
              contraction kinetics and muscle composition amongst fishes in general.  For
              this objective, the same sorts of molecular approaches will be used.  However,
              physiological measurements of muscle contractile properties will also be made,
              including measurements of activation and relaxation rates and shortening
              velocity.  The targeted species include eel, mackerel, largemouth bass and
              scup.

