Title       : RUI - Functional Characterization of a Nematode Gene Related to the Class II
               bHLH Protein, ABF-1
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 28,  2002      
File        : a0111069

Award Number: 0111069
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Joanne S. Tornow                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $139429             (Estimated)
Investigator: Craig Vierra cvierra@uop.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Gregg Jongeward  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of the Pacific
	      3601 Pacific Avenue
	      Stockton, CA  952110110    209/946-2011

NSF Program : 1154      BIOCHEMISTRY OF GENE EXPRESSIO
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Basic helix-loop-helix proteins are important transcriptional regulators of
              cellular proliferation and differentiation in organisms ranging from
              invertebrates to vertebrates.  Recently, a new gene closely related to the
              mammalian basic helix-loop-helix protein activated B-cell factor 1 (ABF-1),
              designated CeABF-1, was cloned from the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans.  The
              objectives of the research include 1) investigating the function of the CeABF-1
              gene; 2) elucidating the transcriptional properties of the CeABF-1 protein; 3)
              identifying the target gene(s) regulated by CeABF-1.  To accomplish these
              specific goals, gene function and expression studies will be performed to
              delineate the role of CeABF-1 in the nematode.  The functional studies will
              integrate a broad spectrum of genetic and biochemical techniques, including RNA
              microinjections and the development of transgenic animals for expression
              analyses.  The transcriptional properties and target gene(s) regulated by
              CeABF-1 will be analyzed using DNA transfections, electrophoretic-mobility
              shift assays and DNA microanalysis.  This project will allow for the comparison
              of HLH gene function in both nematodes and humans and identify conserved
              molecular pathways important for cellular processes. The results of these
              studies will help to elucidate the evolutionary as well as the biological
              relationship between the nematode and human ABF-1 protein. 
              

Helix-loop-helix (HLH) proteins are important transcriptional regulators of
              cellular proliferation and differentiation in organisms ranging from
              invertebrates to vertebrates. The importance of HLH proteins as potent
              mediators of immune system function and muscle development has been well
              established.  The significance of these studies will allow for the
              determination of the biological function of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans
              HLH gene, designated CeABF-1, and will provide data that will help to elucidate
              the molecular mechanisms that govern cell-restricted eukaryotic gene
              expression.  This project will enhance the knowledge of target gene(s)
              controlled by the protein CeABF-1, and provide an understanding of the
              ancestral relationship between the worm CeABF-1 and human homologue, activated
              B-cell factor 1 (ABF-1).
