Title       : Calibrating the Early Peopling of North America: Ancient Biomolecular and
               Chronological Contexts
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 12,  2001      
File        : a0111249

Award Number: 0111249
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $108265             (Estimated)
Investigator: R. E. Taylor RETAYLOR@citrus.UCR.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the National Science Foundation, Dr. R. E. Taylor
              (University of California, Riverside) and Dr. David Smith (University of
              California, Davis) will undertake radiocarbon (14C) measurements using
              accelerator mass spectrometry technology and examine the mitochondrial DNA
              (mtDNA) content in a group of 35 human skeletal samples from 15 North America
              sites with indicated ages ranging from approximately 5,000 to 11,000 years. 
              Recently developed technical capabilities in the laboratories of the
              collaborators will provide data to address questions recently raised by what
              appears to be anomalous physical characteristics of several North American
              human skeletons dating to the early Holocene--between 10,000 and 6,000 years
              ago. The 14C data will provide the temporal controls and the mtDNA data will
              define genetic relationships between and among the group of human skeletal
              samples examined.  The purpose of this research is to examine various questions
              that have recently been posed involving new understandings concerning the
              timing and character of earliest human migrations from Asia to North America at
              the very end of the Pleistocene and beginning of the Holocene.  This movement
              of hunter and gatherer groups constitutes one of the most significant migration
              in the history of the human species.  Precisely when and how it occurred have
              been the subject of long standing and sometimes contentious debates among
              scientists.  The long-held view that the late Pleistocene North American Clovis
              culture represented the earliest New World human occupation has been challenged
              on the basis of data from several sites in both North and South America.  This
              data appears to point to the presence of human groups in the New World at least
              1,000 years prior to the earliest manifestation of Clovis occupation in North
              America.  In addition, preliminary evaluations of physical characteristics of a
              number of North American human skeletons recently assigned to the early
              Holocene suggest that the origins of the ancestral populations of Native
              Americans may be much more complex than currently understood.  A series of
              early multiple migrations may have produced a very complex late
              Pleistocene/early Holocene genetic admixture in North America.  A major
              research question that will be directly addressed with the data to be obtained
              in this study is whether some early North American human populations did not
              survive and thus may not be genetically related to any contemporary Native
              American group.


