Title       : Productivity, Location and Growth in the Service and Manufacturing Sectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 3,  2002      
File        : a0111803

Award Number: 0111803
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $303893             (Estimated)
Investigator: J. Vernon Henderson j_henderson@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Business service and headquarters activities locate disproportionately in the
              largest metro areas, while manufacturing is found disproportionately in smaller
              towns and cities. The question is why; and, hence, what is the role of large
              metro areas versus small and medium size cities in the USA. To start to
              understand the forces at work, this project examines local growth patterns,
              productivity, and out-sourcing decisions in the service and headquarter
              sectors. For the case of headquarters, by locating in the largest metro areas,
              headquarters separate themselves from their production facilities, creating
              significant internal company face-to-face communication costs. To what extent
              do they choose to be in these metro areas to take advantage of the diversity of
              local intermediate service inputs such as advertising, legal, and financial
              services found there, as opposed to gather information about innovations,
              export markets, financing, and the like through local information spillovers
              from, say, other headquarters? Similarly, why are business services located in
              the largest and most expensive metro areas? To what extent is it local scale
              economies within the service sector, versus upstream and downstream linkages
              within the service sector, versus linkages to sectors using services (e.g.,
              headquarters) where those sectors may experience high own sector scale
              economies? 

The first two sections of the project examine these issues
              through a detailed analysis of city growth of headquarters and service
              industries, out-sourcing decisions, and productivity of headquarters and
              service sector firms. One issue is that for headquarters, there is no direct
              output measure, so productivity benefits must be measured through their effects
              on wages and rents. Another issue concerns the role of firm structure and the
              relationship between operating units and their headquarters in determining
              out-sourcing decisions. The last section of the project looks at the
              determinants of industry mobility across cities and compares mobility for
              service versus manufacturing sector industries, an issue for cities in planning
              and competing for industries. Manufacturing industries are highly mobile across
              cities, so that over the course of a couple of decades a smaller city may
              switch from being a textile manufacturer to specializing in electronics. Are
              service sector industries so footloose?

