Title       : Lobbying and Issue-Definition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 7,  2001     
File        : a0111224

Award Number: 0111224
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $235930             (Estimated)
Investigator: Frank R. Baumgartner frankb@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Marie E. Hojnacki  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research involves an extension and continuation of research begun with an
              earlier National Science Foundation award.  In that project the investigators
              laid out a methodology for conducting interviews on a random sample of public
              policy issues and assessing the strategies and resources of lobbyists and other
              policy advocates as they attempt to influence the policy process.  The
              researchers focused on the use of arguments and evidence in addition to the
              more standard variables of material resources.  In the current project, the
              investigators complete documentation of 100 randomly selected cases of federal
              government policy debates.  The analyses allow for the systematic comparison of
              advocacy efforts on a broad sample of issues in government.   The researchers
              compare the dimensional structures of those issues, the lobbying and advocacy
              efforts of those involved, the degree to which government officials themselves
              are advocates along with those outside government, the impact of money and
              material resources on coalition formation and policy outcomes, the differences
              between highly visible and less-visible policy decisions, and the ability of
              advocates to affect policy outcomes through the use of arguments, targeted
              lobbying efforts, and other means.  Further, they integrate with the research
              project the creation of a massive web site to serve other researchers and
              students.   For each of the cases, not only do they collect a range of
              information from public and confidential sources but all of the public
              information they collect, including versions of legislation, public testimony,
              press releases by those involved, press coverage, and lobby spending reports,
              is released in a comprehensive web site for each issue.  This allows other
              researchers access to a well-organized set of raw materials for all manner of
              subsequent analyses, as well as providing primary source material suitable for
              teaching courses on U.S. government, Congress, and public policy.

The
              theoretic focus of this research is based on the ideas of rhetoric,
              heresthetics, and the related questions of decision-making for complex
              multidimensional issues.  Policy advocates mastering the arts of heresthetics
              would be able to affect policy outcomes simply by focusing attention on new
              dimensions of issues or by otherwise altering the context in which policy
              choices are made.  However, there are many constraints on these efforts,
              including the strategic efforts of policy advocates who disagree, institutional
              factors and other sources of stability in public advocacy.  The researchers
              explore these questions of strategic redefinition of policy issues and
              stability in considerable detail, identifying specific hypotheses and showing
              how these can be systematically tested.

This is a project that will allow
              numerous other scholars to use the dataset and do subsequent investigations to
              enhance substantially our understanding of the topic.


