Title       : The Surface Archaeology of Southwestern Wyoming: A Pilot Project
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0111057

Award Number: 0111057
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: John E. Yellen                          
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : October 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $74564              (Estimated)
Investigator: Mary Lou Larson mlarson@uwyo.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Wyoming
	      Box 3355 Univ Station
	      Laramie, WY  820713355    307/766-5320

NSF Program : 1391      ARCHAEOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support Dr. Mary Lou Larson and her
              collaborators will combine field and laboratory research to develop an
              archaeological data base for a large multi-county region within Southwest
              Wyoming.  In the course of many cultural resource management projects as well
              as through basic archaeological research, data has been recorded for nearly
              25,000 prehistoric sites in southwestern Wyoming. These include potentially
              valuable information on individual types of artifacts as well as larger
              features such as structures. These data are  curated in the Wyoming Cultural
              Records Office and available for potential research. However because of the
              method of storage - in paper form in multiple filing cabinets - they are
              extremely difficult to use. Collation of data on one specific distribution of
              one specific artifact type for example can involve hundreds of hours culling
              through individual site reports. An added difficulty rests in the fact that
              these materials, collected over a period of decades by multiple individuals,
              may be of variable quality. In preliminary work, Dr. Larson has organized this
              material and incorporated it in standardized form into a Geographic Information
              System thus making it readily available for analysis. In her NSF research, she
              and her team will continue this process. In order to assess the accuracy of
              these data she will conduct limited field research to compare actual and
              recorded spatial coordinates. Because one basic use of the data is to examine
              distributions of features and artifact types over space, and because observed
              distributions can be significantly affected by geomorphological processes such
              as differential erosion and deposition, the team will also examine the degree
              of distortion such factors induce. The GIS system will allow incorporation of
              landform, vegetation and hydrological data from other sources and thus permit
              researchers to examine cultural patterns within an environmental
              context.

Dr. Larson notes that the Wyoming surface material provides an
              extensive record for Archaic period hunters and gathers and that sites from
              multiple periods allow one to trace changing land use and subsistence patterns
              over time. Wyoming is unusual in the widespread presence of  underground pit
              dwellings - a type of house which most often is associated with more settled
              agricultural peoples. The Wyoming record reveals that during the early Archaic
              period a complementary, non-overlapping relationship is evident between pit
              dwellings and stone lined storage pits. She believes this results from seasonal
              movement across the landscape with different activities occurring in spatially
              segregated areas at varying times of the year. She plans to use these features
              as a test case, both to answer a significant anthropological question as well
              as to test the utility of the Wyoming records and her GIS database as a
              research tool.

This work is important for several reasons. It will result in
              a data base of potentially great utility. It will also provide a test case to
              evaluate the research potential of state archaeological records and their
              incorporation into a GIS system. The work will also shed new light into early
              American subsistence adaptations.

