Title       : RUI: Na+/H+ Exchange in Fish Acid-Base and Ion Regulation
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 13,  2003  
File        : a0111073

Award Number: 0111073
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $534620             (Estimated)
Investigator: James B. Claiborne   (Principal Investigator current)
              Alison Morrison-Shetlar  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Ga. Southern Univ. R&S Fdn
	      4 College Plaza
	      Statesboro, GA  304608005    912/681-5465

NSF Program : 1155      INTEGRATIVE ANIMAL BIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9178,9179,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The gills of fish accomplish many of the same functions as the lungs, liver and
              kidneys in terrestrial animals. Gills are the site for gas exchange, metabolic
              waste excretion, salt balance, and pH adjustments. At the cellular level,
              certain proteins are thought to be responsible for the movement of salts like
              sodium (Na+) and acid (H+).  The transfers of these ions across the gills may
              in turn assist in acid-base and ion regulation in these animals. Over the past
              70 years, a variety of cellular systems have been proposed to drive these
              exchanges in freshwater and marine fish species. 
Na+/H+ exchange proteins
              (NHE) have been described in a number of mammalian and non-mammalian systems.
              These proteins are thought to function in several roles including cell volume
              regulation, pH balance, and Na+ uptake. Several different types of NHEs have
              been characterized in mammals with NHE-2 and 3 thought to be specific to
              transporting epithelial tissues such as kidney and intestine. In this
              continuing study, the authors have focused on the presence and function of
              similar Na+/H+ proteins in fish gills.  Using RT-PCR and 3' RACE they have
              recently demonstrated the presence of mRNA transcripts homologous to NHE in the
              gills of the marine long-horned sculpin (Myoxocephalus octodecimspinosus), the
              euryhaline mummichog (Fundulus heteroclitus), elasmobranchs (Raja erinacea and
              Squalus acanthias) and a craniate (Myxine glutinosa). When M. glutinosa was
              made acidotic, quantitative PCR revealed that mRNA for NHE in the gills
              increases in a fashion parallel to net acid efflux measured in vivo. The
              presence of gill NHE in these species was also established using antibodies for
              the mammalian NHE-1 and NHE-3 isoforms. 
The investigators have proposed that
              net H+ excretion following acidosis in these marine species is driven by gill
              Na+/H+ exchange in a fashion similar to mammalian transporting epithelia such
              as the renal proximal tubule. The objectives of their research are three-fold:
              1) to determine the presence and isoform distribution of Na+/H+ antiporter mRNA
              and protein expression in the gill tissue of marine fish; 2) to describe the
              specific cellular distribution of the NHE antiporters in the gill epithelium;
              and 3) to characterize the effects of systemic acidosis or variations in
              external salinity on gill NHE expression. 
To accomplish these goals, they
              propose to study gill ion transport mechanisms using a combination of
              molecular, physiological, and immunological techniques. They plan to design
              fish-specific monoclonal and/or polyclonal antibodies to correlate in vivo and
              cellular changes following acidosis or alterations in the external salinity.
              The cellular distribution of these proteins will be shown using
              immunohistochemical localization and confocal laser microscopy.  RT-PCR, 3' and
              5' RACE and quantitative PCR will be used to detect and amplify regions of
              currently unknown NHEs.  The authors have already cloned the first full-length
              sequence for a fish NHE isoform which is most closely related to the
              specialized epithelial NHE-2 in mammals.  This study will provide new insight
              into the physiology of gill acid-base and ion regulation, and may lead to a
              greater understanding of the molecular structure and conserved regulatory
              domains of other vertebrate NHE isoforms. This four-year project will involve
              both undergraduate and Masters of Science students doing research at the home
              institution (Georgia Southern University) and at a marine field station (The
              Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory).

