Title       : Student Travel Support for the Software Engineering and Mobility Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CCR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0111878

Award Number: 0111878
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Yuan-Chieh Chow                         
	      CCR  DIV OF COMPUTER-COMMUNICATIONS RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2002    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $9750               (Estimated)
Investigator: Gruia C. Roman roman@cs.wustl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington University
	      
	      St. Louis, MO  63130    314/889-5100

NSF Program : 2876      DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM & COMPILERS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
              The Workshop on Software Engineering and Mobility will be held on May 13-14,
              2001, in Toronto, Canada, in conjunction with the 23 rd International
              Conference on Software Engineering. The two-day meeting is designed to bring
              together leading software engineering researchers whose work is concerned with
              mobility in all its forms, i.e., both logical movement of code fragments and
              physical movement of hosts. This proposal seeks to stimulate the participation
              of graduate students in the workshop proceedings by providing travel grants in
              the amount of $500 to $1,000. The goal is to enable between 8 and 16 graduate
              students involved in doctoral research on topics related to the themes of the
              workshop to
participate in its workings. Special attention will be paid to
              ensure diverse geographic, racial, and gender representation among the invited
              students. Specialized workshops, such as this, have a tendency to attract
              established researches and a very small contingent of students whose
              dissertations are near completion.

Since discussions taking place in the
              workshop often reshape the research agenda of the field, students who are in
              the earlier stages of research could benefit the most from being involved in
              the workshop. Yet, they are least likely to attend. The funding we are
              requesting from NSF to support travel grants to the workshop will significantly
              affect the level of student participation. Even though the size of the travel
              grants is relatively small, the prestige of receiving one will make both
              advisors and students give serious consideration to applying for the grants.
              Finally, if successful, we hope to create a culture in which conference travel
              by students happens earlier than customary for the long-term benefit of the
              entire
research community, e.g., improved retention in the doctoral program.

