Title       : Role of Protein-RNA Interaction in Virus Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0111025

Award Number: 0111025
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Adam Zlotnick adam-zlotnick@ouhsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma HSC
	      P O BOX 26901
	      Oklahoma City, OK  731260901    405/271-4000

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9150,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              
The lifecycle of many spherical (icosahedral) viruses involves co-assembly of
              the protein
capsid around the viral genome. However, the details of this
              process are largely
unknown. Important questions remain about how capsid
              protein associates with the
nucleic acid to initiate assembly and complete
              virion, and how the viral genome becomes
organized within the capsid. We will
              examine assembly of Cowpea Chlorotic Mottle
virus (CCMV), a plus strand RNA
              plant virus. This is an ideal model for studying in vitro
assembly because
              CCMV capsid protein (CP) can assemble into empty capsids, virus-like
particles
              with non-specific RNA, and infectious virions with viral RNA. We
              hypothesize
that virion assembly proceeds stepwise by (i) non - specific
              binding of CP to RNA, (ii)
specific binding to viral RNA, (iii) refolding of
              the RNA - protein complex, and (iv)
finally, cooperative association of CP to
              the complex, leading to completion of the
capsid. This hypothesis implies that
              the protein - protein interactions will affect the
organization of the
              packaged RNA and that RNA structure will have a profound effect on
capsid
              assembly.

Understanding the assembly of empty capsids is a preliminary to
              studying assembly of
RNA-filled virions. Study of the protein-protein
              interaction is complicated because the
CCMV capsid is an oligomer of 180
              copies of CP. We have developed analyses of
assembly that allow us to deduce
              elements of the mechanism and thermodynamic and
kinetic parameters.
              Experimentally, assembly will be observed using light scattering,
liquid
              chromatography, and electron microscopy.
Assembly of RNA-filled capsids adds
              an additional layer of complexity. In vivo, only
viral RNA is encapsidated; in
              vitro, encapsidation is promiscuous. The role of RNA in
directing assembly
              remains to be determined. RNA binding will concentrate CP, but is
also likely
              to affect CP - RNA quaternary structure. We have observed distinct CP -
              RNA
complexes that are likely to play critical roles in assembly and
              specificity. We will
physically and structurally characterize these complexes
              and their formation on viral and
random RNA. Subsequent capsid assembly will
              be observed with electrophoresis, and
solution assays using RNA with bound
              complex, bare viral RNA, and random RNA as
substrates. We expect that protein
              - protein interaction energy, observed for formation of
empty capsids, will
              probably contribute to the cooperativity of assembly. We anticipate
that these
              studies will yield a detailed picture of a basic biological process, the
              assembly
of an infectious virus. These studies will be a paradigm for
              understanding assembly of
other viruses, identifying new targets for
              anti-viral intervention, and for manipulating
virus assembly to yield novel
              nano-structures.

