Title       : Quasi- Concave Social Welfare Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 18,  2001 
File        : a0111541

Award Number: 0111541
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager:                                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2002     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $50000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Uzi Segal segalu@bc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Boston College
	      140 Commonwealth Avenue
	      Chestnut Hill, MA  024673800    617/552-8000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Utilitarianism suggests that societies should be interested in maximizing the
              sum of individual utilities. Modern objections to utilitarianism are that it
              implies indifference to randomization.  When society is indifferent between
              giving an indivisible good to one of several individuals, nothing is gained by
              choosing the recipient by a lottery.  Nonlinear alternatives to utilitarianism
              can solve this problem. Such alternatives use what is technically labeled as
              'quasi concave social welfare functions.'

Here we suggest another difference
              between utilitarianism and these alternatives. Rather than starting with
              situations of social indifference, we concentrate on situations of extreme
              inequality, and investigate the implications utilitarian and non-utilitarian
              have in these situations.

Suppose society is facing trade-off between
              reducing the number of those who are worse off and improving their overall
              position. Both objects are desired, but often one comes at the cost of the
              other. Our theoretical conjecture is that the more society prefers
              randomization in symmetric situations, the more it will prefer improving the
              position of those who are at the bottom at the cost of increasing their
              numbers.

In the less theoretical part of this research, we would like to
              establish the following claim: free, liberal societies move in the same
              direction as the one suggested by quasi concave preferences.
              

Charity

Suppose society is composed of two groups, `haves' and `have
              nots.' We have a given budget to help the second group, and the choice is
              between two policies: "Individual help" that takes individuals from the second
              group and transfer them into the first, and "community help," where the money
              is spent on improving facilities for the second group. We can also choose any
              feasible combination of the two.

Increasing the amount spent on community
              help means less money for individual help, therefore higher probability of
              being at the lower group, but the welfare of all individuals of this group is
              increasing with the money spent on such programs. We predict that a
              quasi-concave society will prefer the community to the individual
              help.

Cruel and Unusual Punishment

Harsh punishment is more deterring
              than mild one. By using such punishments we can reduce the number of people who
              will be punished, and improve the position of those who do not commit crimes,
              at the cost of reducing the welfare of those who are at the bottom.  Our
              conjecture is that the utilitarian society will use harsher penalties than the
              quasi-concave society.

Safety and Prevention

Sometimes, quasi-concave
              societies choose outcomes whose optimality is questionable. Suppose society can
              choose between improving public safety, or spending money on saving people who
              had an accident. Suppose further that more people could be saved the first way.
               It follows from our conjectures that for a given budget, the quasi concave
              society will spend less on prevention and more on saving people after an
              accident happens than the utilitarian society. 


