Title       : Mechanism of Mitochondrial Fe-S Cluster Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 11,  2002      
File        : a0111161

Award Number: 0111161
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: John Gilje                              
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: James A. Cowan   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1966      SYNTHETIC INORGANIC
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. James A. Cowan, Chemistry Department, Ohio State University, is supported by
              the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
              Chemistry Division for investigations into the mechanism of mitochondrial Fe-S
              cluster assembly. Recent characterization of gene products that are putatively
              involved in biosynthetic cluster assembly allows consideration of a range of
              molecular mechanisms that underlie the chemistry of cluster biogenesis. The
              understanding of the details of the cellular pathways requires the
              characterization of such proteins and the elucidation of their functional
              chemistry. Accordingly, this project will focus on a systematic investigation
              of two proteins implicated in mitochondrial ironsulfur cluster biosynthesis:
              IscU and IscA. The structure and function of these Fe-S cluster-containing
              proteins will be characterized. Particular attention will be paid to the
              elucidation of cognate protein partners, mechanisms of iron/sulfur transfer,
              and the role of redox chemistry in mediating these pathways.

Iron sulfur
              clusters are essential metal cofactors that are involved in mitochondrial
              respiration, cell signaling pathways, transcriptional and translational control
              in gene regulation, metal ion homeostasis, the biological chemistry of reactive
              oxygen species, and novel mechanisms for enzymatic catalysis. This study will
              probe the fundamental, but as yet unanswered questions of how such centers are
              synthesized in vivo, what proteins are involved in the syntheses, and how the
              proteins function?


