Title       : SBIR Phase I: Three-Dimensional Atom Probe Imaging for Nano-Biotechnology
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 22,  2001      
File        : a0111223

Award Number: 0111223
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Om P. Sahai                             
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : December 31,  2001   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $99960              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven L. Goodman sgoodman@imagoscientific.com  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Imago
	      6417 Normandy Lane     Suite 100
	      Madison, WI  537191133    608/274-6880

NSF Program : 5371      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE I
Fld Applictn: 0308000   Industrial Technology                   
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I (SBIR) project will develop the
              means necessary to adapt the Local Electrode Atom Probe (LEAP) to provide
              three-dimensional atomic-resolution imaging and elemental analysis of biochips
              and other nanoscale biotechnological specimens. Hard lithography used in the
              microelectronics and biotechnology industries already produces nanostructures
              that are extremely difficult
to evaluate with current instrumentation. Soft
              lithography, self-assembly, and other methods will produce even smaller
              features from biological and organic materials. Structural characterization for
              bio-nanotechnology is already problematic because analytical electron
              microscopy has substantial limitations in the quantitative imaging of carbon
              and other low atomic number elements. Further compounding this problem is the
              fact that unlike the simpler geometries of microelectronics devices, the
              biomacromolecules intrinsic to biotechnology are three-dimensional. Without
              analytical instrumentation better suited to the evaluation of 3-D bio-organic
              structures, industry will be "flying blind" as it develops complex nanoscale
              biotechnologies. Our project is designed to adapt and develop methods for the
              LEAP to perform atomic-scale analysis of bio-organic biotechnological
              specimens. After adaptation, LEAP should be able to rapidly image 3-D
              structures at atomic (0.2-0.5 nm) resolution, while providing quantum-level
              elemental composition of synthetic polymers, proteins, and nucleic acids
              critical for biochips and other biomacromolecular nanoengineered
              devices.

The primary commercial application of the technology and the
              product developed in this project will be as a supplement to the existing
              analytical instrumentation used for the determination of structure and
              composition of nano-biotechnology devices and components. Additional
              applications are envisioned in academic and industrial research in the areas of
              structural biology, cell biology and pharmaceutics.





