Title       : State-Resolved Dynamics of Gas-Surface Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0111446

Award Number: 0111446
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2006       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $336500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Arthur L. Utz autz@tufts.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Tufts University
	      Ballou Hall
	      Medford, MA  02155    617/627-3417

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Arthur L. Utz of Tufts University is funded for his research on
              state-resolved dynamics of gas-surface reactions by the Physical Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division.  The gas-surface reaction dynamics of model
              reaction systems will be studied to test theoretical predictions and establish
              mechanistic insights into hetergeneous chemistry.  Four specific areas will be
              examined:  (1) Vibrational mode specificity in gas-surface reactivity will be
              examined because statistical models are inadequate.  Molecular dissociation on
              Ni(100) (e.g., of methane) will be examined to find mode-specific dissociation
              probabliities in reagents and to establish predictively-useful trends.  (2)
              Orientation, reorientation and stereochemical effects will be studied by using
              polarized laser light to anisotropically excite the reagent molecules.  (3)
              Trapping-mediated reaction channels for internally excited molecules will be
              used to examine how internally excited molecules reactively encounter surfaces
              in molecular beam reflectivity experiments.  (4) Bond-selective chemistry will
              focus on the examination of methane, trideutero-methane, and HOD dissociation
              on Ni(100) and the influence of vibrational mode excitation on the reaction
              products.

Heterogeneous chemistry has a tremendous economic and
              technological impact in the chemical industry.  The gas-surface reaction
              studies at Tufts University will provide  means for improving our understanding
              of the mechanistic role of internal vibrations and internal energy on
              gas-surface reactions.  Such reactions are commonly encountered in bulk
              chemical production, in pollution control devices, etc.  Lasers will be used to
              selectively excite such internal vibrations, and their utility in controlling
              reaction chemistries will be extended.
