Title       : Biochemical Characterization of Phage Lambda Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 27,  2003     
File        : a0111066

Award Number: 0111066
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $335018             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carlos E. Catalano carlos.catalano@uchsc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado HSC
	      4200 East Ninth Avenue
	      Denver, CO  802203706    /   -

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1228,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The assembly of an infectious virus particle requires the coordinated action of
              a number of proteins, and complex interactions with viral DNA. Terminase
              enzymes are common to many double-stranded (ds) DNA viruses, including
              poxvirus, the herpesvirus groups, and most dsDNA bacteriophage. Terminases
              "package" viral DNA into the capsid, a critical step in virus assembly. This
              project centers on the terminase enzyme from bacteriophage lambda and attempts
              to define the biochemical, biophysical, and structural characteristics of
              nucleoprotein intermediates involved in DNA packaging. Three approaches
              designed to provide mechanistic insight into virus assembly are examined. (I)
              One of the most fascinating and least understood aspects of the packaging
              pathway is the transition from complex I, an extremely stable packaging
              precursor, to a mobile packaging complex. Biophysical, kinetic, and structural
              experiments are used to provide a mechanistic underpinning for this transition.
              (II) Current models describing the packaging pathway are based on genetic and
              crude in vitro packaging studies. Biochemical studies are used that will
              define, at a molecular level, the role of terminase, and inancillaryls
              packaging proteins at each step of the packaging pathway. (III) Genetic studies
              suggest a domain organization for gpA, the large terminase subunit. Biochemical
              and biophysical experiments will rigorously define functional domains in gpA.
              These three experimental approaches represent discrete research directions that
              are intertwined in their attempt to provide a detailed description of lambda
              terminase, and its role in virus assembly. This work will provide a paradigm
              for genome packaging on other dsDNA viruses. Moreover, mechanistic similarities
              exist between genome packaging and complex cellular processes such as DNA
              replication, transcription, and site-specific recombination. Thus, an
              understanding of the structural and catalytic properties of this packaging
              apparatus has broad implications in our understanding of DNA manipulation by
              large multiprotein enzyme complexes in biology.
