Title       : Exploring Mechanism of Additions to Alkenes; Extending a New Technique by Four
               Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 14,  2003     
File        : a0111421

Award Number: 0111421
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $59999              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donna J. Nelson djnelson@ou.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oklahoma
	      1000 Asp Avenue, Room 314
	      Norman, OK  73019    405/325-4757

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
              0510701   Chemical Reaction Systems               
Program Ref : 0000,9138,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are two proposal objectives. The first is to extend development of a
              technique, which has been developed by the PI, for correlating measurable
              characteristics in addition reactions of alkenes in order to gain information
              useful mechanistically and synthetically. The PI has applied the technique to
              enough systems to establish its viability, but its range is not determined. The
              technique enables (1) a procedure to determine relative magnitudes of steric
              and electronic effects in the rate-determining step, (2) a relatively simple
              way to predict the effects of substituents on reaction rates for synthetic
              purposes, and (3) a method to choose between alternative proposed reaction
              mechanisms in some cases. The simple technique to be extended is correlating
              (plotting) the logs of the relative rates (log krel) of the alkene addition
              reactions studied versus measurable characteristics of the alkenes, such as
              ionization potentials (IPs), their highest occupied molecular orbital energies
              (HOMOs), and in some cases their lowest unoccupied molecular orbital energies
              (LUMOs). There have been previous mechanistic studies making use of IP vs log
              krel comparisons, tables, and plots; this technique differs in that it focuses
              on the separation of steric versus electronic effects, and it requires more
              data points and substituents with a variety of electronic effects in the
              alkenes in order to spread out the data points and to facilitate
              visualization.

Many of the reactions studied and to be studied are
              fundamental reactions, which appear in undergraduate organic chemistry texts.
              Surprisingly, the relative reactivities of many of these have not been studied
              at all, and in some cases, erroneous conclusions have been drawn by using too
              few data points or alkenes bearing substituents without a wide enough range of
              electronic effects. This project will advance the understanding of these
              fundamental reactions and benefit chemists using addition reactions in
              synthesis, because relative reactivity data will enable prediction of site
              selectivity when more than one double bond is present in the molecule, but it
              is desired to effect reaction at only one.

The second objective is to
              increase the participation of native under-represented minorities (URMs) in
              chemistry. The direct influence of the grant will be limited due to its short
              (one year) duration, but subsequent funding can continue efforts toward the
              goals.
