Title       : G Protein Mediated Downregulation of a MAP Kinase in Yeast
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : October 30,  2002   
File        : a0111397

Award Number: 0111397
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $435000             (Estimated)
Investigator: David E. Stone dstone@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1136      SIGNAL TRANSDCTN/CELL REGULATN
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 1156,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Collecting information about the environment, integrating it and responding in
              accordance with changing conditions are fundamental abilities required of all
              cells. In eukaryotes, one of the most common strategies for detecting and
              transmitting information across the plasma membrane depends on heptihelical
              receptors coupled to heterotrimeric G proteins.  Haploid cells of the budding
              yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae use a receptor coupled G protein both to sense
              and adapt to mating pheromone secreted by cells of opposite mating type. The G
              By subunit of the G protein couples to a MAP kinase cascade, the activation of
              which blocks
proliferation and induces the differentiation of vegetative cells
              into gametes. Yeast cells that are unable to mate eventually resume growth,
              even when continuously exposed to pheromone.  Thus, the mating response pathway
              of yeast, like analogous signaling systems of higher eukaryotes, can adapt to a
              continuous signal. We have established that the pheromone responsive G a
              protein, Gpa1, stimulates adaptation to pheromone, and that most likely it does
              so by two independent mechanisms. First, it is thought that Gpa1 stimulates an
              unknown protein to bind and inactivate G aa.  Second, there is evidence that
              Gpa1 inhibits the pheromone responsive MAP kinase, Fus3.  The latter mechanism
              may serve both to inactivate Fus3, and to remove it
from the nucleus.  It is
              believed that the movement of MAP kinases into and out of the nucleus is a
              primary method of signal transduction regulation, but the ways in which
              nucleocytoplasmic transport is controlled are poorly understood.  Recently, a
              model was posited in which Gpa1 stimulates long-term downregulation of the
              mating signal by inducing vacuolar localization of Fus3 and the phosphatase
              that regulates it, Msg5 is proposed.  In this investigation, the two most
              important tenets of this model will be tested.  Genetic and biochemical
              approaches will be used to determine whether Gpa1 stimulates the export of Fus3
              from the nucleus during recovery from pheromone treatment, and whether Fus3 is
              translocated in complex with Msg5.  A second goal of the project is to test the
              possibility that Gpa1 inhibits Fus3 kinase activity, and if so, to determine
              whether this effect is mediated directly, by allosteric interaction, or
              indirectly, via Msg5.  In addition to testing specific hypotheses, a proven
              protocol will be used to isolate novel alleles of FUS3 that confer defects in
              Gpa1-mediated adaptation. The mutant forms of Fus3 will be characterized
              according to their kinase activity, localization, and ability to associate with
              Gpa1. The results of these experiments are expected to elucidate the mechanisms
              by which Gpa1 downregulates Fus3.  Because adaptive mechanisms are a
              fundamental means of regulating signaling pathways, and because G proteins and
              MAP kinase cascades play important signaling roles in all eukaryotic cells,
              important precedents are likely to result from this work.
