Title       : Applications of Mechanism Design
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0111527

Award Number: 0111527
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123595             (Estimated)
Investigator: Tomas Sjostrom jts10@psu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project will apply the theory of incentives and mechanism design to various
              models in micro credit, conflict, and multi-community models.
1. Micro credit.
              The Grameen Bank in Bangladesh has achieved high repayment rates from small
              uncollateralized loans. The Grarneen Bank's lending has two distinctive
              features: joint liability and cross reporting. The microfinance literature has
              largely neglected the cross reporting aspect, although it appears to be crucial
              to Grameen's success. The project tries to understand the role of both joint
              liability and cross reporting. It, is commonly assumed that the villagers share
              information not available to the bank, and that the villagers can enforce
              cooperative behavior using social sanctions. The mechanism design approach
              makes it possible to make precise assumptions about the agents' ability to side
              contract with each other, their shared and their private information, etc.
              Ashok Rai (Harvard University) is a collaborator on this part of the
              project.

2. Conflict. The Mechanism Design literature usually makes strong
              assumptions regarding the existence of a third party (such as a court) which
              enforces the "rules of the game"". In contrast, this project is interested in
              models where there is no such pow-erful third party and in particular
              institutions for the prevention of conflict.  Suppose there are two nations,
              and each has private information about its own propensity to arm. The Bayesian
              Nash equilibrium may be very inefficient, since each state may arm itself in
              self defense, even though the probability that any state actually desires a
              conflict is vanishingly small. What kind of institution will solve this dilemma
              ? One particular institution world be an arms control agreement, which in the
              absence of a third party is essentially cheap talk. Other institutions might
              involve a mediator. Sandeep Baliga (Northwestern University) is a collaborator
              on this part, of the project.

3. Multi-district models. The Mechanism Design
              literature usually assumes that there is one monopolistic mechanism designer.
              In contrast, this project is interested in models with competing mechanism
              designers. For example, in a Tiebout type model, many communities decide on
              local taxes and local public goods production. These decisions will in general
              have externalities on members of other districts. What kind of institutions
              will be efficient?  This project addresses such issues as the equilibrium
              selection of a voting mechanism or a tax system. It, is particularly
              interesting to allow migration among different districts, as in the original
              Tiebout model, since it amounts to a very direct competition between the "local
              mechanism designers". Christian Schultz (University of Copenhagen)  is a
              collaborator on this part of the project.


