Title       : Pre- and Post-Decision Editing in a Risky and Complex Task Environment
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 20,  2001  
File        : a0111969

Award Number: 0111969
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $145000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Carl G. Lundberg lundberg@duq.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Brian Nagle  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Duquesne University
	      Administration Bldg
	      Pittsburgh, PA  15282    412/434-6000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This study focuses on the processes involved in the editing (memory) of past
              
decisions.   Our goal is to contribute to decision theory while expanding our
              
collective understanding of how complex auditing decisions are made. The
              
study builds on a well-known body of preceding work, notably Festinger's
              
cognitive dissonance reduction theory, Fischhoff's hindsight bias, and
              
Svenson's differentiation and consolidation theory.  Festinger, for example,
              
has shown that decision makers actively reevaluate the" worth" of the
              
rejected alternative after a decision has been made--frequently to reduce the
              
risk of post-decision regret.  We focus on both pre- and post-decision
              
attribute isolation and editing: on how expert and novice auditors make sense
              
of complex and risky judgment/decision tasks, and on how feedback (or lack
              
thereof) influences their memory of earlier supportive and counter-indicative
              
signal ratings.  Both pre- and post-decision sense-making (editing) processes
              
are closely linked to both effective and biased learning.  We hypothesize
              
that there are significant differences in the type of data--qualitative vs.
              
quantitative and positive vs. negative-- that the professionals and novices
              
attend to.  We also hypothesize that novices are more likely to behave in
              
accordance with established decision theory than their professional
              
counterparts; that domain knowledge gives rise to an interesting and largely
              
unexplored set of mitigating factors. 

