Title       : Studies of Degradation of Xenobiotic Compound: A Window on the Evolution of a
               Novel Metabolic Pathway at an Early Stage of Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0111033

Award Number: 0111033
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Neil E. Hoffman                         
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Shelley D. Copley copley@cires.colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1168      METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              This project will address the evolution of the pathway for degradation of
              pentachlorophenol (PCP) in the soil bacterium Sphingomonas chlorophenolica. 
              Since PCP was introduced only in 1936, this pathway must have evolved and
              assembled rather recently in microorganisms. This experimental system provides
              an unusual opportunity to study a metabolic pathway at a very early stage in
              its development.  The emergence of this pathway is also of special interest
              because PCP is highly toxic, as well as being xenobiotic, and is thus a
              particularly challenging target for degradation. Previous work has suggested
              that tetrachlorohydroquinone dehalogenase, the second enzyme in the pathway,
              may have originated from a glutathione-dependent double bond isomerase such as
              maleylacetoacetate isomerase or maleylpyruvate isomerase (enzymes involved in
              degradation of tyrosine and benzoate, respectively).  The first objective of
              the project is to further explore the origin of this enzyme.  Levels of
              dehalogenase activity in several maleylacetoacetate and maleylpyruvate
              isomerases will be measured in order to evaluate the hypothesis that this
              enzyme was recruited to serve as a dehalogenase because it fortuitously had a
              low but useful level of dehalogenase activity. The second objective of the
              project is to investigate the genetic context of the dehalogenase gene in order
              to determine whether it
originated from a gene duplication event in S.
              chlorophenolica or was introduced by horizontal transfer from another organism.
               This project addresses the mechanisms by which soil bacteria evolve new
              metabolic pathways to degrade anthropogenic pollutants which have been recently
              introduced into the environment as a result of agricultural, industrial,
              military, or household uses.  Such pollutants are often resistant to
              biodegradation and consequently persist in the environment.  The ability of
              bacteria to evolve new pathways to degrade anthropogenic compounds is a
              critical factor that affects the environmental fate of these compounds.  This
              project concerns the evolution of a new metabolic pathway for degradation of
              pentachlorophenol, a widely used and highly toxic wood preservative, in a soil
              bacterium called Sphingomonas chlorophenolica. This bacterium has apparently
              evolved a new pathway by recruiting proteins already present in the cell to
              perform new functions.  The evolutionary origin of one of these enzymes,
              tetrachlorohydroquinone dehalogenase, will be studied during this project.

