Title       : Alternative Basis Sets for Accurate Quantum Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0111101

Award Number: 0111101
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $401000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter Pulay pulay@mail.uark.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas
	      120 Ozark Hall
	      Fayetteville, AR  72701    479/575-3845

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Peter Pulay of the University of Arkansas is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to develop methods using alternatives to the
              generally employed Gaussian basis sets in electronic structure calculations. 
              Plane waves, wavelets, Slater functions, and semi-numerical orbitals will be
              explored for their potential implementation in chemical applications.  A
              Gaussian-based local electron correlation method will be developed, with goals
              of reduction of the local basis size for weakly interacting orbital pairs by
              using pseudo-natural orbitals, inclusion of gradients, and programming of
              high-level correlation methods for selected localized parts of a molecule. 
              Application of these improved techniques include the structures and vibrational
              spectra of metalloprotein models.  Also, accurate hydrogen bond potential
              functions based on correlated calculations for hydrocarbons will be developed. 
              It is anticipated that the new methods developed in this project will
              significantly improve computational modeling of chemical and biochemical
              systems.  

The research in this project takes advantage of the rapid
              technological developments in the computer industry in the past five years. 
              The dramatic expansion in fast memory and disk capacity, in particular, makes
              it possible to offer viable alternatives to the computational methods presently
              used in chemistry and biochemistry.  Successful outcomes from this project
              could change the way computational chemistry is done, with substantial
              industrial impacts in areas such as pharmaceutical chemistry and materials
              science.
