Title       : Have Transition Economies Become More Efficient? Evidence from Russian and Czech
               Panel Data on Firms and Individuals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0111783

Award Number: 0111783
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $556971             (Estimated)
Investigator: Katherine Terrell terrell@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jan Svejnar  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Klara Sabirianova  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : William Davidson Institute
	      724 East University
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091234    /   -

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,5930,5973,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              There are widely divergent views of what constitutes a successful transition
              from a planned to a market economy, how well transition economies have
              performed, and what policies account for differences in observed performance.
              This project will contribute to our understanding of this process by providing
              rigorous evidence on the evolution and determinants of economic efficiency in
              two countries that represent divergent models of transition - Russia and the
              Czech Republic. Similar initial conditions and widely different transition
              experiences in these two economies provide a useful context for the analysis of
              policies and other factors determining the evolution of well-functioning
              markets. The researchers are able to carry out this analysis because they have
              new micro panel data on a large number of firms and workers that are linked and
              span the final years of the communist system through the first decade of the
              transition. 

The research project will address the following key
              questions:
(Q.1) How has firm efficiency changed during the transition period?
              Which types of firms show the greatest absolute and relative gains in
              efficiency and which ones are losing out? Stylized facts on efficiency are
              being established; the productive efficiency of different types of firms will
              be assessed relative to the best practice in the country in a given year and
              the practice of western firms in each country in 2000. 
(Q.2) What matters
              more for efficiency: ownership, economic liberalization or competition? The
              project ascertains the relative importance of these factors in determining the
              levels and changes in efficiency over time.
(Q.3) Does firm turnover replace
              the least efficient firms with more efficient ones? The efficiency measures
              derived for each firm are used to assess if entering firms are more efficient
              than exiting firms. The analysis shows if the bankruptcy laws and continuation
              of subsidies slowed down the cleansing process.
(Q.4) Is labor reallocation
              efficiency enhancing? The research assesses if workers move from firms with low
              marginal products of labor to firms with higher marginal products of labor, and
              if government policy affects these flows in a positive way. 
 (Q.5) Are
              capital markets becoming more efficient? At the start of the transition, some
              firms had excessive and some inadequate capital stock. The project evaluates
              whether subsequent investment behavior corrected this misallocation. 

