Title       : Collaborative Research Testing Affect Control Theory: Restoring the Challenged
               Identities of Others
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 17,  2002       
File        : a0111291

Award Number: 0111291
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $123981             (Estimated)
Investigator: Dawn T. Robinson dawn-robinson@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The investigators will conduct a series of experiments that focus on crucial
              substantive implications of modeling social interaction as the result of a
              cybernetic process of meaning control whereby actors behave so as to maintain
              meanings in the situation.  Affect Control Theory describes a control system
              between identities and actions, with identity meanings acting as a reference
              level for interpreting social interactions.  Specifically, it suggests that
              people will not only try to maintain their own identities, but will also strive
              to restore the identities of others with whom they are interacting.  The theory
              also incorporates the restorative actions of other actors into the model.  If
              another person in the interaction takes a restorative action, it may restore
              the meanings so that no further reparation is necessary.  The studies described
              here propose to test these key predictions that differentiate Affect Control
              Theory from the other major control perspective.  Study one challenges
              (negatively deflects) the identity of an alter, and tests to see whether this
              challenge evokes restorative behavior from ego.  Study two creates an
              atypically positive interaction for the alter, to see if this evokes negative
              behavior by ego toward the alter (as predicted to be restorative of original
              meanings).  Study 3 draws on pre-test results that indicate two alternative
              means of restoring another's challenged identity.  Here, the investigator use
              computer-regulated interaction to make available alternative means of restoring
              another's identity.  The prediction involves the substitutability of different
              behaviors for meaning restoration.  Study four elaborates the substitutability
              of restorative action hypothesis.   The investigators will test whether or not
              a restorative act by one actor affects the probability of another actor's
              engaging in a restorative act.  Study five examines whether or not the identity
              of the actors influences the effect of the restorative behavior.  Taken
              together, the five experiments explore how we go about maintaining the
              identities of others, and how the social situation in which we are embedded
              affects those restorative efforts.


