Title       : The Trading Behavior of Individual Investors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0111470

Award Number: 0111470
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $156823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Brad M. Barber bmbarber@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Terrance Odean  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,1640,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              While recent studies have found that investors' common stock selling behavior is
              heavily influenced by their reluctance to accept losses (which has been labeled
              the disposition effect), little is known about what influences the buying
              decisions of investors. We speculate that the buying behavior of individual
              investors is largely determined by that which catches investors' attention.
              Thus investors, unlike agents in most academic models, treat buying and selling
              asymmetrically. This study is an empirical test of the proposition that buying
              is driven by attention.

To test whether buying behavior is driven by
              attention, the research will use four separate proprietary datasets. Combined,
              these datasets include month-end common stock positions and trading records for
              over 100,000 households from 1987 to 1999. These data are compiled from three
              different brokerage firms: a large discount broker, a large retail broker, and
              a smaller broker that attracts primarily active traders.

To test whether
              buying behavior is driven by attention, the research will analyze three types
              of information that are likely to catch the attention of the average investor:
              large price movements, the announcement of quarterly earnings, and news
              coverage. The research provides a simple prediction: that buying will increase
              around these information events regardless of the value of the information.
              Thus, we anticipate increased buying activity following large price increases
              and decreases, good and bad earnings announcements, and good and bad press
              coverage.

The research fits neatly into a stream of recent studies that
              analyze the behavior of individual investors. In combination with current and
              planned studies of investor behavior, this research serves to enhance our
              understanding of investor behavior and financial markets, improve investor
              education, and inform policy decisions.

