Title       : Can Interspecific Variation in Whole-Plant Resource Economies and Underlying
               Physiological and Morphological Traits Provide a Mechanistic Basis for Forest
               Composition?
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : November 7,  2002   
File        : a0111037

Award Number: 0111037
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: William E. Zamer                        
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $444771             (Estimated)
Investigator: Michael B. Walters mwalters@msu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Richard K. Kobe  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Kevin R. Kosola  (Co-Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Michigan State University
	      
	      East Lansing, MI  48824    517/355-1855

NSF Program : 1148      ECOLOGICAL & EVOLUTIONARY PHYS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              Human activities are substantially influencing the availability of nitrogen,
              calcium
and water in north temperate forests. These changes may strongly
              affect forest composition and dynamics because water, nitrogen and calcium
              limit - in a species-specific manner -the growth and survival of trees in
              northern temperate forests. The ability to predict forest responses will be
              aided by characterizing the functional mechanisms that underlie tree species
              differences in growth and survival across soil resource gradients and how these
              species traits interact with light availability in determining species
              competitive abilities. We hypothesize that seedlings of tree species with
              greater growth and survival in low soil resource environments have collections
              of traits that enhance whole-plant use efficiency of and access to limiting
              soil resources, that these traits underlie adaptation to low soil resources,
              and that these traits occur at a tradeoff with shade tolerance and/or high
              light growth rates in high soil resource environments.

A seedling transplant
              experiment to field plots and a closely linked potted seedling experiment are
              proposed to address these hypotheses. Both experiments will use the same nine
              broad-leaved deciduous species that are common in northern temperate forests,
              but that vary in abundance across light and soil resource environments. For the
              field experiment, seedlings have been transplanted into fertilized (Ca,
              nitrogen, Ca + nitrogen) and unfertilized plots distributed across variation in
              light and independent landscape-level gradients of water and nutrients in
              glaciated northwestern lower Michigan. Over the three-year duration of the
              experiment, we will monitor seedling growth and survival and measure
              whole-plant morphological and physiological traits that we hypothesize underlie
              species differences in performance. The outdoor plastic pot experiment will
              allow us to more thoroughly examine fine root physiology and dynamics than
              could be accomplished in the field experiment.

Collectively these data will
              allow us to determine: 1) species specific growth and survival responses to
              natural gradients of nitrogen, calcium, water and light; 2) with fertilized
              plots, the degree to which N and Ca limit growth and survival and how it varies
              over the landscape gradient; 3) interspecific variation in access to, and use
              efficiency of nitrogen, calcium and water; 4) the physiological and
              morphological components of whole-plant resource economies that are associated
              with species differences in access to, and use efficiency of soil resources; 5)
              whether interspecific variation in whole-plant resource economies and related
              traits  underlie variation in growth and survival at low soil resource
              availability; 6) interspecific trade-offs in resource-based growth and survival
              and the particular morphological / physiological traits underlying species
              differences. 

