Title       : Do Alternate Stable Community States Exist in the Gulf of Maine Rocky Intertidal
               Zone
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 19,  2002      
File        : a0111427

Award Number: 0111427
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Phillip R. Taylor                       
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2005  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $480001             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark D. Bertness mark bertness@brown.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brown University
	      164 Angell Street
	      Providence, RI  02912    401/863-2777

NSF Program : 1650      BIOLOGICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 9169,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              It has recently been suggested that intertidal mussel beds and seaweed canopies
              represent alternate community states on rocky shores in the Gulf of Maine. This
              theoretically appealing idea hypothesizes that these shoreline habitats are
              disturbance patch mosaics dominated by either seaweed or mussel communities,
              and that the community occurring in a given habitat is stochastic and dependent
              on the size of the original disturbance and recruit availability. Large
              disturbances are postulated to be dominated by mussel beds and barnacles which
              have widely dispersed larvae,
while smaller disturbances are dominated by
              seaweeds, which have more limited dispersal. Positive feedbacks are proposed to
              maintain the stability of these two distinct community types.
	Dr. Bertness
              tested this hypothesis on the shores of a tidal estuary in central Maine. These
              habitats are conducive to exploring this idea because discrete mussel beds and
              seaweed canopies occur in close proximity and are easily manipulated. The
              results did not support the alternate stable state hypothesis. Instead, they
              suggest that the occurrence of mussel beds and seaweed canopies is highly
              deterministic. Largely independent of the size of artificial disturbances, they
              found that mussel beds and seaweed canopies rapidly returned to their original
              community type, but only in
the absence of grazers. Seaweed canopies dominate
              habitats with little water movement, whereas mussel beds dominate habitats with
              high flows. In the absence of grazers, these communities predictably and
              rapidly returned to their original state, but with grazers present, neither
              community showed signs of recovery even after two years.
	In this project  Dr.
              Bertness and collaborators will examine the robustness and consequences of
              these findings. In particular, they will:
    I. Continue monitoring
              experimental clearings to examine the time course and trajectory of natural
              disturbances with grazers present and examine the role of consumer refuges in
              the recovery of naturally occurring mussel beds and seaweed canopies;
    II.
              Explore the hypothesis that intertidal mussel and seaweed communities can
              represent
alternate community states, but in a narrower range of intermediate
              flow habitats; and
    III. Extend the generality of the findings to coastal,
              wave-exposed habitats where the idea that mussel beds and seaweed canopies can
              represent alternate states was initially developed.

	The notion that natural
              communities can represent stochastically determined alternate stable states is
              an intellectually stimulating idea that has important implications for
              understanding the structure and dynamics of natural systems and for the
              management of marine and terrestrial ecosystems. Nonetheless, the very
              existence of alternate stable community states in nature has been difficult to
              establish. The work outlined in this project will critically evaluate the
              alternate community stable state hypothesis in the Gulf of Maine rocky
              intertidal zone, elucidate mechanisms underlying the stochastic and/or
              deterministic nature of alternate stable states in this system and establish
              the conditions where they are most likely to occur.

