Title       : Collagen Mimetic Structures for Novel Biomaterials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 31,  2002   
File        : a0111617

Award Number: 0111617
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $300000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Murray Goodman mgoodman@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9181,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The area of collagen research has developed into an important focus for
              biomaterials technology.  The search for robust and diverse collagen-based
              biomaterials has expanded into areas of drug delivery systems, ocular devices,
              wound healing therapies and artificial organs.  In the Goodman laboratories,
              synthetic and biophysical strategies have been developed to design and
              investigate the properties of triple helical collagen mimetic structures as
              candidate biomaterials.  
%%%
As an expansion of early work with
              n-isobutylglycine (Nleu) incorporated into the collagen trimeric building
              blocks Gly-Pro-Nleu and Gly-Nleu_Pro, fluorinated residues fluoroproline or
              N-(hexafluoro)isobutylglycine will now be incorporated into tripeptide building
              blocks.  Their effects on triple-helical stability will be investigated by a
              series of biophysical measurements.  The biophysical analysis includes
              temperature-dependent optical rotation measurements, circular dichroism (CD)
              and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, molecular modeling, as well
              as studies of the thermodynamics of triple helix folding and hydrations. 
              Biological profiles will be assessed by collaborators at Integra Life Sciences
              and the group of Andrea Tenner at the University of California, Irvine.  In
              addition to novel building blocks, templates have been employed to enhance the
              stability of triple helices.  Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS) has been
              successfully derivatized to create collagen mimetic arrays.  The additional
              amine functional group provides a point of attachment to surfaces and other
              reactive molecules.  The TRIS-terminated collagen structures will be utilized
              to create ditemplated molecules in which the collagen peptide chains are
              anchored at both the N- and C-termini.  Ditemplated collagen units can be
              linked together in a chain as precursors for the formation of nanostructures
              (rod-like polymers).  In line with template research, orthogonally protected
              scaffolds will be introduced in order to assemble heterotrimeric collagen
              structures to which unique biologically relevant peptide chains can be
              attached.  This design will result in collagen mimetics that elicit specific
              biological responses to mimic natural collagen proteins such as collagen type I
              or the defense collagen protein C1q.

