Title       : The J. P. Harrington Database Project: The California Materials
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 19,  2002     
File        : a0111487

Award Number: 0111487
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Cecile McKee                            
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $208294             (Estimated)
Investigator: Martha J. Macri mjmacri@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1311      LINGUISTICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Martha Macri and her colleagues
              will conduct two years of linguistic research on the J. P. Harrington Database
              Project. The goal is to increase access to the linguistic and ethnographic
              notes on Native California languages collected by J. P. Harrington during the
              first half of the twentieth century. The people Harrington interviewed were
              often among the last remaining speakers of their languages. His notes thus
              represent knowledge that would otherwise be lost. Over half of an estimated
              500,000 pages of Harrington's notes are on California languages. Researchers
              will begin by transcribing these. They will then code the materials for
              linguistic and ethnographic categories that maximize their usefulness to
              linguists, biologists, geographers, historians, anthropologists,
              archaeologists, and also to Native American communities. The transcribed and
              coded notes will be available through a database on the web. It will be
              possible to search these notes by language (e.g., several Native California
              languages), semantic domain (kin terms, toponyms, flora, etc.), and other
              cultural and linguistic categories. The database will also generate a running
              text of Harrington's notes as well as lexicons for each language with
              Harrington's English and Spanish glosses.

Each of the world's languages
              represents a unique solution to the expression of human cognition and to the
              variety of ways in which humans categorize and interact with their social and
              physical environment. Most of the Native California languages that Harrington
              recorded are no longer spoken, or now have only a few elderly speakers.
              Harrington's materials are thus cherished by Native American communities
              engaged in language and cultural revitalization and valuable to scholars from a
              wide variety of disciplines. The J. P. Harrington Database Project will
              increase access for Native American communities as well as linguists and other
              scholars to these materials. 

