Title       : Public Perceptions of the American People
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 24,  2001    
File        : a0111887

Award Number: 0111887
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Frank P. Scioli  Jr.                    
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $151957             (Estimated)
Investigator: Elizabeth Theiss-Morse etheissmorse1@unl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Nebraska-Lincoln
	      14th & R Streets
	      Lincoln, NE  685880430    402/472-7211

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,9150,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project supports a national survey, focus groups, and an experiment to
              investigate public perceptions of the American People.  Previous research on
              American public opinion has tended to focus on people's views of politicians,
              policies, institutions, and democratic values and processes.  Surprisingly
              little work has been done on what people think about the American people as a
              group or on the extent to which people identify with this group, even though
              the people are a key political actor given the idea of popular sovereignty in
              the United States.

The Principal Investigator contends that we need to
              discover how the people themselves view the American people to understand their
              beliefs about democracy.  Two contrasting political theories highlight the
              importance of understanding how views of the people can affect views of
              democratic political systems, and the researcher draws on these theories to
              develop hypotheses to test.  The literal view espoused by James Madison and
              others holds that the American people are fallible and hold wildly diverse
              interests.   The solution to these problems is an institutional structure that
              protects government from the whims of the people and makes sense of the diverse
              demands made on government.  A more communitarian view holds that people
              pursuing their wildly diverse interests hurt democratic government. Democratic
              government needs a unifying force that brings the people together, and that
              unifying force is a strong national collective identity.  This identity helps
              people to fulfill their obligations to fellow Americans, trust fellow citizens,
              and want to pursue the common good over narrower interests.  In both these
              theoretical approaches, beliefs about how the government ought to operate are
              influenced by perceptions of the people.   Are the public's beliefs about
              government similarly affected by its perceptions of the American people?  The
              researcher assesses this key question.

The researcher discovers how
              Americans characterize the American people in terms of their capabilities,
              their political values, their demographics, and their homogeneity or
              heterogeneity as a people; to investigate the extent to which people identify
              with the American people as a group; and to determine the consequences of these
              characterizations and of a national collective identity for several political
              attitudes.

This project provides the most detailed understanding yet of
              public attitudes toward the American people and provides an extremely valuable
              dataset for others interested in understanding people's attitudes toward
              democratic government, the American people, and group identity.

