Title       : RUI: The Role of Multiple Modulators in a Small Neural System: A Comparative
               Approach
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 23,  2001    
File        : a0111040

Award Number: 0111040
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Diane M. Witt                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $312313             (Estimated)
Investigator: Patsy S. Dickinson pdickins@bowdoin.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bowdoin College
	      5700 College Station
	      Brunswick, ME  04011    207/725-3000

NSF Program : 1191      BEHAVIORAL NEUROSCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9184,9229,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Animals must alter their behavior to meet the demands of a changing environment.
               One mechanism that allows such behavioral flexibility in the pattern
              generators that drive rhythmical movements, such as locomotion and chewing, is
              the functional reconfiguration of neural networks by neuromodulators.  The
              stomatogastric system, which contains the pattern generators that drive the
              pyloric filter and the gastric mill in the crustacean foregut, provides an
              ideal system in which to study neuromodulation.  Both the pattern generators
              and the modulatory inputs in the stomatogastric system have been extensively
              characterized.  More than 20 modulatory substances have been identified in this
              ganglion, raising the following question: Why are so many modulators involved
              in modulating such a relatively simple system?  This project asks whether a
              comparative approach can shed light on this question and thus provide insights
              into the fundamental mechanisms and effects of neuromodulators.
The pyloric
              pattern and its responses to modulators have been studied to some extent in a
              number of different species of decapod crustaceans. The present study will
              further examine the responses of six species - two closely related species of
              crab, two related lobster species, the California spiny lobster, and a kelp
              crab - to a test group of four neuromodulators.  Using standard recording
              techniques, the basic pyloric pattern and its responses to these substances
              will be recorded and characterized qualitatively and quantitatively. 
              Additionally, some of the mechanisms involved in modulation will be compared,
              as will the effects of these four modulators on muscle activity and contraction
              in the six species.


