Title       : ITR/SI: Wireless Transmission Optimization for Bursty Data Traffic
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : ANI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 26,  2001 
File        : a0111818

Award Number: 0111818
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Taieb F. Znati                          
	      ANI  DIV OF ADVANCED NETWOR INFRA & RESEARCH 
	      CSE  DIRECT FOR COMPUTER & INFO SCIE & ENGINR
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $305726             (Estimated)
Investigator: Rohit Negi negi@ece.cmu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Carnegie Mellon University
	      5000 Forbes Avenue
	      Pittsburgh, PA  152133815    412/268-5835

NSF Program : 1686      ITR SMALL GRANTS
Fld Applictn: 0206000   Telecommunications                      
Program Ref : 1686,9218,HPCC,
Abstract    :
                   The wireless channel is expected to play as dominant a role as the wired
              internet, in providing seamless information 'super-highway'.  In the future,
              wireless data traffic will be increasingly dominated by a variety of
              multimedia, such as real-time video, email, web downloads, as opposed to voice
              transmission.  "Tether-free communication and networking', as envisioned by the
              Information Technology Research program, requires intensive research into
              handling the transmission of multimedia over the wireless channel.  Various
              multimedia have very different traffic characteristics than voice, being
              characterized by different delay constraints and burstiness. Handling bursty
              data has been addressed primarily in the networking communit.  The community
              has focussed on the relationship among the traffic delay constraint, the packet
              loss rate (which is assumed to be the packet drop rate), and the channel
              capacity, captured by measures such as "Effective bandwidth'. Networking
              problems in wired (fiber, copper, etc.)  media have been successfully solved by
              this approach, because this channel is inherently a low-error channel.         
                     However, the networking community has by and large ignored the fact that
              there is a very real, non-idea physical channel on which this data is carried. 
              Therefore, the migration of these approaches to the wireless medium meets a
              significant obstacle- the fact that the wireless channel is inherently a very
              noisy, non-robust channel.  Thus for wireless channels, it is important to
              consider the effect on packet loss of both, burstiness and channel errors. 
              Researchers have been approaching the issue of considering both these effects
              in (the PI believes) an ad hoc manner.  This proposal intends to approach the
              issue in a systematic and logical manner.  Specifically, the PI proposes to
              introduce a joint measure of burstiness and channel condition, and use the
              measure to solve the key problem of allocating scarce resources among competing
              users of a wireless system.  The proposed joint approach is a fundamental
              change in paradigm, since it attempts to synthesize ideas from the Networking
              and Communication Theory communities.                                          
                                             The reason why source burstiness as well as
              channel errors (due to noise, fading, etc.) affect the standard notions of
              channel capacity, is due to the requirement of finite delay in the data
              communication.  The PI has therefore developed an initial set of measures
              (details in the full proposal) that relate the delay and packet loss.  The
              measure is based on the random coding error exponent approach, developed in an
              information theoretic setting.  To reduce the packet drop probability, the
              wireless transmitter must transmit at as high a data rate as possible.  But a
              high rate of transmission would imply a high packet error probability on the
              wireless channel, due to transmission errors.  The measure developed by the PI
              attempts to capture this trade-off.  Preliminary analysis indicates that using
              this measure indeed offers a substantial benefit (in terms of designing an
              optimum system) for bursty traffic transmission over fading wireless channels. 
                              The first step in the current research would be to refine the
              developed joint measure.  This would involve using more sophisticated source
              traffic models, more sophisticated fading channel models, and practical channel
              coding schemes.  The developed measure will then be used to design optimal or
              robust schemes (as the need may be) to allocate wireless resources to competing
              streams of data traffic.  This will involve developing scheduling flow control
              algorithms, and the associated adaptive channel coding schemes, using the joint
              measure.                                                                       
                                                                                             
                              In summary, this research will introduce a fundamentally new
              paradigm for transmission optimization of bursty data traffic over wireless
              channels, and then demonstrate the usefulness of the new paradigm in practical
              situations.
