Title       : The Reactions of Elemental Mercury with Reactive Halogens
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 26,  2002     
File        : a0111282

Award Number: 0111282
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $296000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Kirk A. Peterson kirk.peterson@pnl.gov  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Washington State Univ
	      Office of Grants & Research Dev
	      Pullman, WA  991643140    509/335-9661

NSF Program : 1954      QUANTUM CALCULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Kirk Peterson of Washington State University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to carry out theoretical investigations of the
              reactions of atomic mercury with reactive halogen species (X, HX, XO and X2
              where X= chlorine, bromine, and iodine). High accuracy, large-scale potential
              energy surfaces for both ground and low-lying electronically excited states
              will be constructed using accurate ab initio electronic structure methods, i.e.
              multireference configuration interaction and coupled cluster methods with large
              one-particle basis sets.  These results will be used to elucidate the
              thermochemistry, spectroscopy, and reaction dynamics of the relevant species
              involved.  In calculations of potential energy surfaces, particular emphasis
              will be given to an accurate recovery of both scalar relativistic and
              spin-orbit effects.  Given the lack of available information on nearly all of
              the systems, this project has the potential to impact significantly the
              knowledge of gas-phase mercury chemistry with reactive halogen
              species.

Because of its high biological toxicity and long atmospheric
              residence time, mercury is considered to be a high priority among environmental
              pollutants.  Recently, the contamination of the Arctic ecosystem by mercury has
              been of particular concern.  In the atmosphere, mercury exists almost
              exclusively in the gas phase and in its elemental form, but the amount of data
              on its chemical reactions in the gas phase is surprisingly scarce.  The
              outcomes of this project are expected to provide information that will improve
              the understanding of environmentally significant chemical reactions including
              mercury.
