Title       : Intrinsic Interaction Between Superconductivity and Magnetism in Quaternary and
               Pseudoquaternary Borocarbides
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 13,  2001      
File        : a0111682

Award Number: 0111682
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Wendy W. Fuller-Mora                    
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $43000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Donald G. Naugle naugle@physics.tamu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Texas A&M Research Fdn
	      3578 TAMU
	      College Station, TX  778433578    979/845-8615

NSF Program : 1710      CONDENSED MATTER PHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1710,5998,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This individual investigator award will provide support to a senior professor
              for a collaboration with leading scientists in Ukraine to investigate the
              interplay between two "hostile" states, superconductivity and magnetism.  The
              rare-earth-nickel-borocarbide family of compounds which exhibit a wealth of
              related phenomena have been chosen for the study. Important length scales can
              be changed by introduction of point defects. This will be done by both chemical
              substitution and irradiation with high energy electrons in order to separate
              the effects related to physical disorder from those related to chemical
              "pressure".  The research will address the role of pair breaking mechanisms in
              the region of coexistence of superconductivity and magnetism, the nature of
              exotic electronic states in this region and the anomalies in normal state
              transport in these intermetallics.  The results are expected to be of general
              applicability to the understanding of the interplay between superconductivity
              and magnetism, valid well beyond the particular material chosen.  Students will
              receive training that will prepare them for careers in industry, academia or
              government.  The close contact and interaction with leading scientists from
              another country will provide new perspectives on science and culture for these
              students.

This individual investigator award will provide support to a joint
              effort by the principle investigator and leading scientists in Ukraine for an
              investigation into the intricate interplay between "hostile" physical states,
              namely magnetism and superconductivity.  A family of compounds,
              rare-earth-nickel-borocarbides, that shows an unusual variety of phenomena
              related to these two states has been chosen for these studies.  The effects of
              disorder, introduced both by chemical substitution and irradiation with high
              energy electrons, on the interplay will be studied.  The interplay between
              superconductivity and magnetism is a fundamental problem in solid state
              physics, and the results of this investigation are expected to lead to a much
              better understanding of this interplay that will be applicable beyond the
              chosen material.  Students will have the opportunity to collaborate with
              leading international scientists while learning state-of-the art technology and
              experimental skills.



