Title       : US Surface Ocean - Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS) Workshop
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : OCE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 13,  2001     
File        : a0111295

Award Number: 0111295
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Donald L. Rice                          
	      OCE  DIVISION OF OCEAN SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : April 15,  2001     
Expires     : January 31,  2003    (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20174              (Estimated)
Investigator: Patricia A. Matrai pmatrai@bigelow.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Bigelow Lab for Ocean Scs
	      McKown Point
	      West Boothbay Harbor, ME  04575    /   -

NSF Program : 1670      CHEMICAL OCEANOGRAPHY
Fld Applictn: 0204000   Oceanography                            
Program Ref : 1309,9189,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              ABSTRACT

OCE-0111295

This award will support a science-planning workshop
              on the biogeochemical and physical processes controlling  climate relevant
              compounds (CRCs) in the Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere (SOLA) region. This
              workshop will  initiate the development of a science plan for a US Surface
              Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS). US SOLAS  will be part of the
              international SOLAS, which is currently planned as a new international
              interfacial program by the  IGBP, SCOR and CACGP. The international SOLAS has
              already been approved by SCOR and IGBP.  This workshop will be structured
              around several interelated fundamental science issues in ocean/atmosphere 
              biogeochemical coupling:

-- The Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Sulfur
              Cycle
-- Radiation and Photochemistry in the Surface Ocean-Lower
              Atmosphere
-- Boundary Layer Dynamics of CO2 and other climate relevant
              gases
-- Atmospheric Connections with the Marine Nitrogen Cycle
-- Boundary
              Layer Physics  

Through discussions in the five science issue areas above,
              the overall objectives of the workshop will be to: 

-- Summarize recent
              advances in quantifying fluxes of CRCs in the SOLA region. 
-- Identify
              critical and addressable knowledge gaps to predict future concentrations of
              CRCs in the lower marine  atmosphere.  
-- Prioritize which inter- and
              multi-disciplinary studies will further our understanding of controls on the
              concentrations and fluxes of CRCs in this boundary region.  
-- Further the
              development of a US science plan for study of the SOLA region and evaluate how
              such an effort would  interface with other national and international science
              initiatives such as the U.S. Carbon Cycle Science Plan  (CCSP), the IGBP
              International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) project and the international
              SOLAS.  

The atmospheric concentrations of many CRCs are affected by
              physical, biological, and chemical processes in the  SOLA region. Models
              suggest that this region is particularly susceptible to climate change, and
              that changes in this  region can affect global concentrations of CRCs.
              Forecasting future levels of the CRCs thus requires better  knowledge of
              processes in the SOLA and how the processes there will change under various
              climate change  scenarios. Many processes in the SOLA region are closely linked
              on both sides of the air-water interface and must be  investigated in a
              comprehensive interdisciplinary fashion. Advances have been made over the last
              decade in the  study of the relevant processes, but a holistic and interlinking
              view of these processes has been lacking. The need for  such an approach has
              been amply documented by increasing evidence of the interconnectivity of
              biogeochemical and  physical cycles. Some processes, such as the effect of
              aeolian deposition of trace nutrients on the surface ocean's  carbon cycle,
              have received increasing attention. Others, such as the effect of ocean-derived
              aerosol particles on  lower atmosphere oxidation efficiency are just becoming
              apparent. To quantify these climate-relevant processes a  partnership between
              scientists investigating the surface ocean and lower atmosphere is necessary. 
              

Developing a program that crosses traditional disciplinary boundaries is
              challenging and requires significant  community input from investigators who
              have not routinely interacted in the past. The proposed workshop is one  avenue
              to foster such interactions. As with previous interdisciplinary efforts, such
              as JGOFS, the returns are high as  scientific breakthroughs are often
              accomplished by thinking "outside the box"[or in this case reservoir].  


