Title       : NMR Studies of RNA Enzymes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0111060

Award Number: 0111060
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $360000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Juli Feigon feigon@mbi.ucla.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Los Angeles
	      10920 Wilshire Blvd.
	      Los Angeles, CA  900241406    310/794-0102

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Multidimensional, multinuclear NMR spectroscopy will be used to investigate the
              folding, cation binding, and structures of (1) the hairpin ribozyme from the
              tobacco ringspot virus satellite and (2) telomerase RNA domains. The hairpin
              ribozyme studies are a continuation of previous structural studies of the
              individual domains A and B, and will focus on the folding pathway and cation
              interactions of the intact ribozyme. Telomerase is a ribonucleoprotein which is
              responsible for replication of telomere DNA found at the physical ends of
              chromosomes. Telomerase activity is generally undetectable in somatic cells,
              and high levels of telomerase activity are only found in proliferating germ
              cells and cancer cells. The known components of human telomerase are a reverse
              transcriptase (hTERT) which catalyzes the addition of the nucleotides, a 451
              nucleotide RNA (hTR) which contains the template for the synthesized DNA, and
              telomerase associated protein 1 (TP1). The proposed secondary structure of the
              vertebrate telomerase RNAs based on phylogeny consists of four conserved
              structural domains: the pseudoknot domain, the CR4-CR5 domain, the Box H/ACA
              domain, and the CR7 domain. This essential core structure appears to be
              preserved despite extensive sequence and length divergence. The conservation of
              the core telomerase RNA structure and a variety of functional studies both in
              vitro and in vivo indicate that the structure of the RNA plays an important
              role in telomerase function. The structures of essential subdomains of
              telomerase RNA, specifically in the pseudoknot and box H/ACA domains, will be
              determined and their interactions with known telomerase binding proteins will
              be studied. These  structural studies should complement the existing
              information on the molecular biology and biochemistry of these enzymes, and
              provide new insights into RNA folding, tertiary structure, role of cations in
              tertiary structure formation, and catalysis. In addition, the telomerase
              studies will provide basic information on the structure and assembly of the
              telomerase RNP complex.
