Title       : Quantifying the Lock-in Effect in a Dynamic Industry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0111737

Award Number: 0111737
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Laura Razzolini                         
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20000              (Estimated)
Investigator: April M. Franco april-franco@uiowa.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Iowa
	      
	      Iowa City, IA  52242    319/335-2123

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,9136,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to understand why incumbent firms sometimes are
              followers in using new technology, even when they were instrumental in
              developing it.  The evidence suggests that they face a larger opportunity cost
              than entering firms.  Incumbents are locked in to older technologies because of
              their higher productivity in using older technologies, while entering firms can
              only use the new technology. The primary goal is to determine how large this
              lock-in effect is.  The data used is from the rigid drive industry.  This
              industry is well-suited for this exercise, since technology advances are rapid
              and there has been evidence of both situations where incumbents have lagged
              behind in the use of new technology and where they have been the first to use
              new technology.
	Simulating the model to approximate the data will provide
              information on what changes in the environment lead to the lock-in effect.  In
              the model, as the relative value of the product produced using the new
              technology increases, the lock-in effect tends to decrease.  However, the
              simulation of the model can provide us with direct evidence of how much the
              relative value must increase, given the other parameters, in order to eliminate
              the lock-in effect.  A similar experiment can be run with changes in
              productivity.
	Computationally, this means solving the equilibrium model with
              many agents and calculating the difference in the value of an incumbent firm
              from switching to the newest technology.  This is a formidable task as the
              agent's productivity using a given technology and the distribution of the
              agents' productivity using a given technology are state variables.  Because the
              output from the computed model must approximate the data, this means repeating
              this task as the program searches for the appropriate values of the state
              variables, as well as the other parameters for the model.
	
 
