Title       : Asymmetric Synthesis with Chiral Heteroalkyl Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 23,  2002     
File        : a0111831

Award Number: 0111831
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $390000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Philip P. Garner ppg@po.cwru.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Case Western Reserve
	      Adelber Hall Rm. 4
	      Cleveland, OH  441067015    216/368-4510

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Philip P. Garner, of the Department of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve
              University, is studying asymmetric synthesis using chiral heteroalkyl radicals.
              Professor Garner is both developing a general, iterative polymer-supported
              radical synthesis of polyols and extending the use of pyranosidic chiral
              auxiliaries to synthetically useful closed-shell processes. The optimal
              resin-linker strategy for this iterative approach will be defined and
              techniques developed for the quantification of polymer-supported reactions.
              Methods for reducing the number of steps required for each iteration of the
              radical homologation sequence and paring down the structure of the chiral
              auxiliary will also be explored. Pyranosidic chiral auxiliaries will be applied
              to a variety of useful closed-shell processes. Concerted cycloadditions,
              allylboron/enolate alkylations, and a tandem asymmetric hydroboration/Suzuki
              coupling sequence will be examined, both in solution and on polymer
              supports.

While organic reactions have traditionally been carried out in
              solution, allowing intimate mixing of reactants, there are many advantages to
              finding reactions in which either a reactant or a reagent is linked to an
              insoluble "support." If a spent reagent is attached to such a support, for
              example, it may be easily removed from the reaction mixture, while if a desired
              compound is attached, impurities may be easily washed away. Professor Philip P.
              Garner, of the Department of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University, is
              supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for his efforts
              in this area. Professor Garner is harnessing the reaction chemistry of
              compounds containing an unpaired electron ("radicals"), finding ways to control
              their reactivity so as to allow precise geometrical control over the products
              of their reactions.
