Title       : A Value Protection Model of Justice Reasoning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 11,  2002  
File        : a0111612

Award Number: 0111612
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Deborah Frisch                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $199990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Linda J. Skitka Lskitka@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The goal of this research is to test the theoretical possibility that personal
              identity concerns play an important role in how people decide whether something
              is fair or unfair, and to explore how these concerns relate to people's ability
              to generate procedures to resolve conflict. Specifically, people are highly
              motivated to act in ways that allow for public and private affirmation of the
              belief that they are authentically good and moral beings (Steele, 1988). Given
              that moral values form the core of personal identity (Rokeach, 1973),
              self-affirmation should involve endorsing self-expressive moral positions or
              stands, or what Skitka (in press) has referred to as "moral mandates." 
              Thinking about, experiencing, witnessing, or behaving in a way that leads to a
              violation of a moral mandate should be experienced as a threat to people's
              sense of self, and therefore should be defended more vigorously than other
              kinds of strong attitudes. One implication of this line of theorizing is that
              people should have much greater difficulty negotiating procedures to decide
              issues that involve moral mandates than they do for issues that involve other
              concerns.  To test this hypothesis, research participants (college students)
              participating in small heterogeneous or homogeneous groups, will be asked to
              come to consensus on a fair procedure to decide an issue that they either (a)
              have a moral mandate about, (b) do not have a moral mandate about, or (c) have
              a strong attitude, but not a moral mandate about.  Groups will have three
              options to end negotiations: Unanimously agree to a procedure that each
              participant agrees that they could accept as a binding way to decide their
              assigned issue; unanimously agree that they will never come to consensus on a
              binding procedure; or 1 hour passes (whichever occurs first).  Groups' ability
              to generate a consensually accepted procedure, perceptions of the group process
              and other group members, and degree of post-discussion attitude change (i.e.,
              polarization on morally mandated as compared to non-morally mandated issues) as
              a function of group discussion will be assessed.   A follow-up study will
              explore the perceived fairness of the procedures generated in the group
              discussion study  when they are evaluated without reference to a specific
              issue.

