Title       : Regulation of Cellular Interactions by Extracellular Matrix Proteolysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0111285

Award Number: 0111285
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Judith Plesset                          
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $228478             (Estimated)
Investigator: LeAnn L. Lindsay lllindsay@ucdavis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Jerry L. Hedrick  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Davis
	      OVCR/Sponsored Programs
	      Davis, CA  956168671    530/752-2075

NSF Program : 1119      ANIMAL DEVELOPMENTAL MECHANSMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0111285
Lindsay

The extracellular egg envelope plays a crucial role in
              regulating sperm-egg interactions both before and after fertilization, and is
              thus a major subject of interest in developmental biology. After initial sperm
              penetration and fertilization, the egg envelope is modified by egg factors to
              defend the egg against sperm to prevent polyspermy, a condition that is lethal
              to embryonic development. During this complex "block to polyspermy" reaction,
              sperm binding sites on the egg envelope are inactivated, and the envelope
              structure is modified so that it is "hardened" to impede sperm penetration and
              to protect the developing embryo. These observations are almost a century old
              but still the mechanisms behind the reactions are unknown, due primarily to the
              lack of biological material, especially in mammals. One hypothesis is that an
              egg protease is involved in the reaction, since proteolysis of a specific egg
              envelope glycoprotein, ZPA, has been observed following fertilization. The
              current research project is designed to test this hypothesis by isolating and
              characterizing the responsible egg protease, designated "ZPAase", followed by
              the determination of its effects on egg envelope physical properties and
              function. The amphibian model system Xenopus laevis is used due to the large
              amounts of gametes that are available for study. Previously funded research
              identified ZPAase as a metalloprotease and it was partially purified.
              Continuing studies will complete the purification of ZPAase, and use molecular
              cloning techniques to determine the amino acid sequence of ZPAase for
              functional information and comparison to other proteases. Purified protease,
              obtained from eggs or through protein expression, will be used test the
              hypothesis of ZPA proteolysis on sperm binding to the egg envelope and envelope
              hardening. The results of these studies will make a significant contribution to
              our knowledge of the complex reactions that regulate sperm-egg interactions
              following fertilization and are fundamental to normal animal development.

