Title       : Asymmetric Hydrogenation at Electrode Surfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 22,  2001    
File        : a0111621

Award Number: 0111621
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $225000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bernadette T. Donovan-Merkert bdonovan@email.uncc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Charlotte
	      U N C C Station
	      Charlotte, NC  28223    704/597-2000

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program entitled "Asymmetric Hydrogenation at Electrode Surfaces"
              represents a significant expansion of the prior work by Professor Bernadette
              Donovan-Merkert of the University of North Carolina at Charlotte and is
              supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry program.  The goal of this
              project is to prepare electrodes capable of chiral electrochemical
              hydrogenation.  Metal complexes with pyrrole-modified chiral ligands will be
              attached to electrodes via electropolymerization of the pyrrole tether.  This
              strategy allows several metal catalysts to be investigated, both as the pure
              film or copolymerized so as to increase the conductivity of the film.  The
              chiral electrochemical hydrogenation will be evaluated with acetamidoacrylates,
              a class of substrates known to give high enantiomeric excess when hydrogenated
              under homogenous conditions.

Catalytic hydrogenation is a standard chemical
              reaction and usually yields an equal mixture of two stereoisomers.  However,
              for biological applications, the two stereoisomers can have quite different
              properties.  For example, one isomer may be a sedative while the other other
              may cause genetic abnormalities.  To obtain the desired stereoisomer, there are
              two routes:  One can make both isomers, and then separate the good from the
              bad.  Or, more elegantly and less wasteful, create a chiral catalyst which only
              makes the desired stereoisomer.  This research is focussed on a new style of
              chiral catalysts which could operate at lower temperatures and pressures, and
              thus more safely, than previous chiral catalysts.

