Title       : Mechanisms of Transition Metal Catalyzed Reactions in Hydrocarbons
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0111946

Award Number: 0111946
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $570000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert H. Grubbs rhg@its.caltech.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : California Inst of Tech
	      1201 E California Blvd
	      Pasadena, CA  911250001    626/395-6073

NSF Program : 1944      BIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project continues the exploration of organometallic olefin metathesis
              reactions, which has grown into one of the key tools of modern synthetic
              chemists.  Applications include the synthesis of small molecules, such as
              natural products, and the production of polymers with well-defined structures
              and controlled properties.  During the current granting period, emphasis will
              be placed on developing a fuller understanding of the fundamental mechanistic
              underpinnings of these reactions.  Further refinement and development of new
              catalyst systems are expected to accrue from such studies, in additional to
              their intrinsic scientific value.  Applications of a tandem strategy coupling
              ring-opening metathesis with atom transfer radical polymerization will be used
              to produce a variety of new polymer structures such as comb and hyper-branched
              systems.

With this Award, the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program
              of the Division of Chemistry and the Solid State Chemistry and Polymers Program
              of the Division of Materials Research support the research activities of
              Professor Robert H. Grubbs of the California Institute of Technology. 
              Professor Grubbs has developed very powerful catalysts for the precise
              construction of organic molecules including those of interest to the
              pharmaceutical and polymer industries.  The current period of funding will
              allow for the further understanding and refinement of the needed catalyst
              systems as well as their applications for the preparation of novel polymeric
              substances.

