Title       : Rho GTPases in Plant Development: A Genetic and Cell Biological Analysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 8,  2002        
File        : a0111078

Award Number: 0111078
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Sharman D. O'Neill                      
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John E. Fowler fowlerj@bcc.orst.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Oregon State University
	      
	      Corvallis, OR  973315503    503/754-0123

NSF Program : 1118      PLANT & MICRO DEVELOP MECHANSM
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9109,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              0111078
Fowler

Because plant cells are immobile, and are fixed within
              tissues by a cell wall, their shapes and sizes (morphology) must be generated
              by precise regulation of the sites of cell expansion and/or the planes of cell
              division.  Current data indicate that regulation of expansion and division
              depends on interactions among factors associated with the cell cortex, the
              plasma membrane and the cell wall.  However, a mechanistic understanding of
              these factors (proteins and signals) and their functions in plant cell
              morphogenesis is incomplete.  Evidence is building that the plant-specific Rop
              subfamily of the Rho GTPases is involved in regulating these morphogenetic
              processes at the cell cortex, including pollen tube growth, the distribution of
              the actin cytoskeleton, and cell wall synthesis.  However, the in vivo
              functions of specific Rops throughout plant growth and development are poorly
              understood.

Using the model crop plant Zea mays, the P.I. has isolated a
              large collection of mutations in five rop genes, and evaluation of mutant
              phenotypes indicates that at least one of these rop genes, ropB, functions in
              the pollen tube.  The P.I. will take a combined genetic, molecular, and cell
              biological approach to understanding the functions of the Rop family in plant
              development.  Specifically, the P.I. will determine the in vivo functions of
              maize ROPB by a detailed characterization of the ropB mutant phenotype.  Growth
              in the maize style (the silk) of mutant pollen tubes from single and double rop
              mutant plants will be analyzed.  Mutant pollen tubes will be tested in culture
              with a variety of inhibitors, to dissect the signaling pathways downstream of
              ROPB.  The P.I. will also generate and characterize maize plants expressing
              fluorescent reporters of the plant cytoskeleton, and use these to more
              precisely dissect the effects of rop mutations on cytoskeletal distribution in
              vivo.

This work will provide insight into these important signaling
              molecules, and should help clarify their roles in several processes (e.g.,
              pollination and pollen tube growth, cell wall synthesis).  In addition to
              contributing to basic scientific knowledge, our results may suggest ways to
              manipulate specific rops that would lead to crop improvement.  The close
              relationship of the monocot Zea mays to other important grass crops (rice,
              wheat) suggests 
