Title       : Structure-Function in Red and Yellow Fluorescent Proteins
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0111053

Award Number: 0111053
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375000             (Estimated)
Investigator: S. James Remington jim@uoxray.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The purpose of this investigation will be to determine the structural basis for
              the maturation chemistry and fluorescent properties of three newly discovered
              green fluorescent protein homologies (Fps) which emit red light (drFP583),
              yellow light (zFP538) or are colored but not fluorescent (asFP595).  The
              objective is to discover the unique chemistry and three dimensional
              configurations that lead to the fluorescence of these molecules.  On the basis
              of the understanding gained form this work, in the long term the properties of
              these proteins will be improved for use as light emitting research tools for
              the study of the development and dynamic behavior of living creatures on both
              the subcellular and whole organism levels.

The general approach will include
              crystallographic, physicochemical and directed mutagenesis studies.  The
              relationships between the primary amino acid sequences and the tertiary and
              quaternary structures will be determined by high resolution X-ray
              crystallography.  The roles of specific side chains in the maturation chemistry
              will be determined by directed mutagenesis and analysis of the light absorption
              and emission properties of the variants.  Selected mutants will be made in
              order to optimize emission color, state of oligomerization and molecular
              response to external condition for use as visual indicators of solution
              conditions (e.g. pH) in real time in living cells.  The end result will be to
              provide the research community with tools that report the timing of gene
              expression, localization of gene products, and changes in cellular chemistry in
              a noninvasive manner.  For the most part, graduate students will gain training
              in a number of interdisciplinary areas as this work proceeds.


