Title       : Balance Sheets and Monetary Policy in the Open Economy: A Research Proposal
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0111800

Award Number: 0111800
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $375046             (Estimated)
Investigator: Andres Velasco avelasco@ksg.harvard.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Roberto Chang  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The design and analysis of exchange rate regimes has long been a research
              priority.  The subject has attracted even more attention recently because of
              the emerging-market crises of the 1990s, and the ensuing controversies over how
              the exchange rate was managed.  In those episodes the domestic financial system
              often crashed along with the currency.  Moreover, financial considerations
              -such as the health of banks or the size of dollar debt posed severe
              constraints on the conduct of monetary policy. For these reasons, increasingly
              the focus of research is on the interaction between the structure of the
              financial systems and the effects of exchange rate policy. For instance recent
              work has stressed that in the presence of liabilities denominated in foreign
              currency a devaluation can weaken the balance sheets of domestic firms and
              reduce their access to world credit markets thus causing a fall in investment.
              aggregate demand. and output.  In joint work with Luis Felipe Cespedes of NYU,
              the investigators were among the first to model this channel in the context of
              a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium model and to explore its implications
              for monetary and exchange rate policies.  But the literature that studies
              monetary policies in open economies with imperfect fi-nancial markets is still
              in its infancy.   This project advances this line of work in two
              directions:
(i) It develops formal models of how exchange rate policy may have
              an impact on overall activity through the effect of exchange rates on balance
              sheets and, more generally, on credit constraints. Previous work relied on some
              very strong simplifying assumptions.
(ii) It analyzes the proper choice of
              monetary and exchange rate policy. Almost all papers so far have looked at once
              and for all monetary reactions to a particular shock.  This project
              characterizes the optimal monetary policy rule with and without
              commitment.

The theoretical results, and the quantitative implications of
              calibrated simulations of the models could have important implications for a
              number of policy issues. Could floating be the optimal exchange rate policy in
              the presence of financial imperfections? What is the optimal monetary policy in
              a floating regime? In particular. how close should the correlation be between
              home and foreign nominal interest rates? Can the optimal policy be replicated
              or approximated by an inflation-targeting rule? If so. how should that rule be
              designed?

 


	







