Title       : GOALI/FRG: Structural Properties of Alumina and Adsorbed Metal Particles
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 29,  2002       
File        : a0111841

Award Number: 0111841
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Dr. Lynnette D. Madsen                  
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $397823             (Estimated)
Investigator: Sergey N. Rashkeev sergey.rashkeev@vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Karl W. Sohlberg  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Michael Glasov  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Stephen J. Pennycook  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Sokrates T. Pantelides  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1774      CERAMICS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1504,1589,9162,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              The focus of the proposal is to pursue fundamental understanding of structural
              transformations in materials that occur in applications and device methods to
              control them so that they can be either averted or enhanced, as needed by
              industry. The specific problem of interest is the stabilization of g-alumina
              that is widely used as a catalyst support and as a catalyst. At high
              temperatures, g-alumina, which is porous, converts to a-alumina, which is not
              porous, and catalytic activity stops. Empirically, it has been found that the
              addition of 3.5-5% lanthanum stabilizes g-alumina. In a laboratory process
              developed by one of the PIs, it has been found that stabilization can be
              achieved with only 0.3-0.5% La, but the process is not scalable for
              manufacturing (La is very expensive). The proposed research will use a
              combination of atomic-resolution Z-contrast microscopy and electron-energy-loss
              spectroscopy and first-principles theoretical modeling to understand the
              atomic-scale processes that underlie the phase transformation and the
              stabilization with different impurities. A second problem will be the
              interaction of catalytic particles with the alumina substrate in catalytic
              systems. The PIs at two universities, a national lab, and an industrial lab
              have prior expertise and collaborative synergy on similar projects in the past
              and also propose to develop a parallel educational program. 
%%%
The proposed
              research will seek to understand the atomic-scale processes that underlie a
              phenomenon that has proved to be quite costly for industry: the material known
              as g-alumina is porous and is used as a substrate in catalytic systems. At high
              temperatures, it undergoes a transformation to a different phase known as
              a-alumina (different atomic arrangements in the crystal), which is not porous.
              Catalytic activity stops. Addition of 3-5% of the rather expensive element
              lanthanum stabilizes g-alumina. One of the PI's developed an alternative
              process that produces stable g-alumina with only 0.3-0.5% La, but the process
              cannot be scaled for manufacturing. The PIs have an assembly of unique
              experimental and theoretical tools and have demonstrated synergistic
              collaboration in the past. They will be able to determine the atomic scale
              processes that are responsible for the transformation and the stabilization by
              impurities and develop alternative approaches with either La or other
              impurities that will be efficient and cost-effective. In addition, they propose
              to study related interactions between catalytic metal particles on alumina
              substrates. Finally, they propose an educational program that will enable
              students to participate in research done at a national lab and an industrial
              lab. 

