Title       : Theory of Nonuniform Fluids
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 1,  2001     
File        : a0111104

Award Number: 0111104
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $285000             (Estimated)
Investigator: John D. Weeks jdw@ipst.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              John Weeks of the University of Maryland is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to investigate the properties of nonuniform
              fluids.  This work concentrates on ionic systems, and addresses the following
              topics: 1) research in the theory of ionic liquids focusing on regimes where
              molecular and intermediate length scales play an important role along with
              long-range Coulomb interactions, 2) further development of the theory of
              hydrophobic interactions and application to new experiments describing the
              density distribution of water near hydrophobic and hydrophilic surfaces, 3)
              detailed examination of the relationship between this new theoretical approach
              and density functional theory, and  4) development of new technical extensions
              and improvements in the theory by incorporating known data for bulk systems and
              exact sum rules. This may be required for quantitative results in some of the
              applications, ionic liquids in particular, and is expected to facilitate the
              development of simple semi-empirical approaches that make use of experimental
              data to help uncover new qualitative effects.

Problems in the area of
              nonuniform fluids are of great current interest due to their practical
              importance in biophysical and industrial applications.  Experiments have shown
              that the static and dynamic properties of nonuniform simple fluids,
              particularly when confined to small pores or slits, differ dramatically from
              those of uniform systems.  Nonuniform solutions containing ions such as salts
              and proteins play a key role in biological processes.  The nonuniform charge
              distribution associated with double layer formation is believed to stabilize
              aqueous solutions of macromolecules and colloids.
