Title       : Nanostructured Polymers for Bronsted and Lewis Acid Catalysis via Monomer
               Self-Assembly
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 31,  2003     
File        : a0111193

Award Number: 0111193
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Andrew J. Lovinger                      
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2005       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $320000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Douglas L. Gin Douglas.Gin@colorado.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Colorado Boulder
	      3100 Marine Street, Room 481
	      Boulder, CO  803090572    303/492-6221

NSF Program : 1773      POLYMERS
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award will support a research program in the development of functional,
              nanostructured polymeric systems based on polymerizable liquid crystals (LCs). 
              The goal of the proposed project is to design and examine nanostructured,
              polymeric acid catalysts based on lyotropic LC assemblies that would
              potentially offer the best of both worlds in terms of properties and control. 
              One specific new research direction is the design of lyotropic LC monomers that
              form the Hii phase which contain strong Bronsted acid groups.  To out
              knowledge, polymerizable amphiphiles with this combination of features are
              unprecedented.  This aspect of the proposed work will involve investigating
              fundamental issues of functional group compatibility in LC monomer design, as
              well as investigating the effect of the nanoscale architecture and confinement
              on Bronsted acid-base equilibria in the resulting polymer.  More applied
              studies will also be undertaken to determine the effectiveness of these
              proposed nanostructured polymer resins in acid catalysis relative to the more
              conventional inorganic and organic acid materials.  The second new research
              direction is the design of new lyotropic monomers which contain strongly Lewis
              acidic Sc(III) headgroups.  Although amorphous, polymer-supported Sc(III)
              catalysts have been realized, nanostructured Sc-containing polymeric catalysts
              are unprecedented.  LC network-supported Sc(III) materials may yield unique
              heterogeneous Lewis acid catalysts that not only operate in water but also
              afford different reaction kinetics and selectivities compared to traditional
              isotropic Sc(III) systems.
%%%
In terms of broader impact, the proposed
              research will provide training for students in the important area of
              nanoscience.  Nanoscale science has recently become a national science and
              technology priority.  The proposed research provides a novel training ground
              for students in polymer chemistry to examine the effect of nanostructure on
              important materials properties, such as catalysis and reactivity.  The research
              itself may lead to new fundamental insights for designing polymeric materials
              with novel capabilities as a result of control of order on the nanometer
              scale.

