Title       : RUI: Forced Rayleigh scattering on heterogeneous liquid crystals: Directional
               solidification at forced wavevectors
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0111143

Award Number: 0111143
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $116811             (Estimated)
Investigator: Daniel R. Spiegel dspiegel@trinity.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Trinity University
	      715 Stadium Drive
	      San Antonio, TX  78212    210/999-8401

NSF Program : 1960      STRUCTURE AND REACTIVITY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9229,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Daniel R. Spiegel of Trinity University is funded for his research on forced
              Rayleigh scattering (FRS) on heterogeneous liquid crystals by the Physical
              Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division.  The interfacial modulation
              accompanying an impurity-diffusion-driven instability during
              nematic-directional solidification can be stimulated and probed by FRS
              techniques.  Non-homogeneous perturbations at selected wavelengths
              (frequencies) of such transforming systems will be used to experimentally probe
              the nonlinear reaction-diffusion modeling and pattern formation of such
              liquid-crystal systems.  FRS pump-beam interference fringes will be used to
              effect modulation of the nematic-isotropic interface of a directionally
              solidified liquid crystal.  The temporal evolution of specific Fourier
              component amplitudes will be tracked using diffracted FRS probe beams. 
              Fundamentally important dispersion relations relevant to the basic linear
              instability will be mapped experimentally.

Nonlinear dynamical systems,
              including those that produce non-equilibrium pattern formation, are becoming
              increasingly upbiquitous in research and in chemcial industry.  The analysis
              and modeling of such systems is important for developing quantitative methods
              for controlling such phenomena.  The FRS experiments at Trinity University
              should provide definite means for improving our experimental approaches to
              developing such models, and for testing our understanding of such models. 
              Furthermore, invaluable state-of-the-art training will be afforded the
              undergraduates participating in this research program.
