Title       : Justice, Faith and Gender: Muslim Women's Responses to Domestic Violence in
               Kazakhstan
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 11,  2001    
File        : a0111405

Award Number: 0111405
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56287              (Estimated)
Investigator: Edward K. Snajdr esnajdr@mailer.fsu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Daniel Maier-Katkin  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Florida State University
	      
	      Tallahassee, FL  323064166    850/644-5260

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research examines how Muslim activists utilize traditional gender roles and
              Islamic principles to offer victim-survivors of domestic violence alternatives
              to the criminal justice system in the Central Asian Republic of Kazakhstan. The
              central research question guiding the proposed project is: How do Muslim and
              non-Muslim service providers define and respond to domestic violence, its
              victims and its perpetrators through gender, religious and ethnic constructs? 
              Theoretical approaches from cultural anthropology addressing the role of agency
              at the intersection of gender, nation, and religion will frame the analysis of
              both Muslim and non-Muslim responses to violence.  The methodology for the
              proposed project will combine ethnographic observation with semi-structured
              interviews and a comparison of domestic violence cases collected from both
              Muslim and non-Muslim service providers. Interviews with service providers will
              be used to interpret the specific responses to victims in each case of
              intervention collected and to elicit information regarding the normative
              principles associated with particular responses. Ethnographic observation will
              address both ideal beliefs and actual practices. The project will reveal how
              certain culture-specific and informal responses are either more, or
              alternatively, less effective in reaching the goals of providing safety and
              services to victims of domestic violence. The study will shed light on how
              these informal interventions are shaped by Muslim women's negotiations between
              justice, gender and faith.
