Title       : Active Sensing for Three-Dimensional Auditory Localization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 3,  2002       
File        : a0111973

Award Number: 0111973
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Soo-Siang Lim                           
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Cynthia F. Moss cmoss@psyc.umd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of MD College Park
	      3112 Lee Building
	      College Park, MD  207425141    301/405-6269

NSF Program : 1185      SENSORY SYSTEMS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              Active sensing for three-dimensional auditory localization
The proposed project
              examines the production, reception and processing of acoustic signals for
              spatial localization in a dynamic environment.  The research described in this
              proposal utilizes the echolocating bat as a model system for the study of
              auditory localization, with particular emphasis on the coordinated operation
              between perception and action for the representation of three-dimensional
              space.  The echolocating bat produces ultrasonic vocalizations and uses
              information contained in the returning echoes to determine the direction and
              distance of objects in space. With this acoustic information, the bat builds a
              three-dimensional auditory representation of the world. 

The research will
              combine acoustics, behavior and modeling to specify general principles of
              spatial information processing and orientation.  The big brown bat, Eptesicus
              fuscus, an insectivorous North American bat that produces frequency modulated
              (FM) sonar sounds will serve as the subject in three inter-related studies:  1)
              Detailed measurements of the acoustic information available to the bat for
              sound localization.  This study also examines how cues related to sound source
              direction and distance are ultimately combined to represent an auditory
              object's location in three-dimensional space.  2) Behavioral measurements of
              the bat's active control over the direction and volume of the sonar beam used
              to gather acoustic information from the environment. This study aims to
              identify the active processes that contribute to the bat's spatial orientation
              and tracking by echolocation, which shares important principles with other
              sensorimotor systems. 3) Perceptual experiments will measure the resolution of
              the bat's sonar receiver along the distance axis.  This study complements the
              acoustic measures of sonar signal direction and beam width and the pressure
              transformation of acoustic signals at the two ears to permit modeling of active
              sensing for auditory localization in three-dimensional space.

The
              interdisciplinary work described in this proposal holds importance to the
              public sector, contributing to education (cross-disciplinary research and
              scientific training), technology (teleconferencing and radar/sonar) and society
              (human factors).  Furthermore, the bat's motor control over the information
              extracted from three-dimensional space presents a special opportunity to
              examine and develop models of action and perception that bridge work in
              audition and vision.  


