Title       : A Study of Geographic Information Technology Use in Collaborative Water Resource
               Planning
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0111481

Award Number: 0111481
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Richard J. Aspinall                     
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149987             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr L. Jankowski piotrj@uidaho.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Timothy L. Nyerges  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Idaho
	      
	      Moscow, ID  838443010    208/885-2259

NSF Program : 1352      GEOGRAPHY AND REGIONAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The increasing involvement of stakeholder groups in solving spatial decision
              problems has created a need for information technology capable of supporting
              collaborative spatial decision making.  The goal of this project is to develop
              a better understanding of how groups of stakeholders may use geospatial
              technology to enhance collaborative approach to problem solving and decision
              making.  Such knowledge is necessary in order to develop geospatial technology
              support tools capable of accommodating diverse participants involved in solving
              location-based decision problems.  This project will use a field experiment
              approach to study the dynamics of collaborative work and decision making
              supported by geospatial information technology.  The experiment will involve
              true stakeholders invited to engage in a realistic decision problem of water
              management planning in the Boise River basin in southwestern Idaho.  Two groups
              each with 10 participants will be used: the control group will be exposed only
              to traditional support tools such as traditional maps, whereas the experimental
              group will be exposed to collaborative decision support tools such as
              geographic information system (GIS) -based maps and three-dimensional
              visualizations.  The human-computer-human interaction process during the
              experiment will be captured using professional video cameras.  A tested
              social-behavioral science technique called "interaction coding" will be
              employed to compile data logs from the experiment and exploratory sequential
              data analysis techniques will be used to analyze the data.  Parametric and
              non-parametric statistical procedures will be used to test a number of research
              hypotheses. 

Dealing with location-based decision problems in an open manner
              is becoming more important as stakeholder participation increases in land use,
              natural resource, and environmental decision making.  The primary rationale for
              enhanced stakeholder participation in environmental decision making is based on
              the democratic maxim that those affected by a decision should participate
              directly in the decision making process.  The project results are expected to
              expand knowledge about the impacts of geospatial information technology on
              collaborative decision processes engaging diverse groups of stakeholders. 
              Moreover, the project will help develop and share a better understanding of the
              integration needs for information technology involving geographic information
              systems, decision models, and group collaboration support tools. 


