Title       : Acquisition of Light Scattering Instrumentation for Complex Fluids Research and
               Education
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 20,  2001    
File        : a0111497

Award Number: 0111497
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Guebre X. Tessema                       
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $56353              (Estimated)
Investigator: Seth Fraden fraden@brandeis.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Robert B. Meyer  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Brandeis University
	      P.O. Box 549110
	      Waltham, MA  024549110    781/736-2121

NSF Program : 1750      INSTRUMENT FOR MATERIALS RSRCH
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1682,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This award from the Instrumentation for Materials research will allow Brandeis
              University to acquire a light scattering spectrometer that will be the keystone
              f a facility to perform both static and dynamic light scattering measurements.
              The facility will be multi-user and multi-disciplinary, as well as fulfill
              research and educational needs. The facility will consist of an ALV light
              scattering spectrometer ($80k), a homemade static light scattering spectrometer
              (built in 1999), and a Brookhaven differential refractometer (purchased in
              2000). Currently there are no general-purpose light scattering spectrometers at
              Brandeis. The equipment will be used as a non-invasive probe to study complex
              fluids, such as liquid crystals, colloidal suspensions, and protein
              crystallization in the Physics department. Several members of Biology and
              Chemistry departments will have access to this facility as secondary users.
              Their research goals are to study protein complexes. The equipment be used to
              train physics graduate and undergraduate students and biology graduate students
              in light scattering, an important technique in its own right, which
              additionally shares many principles with other techniques such as neutron and
              x-ray scattering. Students will take either a six or nine week intensive
              training course in light scattering that will integrate pedagogical instruction
              with research experience. Instructional exercises will be developed to
              elucidate both physical phenomena of macromolecules and to provide training in
              light scattering techniques. This combination will give students a greater
              understanding of complex fluids in general and will enable them to participate
              in research, at Brandeis with a deeper understanding of scattering techniques
              and principles. Finally, this will be the only research-grade general-purpose
              light scattering instrument at Brandeis University. Thus establishment of this
              facility will have a large impact on research program of the investigators, as
              well as serve as a resource for the entire campus.

This award from the
              Instrumentation for Materials research will allow Brandeis University to
              acquire a light scattering spectrometer that will be the keystone f a facility
              to perform both static and dynamic light scattering measurements. The facility
              will be multi-user and multi-disciplinary, as well as fulfill research and
              educational needs. The equipment will be used as a non-invasive probe to study
              complex fluids, such as liquid crystals, colloidal suspensions, protein
              crystallization, and protein complexes. The equipment be used to train physics
              graduate and undergraduate students and biology graduate students in light
              scattering, an important technique in its own right, which additionally shares
              many principles with other techniques such as neutron and x-ray scattering.
              Students will take either a six or nine week intensive training course in light
              scattering that will integrate pedagogical instruction with research
              experience. Instructional exercises will be developed to elucidate both
              physical phenomena of macromolecules and to provide training in light
              scattering techniques. This combination will give students a greater
              understanding of complex fluids in general, and will enable them to participate
              in research, at Brandeis with a deeper understanding of scattering techniques
              and principles. Finally, this will be the only research-grade general-purpose
              light scattering instrument at Brandeis University. Thus establishment of this
              facility will have a large impact on research program of the investigators, as
              well as serve as a resource for the entire campus.


