Title       : Boron-containing Materials for Electro-optical Applications
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 5,  2003   
File        : a0111657

Award Number: 0111657
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: David L. Nelson                         
	      DMR  DIVISION OF MATERIALS RESEARCH          
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : December 1,  2001   
Expires     : November 30,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $318548             (Estimated)
Investigator: Piotr Kaszynski piotr@ctrvax.vanderbilt.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Vanderbilt University
	      Station B Box 7749
	      Nashville, TN  372357749    615/322-2631

NSF Program : 1762      SOLID-STATE CHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This project combines a theoretical and experimental exploration of the basic
              chemistry of boron, structure-property relationships, long range intermolecular
              interactions in ordered fluids, and the potential for practical applications of
              some of the materials in the optoelectronics and communications industries. The
              focus of the project is on developing a new class of calamitic (rod-like)
              liquid crystals derived from inorganic boron clusters. The design of the
              materials takes advantage of the unique steric and electronic features of the
              clusters such as three-dimensional aromaticity, high electronic polarizability,
              variable polarity, and high rotational axes. This combination of properties is
              not available in purely organic systems. The proposed study focuses on nematic
              materials with lateral and longitudinal dipole moments, mesogenic additives to
              ferro- and antiferroelectric liquid crystals and mesogenic nonlinear optical
              chromophores. The proposed activities will include quantum mechanical
              calculations, synthesis, characterization and evaluation of device performance.
              The project is designed to have a maximum impact on education and research
              productivity.  The project will expose students to a broad spectrum of research
              activities, give them versatile expertise in organic materials, and prepare
              them to undertake complicated projects in the materials chemistry area.

The
              subject of this research project is the development of a new class of liquid
              crystals to address issues in fundamental and applied science and technology.
              Liquid crystals combine properties typical for solids, such as optical and
              dielectric anisotropies, with the fluidity of a liquid. This unique combination
              of properties makes these remarkable materials an indispensable component of
              contemporary technology, such as 
flat panel display, telecommunication, and
              sensors. The project is designed to have a maximum impact on education and
              research productivity. 

