Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Mitigating the Deterioration of Monuments from
               the Effects of Evaporating Shallow Groundwater
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 27,  2001    
File        : a0111344

Award Number: 0111344
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18000              (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard R. Parizek   (Principal Investigator current)
              Shelton S. Alexander  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : PA St U University Park
	      201 Old Main
	      University Park, PA  168021503    814/865-4700

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 1037,5944,CVIS,
Abstract    :
              01111344
Parizek

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project between a US team headed by Dr. Richard Parizek, Department of
              Geosciences at the Pennsylvania State University, University Park, Pennsylvania
              and an Egyptian team headed by Dr. Ahmed Swedan, Geological Survey of Egypt,
              Cairo, Egypt.   They plan to study the causes and means of combating
              deterioration of ancient monuments due to rising ground water.  Shallow
              groundwater levels, coupled with concentrations of salt, dissolved solids, and
              biological compounds, are causing rapid and significant deterioration of
              monuments and other structures in Egypt.  Monuments that have survived for
              thousands of years are rapidly disintegrating, with temple reliefs and
              paintings often being sacrificed because they are shallow and readily
              exfoliated.  At Hierakonpolis, a variety of monuments and materials are being
              degraded. For example, the granite threshold block and its sandstone
              foundations have lost an alarming amount of surface in the past 15 years.  In
              order to mitigate these problems, it is first necessary to determine the
              hydrogeologic conditions at each site of interest. This involves measurements
              of the subsurface flow regime, which typically is not known at the affected
              areas. Practical geotechnical methods need to be developed for site-specific
              characterization and groundwater flow modeling leading to recommended
              mitigation measurements.  Once these methods are shown to be effective, they
              can be applied to many sites by geotechnical contractors in the private sector.
              The teams will use a combination of geological, geophysical, geochemical and
              hydrologic methods to develop and validate a flow model for the Hierakonpolis
              site that can be used to design a practical mitigation plan.

Scope: The
              project supports collaboration between two research teams of investigators,
              with extensive experience in geosciences and in material sciences, to carry out
              a research project of a major societal impact. The combination of these two
              sides is essential to carry this fieldwork, to drill boreholes and collect
              samples necessary for developing a groundwater flow model for this region in
              Upper Egypt.  Using the resources at the Pennsylvania State University, and
              those in Egypt at the Geological Survey of Egypt, the National Research Center
              and at Cairo University makes it possible to conduct the field work, the
              laboratory analysis and to develop the models. The proposal meets INT
              objectives in supporting collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. 
              This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which
              provides grants to scientists and engineers in both countries to carry out
              these cooperative activities.
