Title       : New Methods in Free Radical Chemistry
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 26,  2002  
File        : a0111210

Award Number: 0111210
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kenneth M. Doxsee                       
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306465             (Estimated)
Investigator: Eric J. Enholm enholm@chem.ufl.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Florida
	      219 Grinter Hall
	      Gainesville, FL  32611    352/392-1582

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Eric J. Enholm, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida, is
              developing new methods for free radical reactions on reusable solid supports.
              Professor Enholm uses ring-opening metathesis methodology to prepare new
              soluble polymers to serve as supports for free radical transformations.
              Following establishment of the methodology through the analysis of established
              radical reactions, including tin hydride reduction of halides, radical
              cyclizations, and one-electron allyl transfers, new chiral reactions will be
              examined. The latter will include polymer-supported versions of the asymmetric
              "interrupted" Kharasch atom transfer and catalytic asymmetric Giese reactions.
              Reusable chiral scaffolds, with enantiopure stereo-directing elements imbedded
              in the support, will be prepared, and catalytic asymmetric transformations,
              particularly those allowing for enantioselective acyclic stereocontrol in
              radical and ketyl radical-anion transformations, will be explored.

Molecular
              species bearing unpaired electrons ("free radicals") have historically been
              viewed as highly reactive and therefore relatively chemically undiscriminating
              intermediates. Recent studies have demonstrated that the reactivity of these
              radicals may be harnessed, allowing the selective and effective synthesis of a
              variety of significant organic molecular structures. With the support of the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Eric J. Enholm, of the
              Department of Chemistry at the University of Florida, is exploring new methods
              for carrying out reactions of organic radicals. By exploring radical reactions
              tethered to polymeric supports, the properties of the polymer may be used both
              to control the outcome of the radical reactions and to facilitate separation of
              desired materials from waste products. These studies are leading to new and
              general methodologies for the synthesis of complex organic molecules and to the
              development of polymer-supported reaction chemistry of relevance to the fields
              of combinatorial chemistry and solid-phase organic chemistry.
