Title       : Chemical Sensors Based on Electrodeposited Metal Nanowires
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 12,  2002    
File        : a0111557

Award Number: 0111557
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $340000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Reginald M. Penner rmpenner@uci.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Irvine
	      300 University Tower
	      Irvine, CA  926977600    949/824-4768

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program supports this project by Prof.
              Reginald Penner at the University of California at Irvine on the synthesis of
              nanowires of various metals and an evaluation of their use as chemical sensors.
               Nanowires are to be fabricated by the procedure of electrochemical step
              decoration, which has been demonstrated for molybdenum to make wires that are
              up to 150 micrometers in length,  hemicylindrical in cross-section, and
              removable from the surfaces on which prepared.  The high-aspect ratio
              nanowires, with diameters ranging from 10 to 500 nanometers, can be prepared
              size-selective on stepped graphite surfaces, transferred to a polystyrene film,
              and then electrodes attached.  The conductivity is similar to that of bulk
              metal.  As a sensor, the nanowires function by exposure of the metal surface to
              an analyte while measuring the electrical conductivity of the nanowires.  For
              example, molybdenum wires are reactive with oxygen yielding a substantial, but
              stable drop in conductivity as a metal oxide coating is made.  The future
              research directions include preparation of noble metal nanowires.  One
              synthetic scheme to be tested is metal wire preparation via a mercury amalgam. 
              Then, sensors are to be fabricated with nanowires, either bare metal or with a
              metal oxide overlayer.  Yet to be determined is the physical model to connect
              analyte concentration with the change in metal nanowire conductivity.  

New
              generation chemical sensors will have a wide range of applications, from
              biomedical to pollution control.  As nanotechnology moves from the laboratory
              to practical applications, the synthesis of devices must be improved; faster,
              cheaper, better.  There is a great need for reliable and efficient synthesis of
              nanowires.  Electrochemical step decoration is an application of fundamental
              knowledge of electrochemistry with the known step features naturally occurring
              on a clean graphite surface.  The graphite provides a template for the
              controlled growth of an electrochemically grown metal wire.  The nanowires have
              an extremely high surface area in relation to the number of metal atoms in the
              wire.  For this reason, electrical conductivity depends upon the number and
              kind of molecules attached to the surface, making nanowires a logical component
              of new generation sensors.

