Title       : SBIR Phase II: Subgrade Repair and Stabilization
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : DMI 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 23,  2003   
File        : a0111712

Award Number: 0111712
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: T. James Rudd                           
	      DMI  DIV OF DESIGN,MANUFAC & INDUSTRIAL INNOV
	      ENG  DIRECTORATE FOR ENGINEERING             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $500000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Richard Talley   (Principal Investigator current)
              Lawrence C. Farrar  (Principal Investigator former)
Sponsor     : Montec Research
	      1901 South Franklin
	      Butte, MT  59701    406/723-2222

NSF Program : 5373      SMALL BUSINESS PHASE II
Fld Applictn: 0522100   High Technology Materials               
Program Ref : 9163,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project will develop and
              demonstrate a novel vitrification process for subgrade soil stabilization.  The
              process includes a method to inject readily available materials into the
              vitrification zone eliminating subsidence that would otherwise occur as the
              soils densify during vitrification.  The process is based on the use of
              modifiers that adjust the vitrified soil properties.  The Phase I work
              demonstrated feasibility of the process and that the vitrified material was
              suitable for subgrade stabilization and resulted in materials having strengths
              qualified for structural reinforcement applications.  Economic analysis
              completed in Phase I indicated that the method is competitive with conventional
              subgrade repair methods.  The Phase II work will establish the commercial merit
              of the process by demonstrating its economy, robustness and versatility to
              produce subgrade synthetic rock from soils in the field.  The Phase II work
              includes participation by a university and an end user.  The proposed research
              and development will yield a fundamental understanding of the relationships
              between the vitrification process parameters, soil and synthetic rock
              properties.  This will enable optimization of the process in commercial
              applications.

The commercial market for the proposed technology includes
              soil stabilization of inadequate foundation and slope materials around many
              kinds of structures including building, bridges and waterways.  Customers will
              be highway departments (state and federal), airport authorities, municipalities
              and the industrial sector.  Essentially, the process will be useful to any
              entity, including contractors that deal with maintenance of subgrade and/or new
              construction that have "local" subgrade instability issues to overcome.

