Title       : Children, Sport, and Character Development
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : BCS 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 20,  2001 
File        : a0111794

Award Number: 0111794
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Marguerite E. Barratt                   
	      BCS  DIVISION OF BEHAVIORAL AND COGNITIVE SCI
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $18446              (Estimated)
Investigator: David L. Shields shields.21@nd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              F. Clark Power  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Matthew L. Davidson  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Brenda Light Bredemeier  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Notre Dame
	      
	      Notre Dame, IN  46556    219/631-7432

NSF Program : 1358      CHILD LEARNING AND DEVELOPMENT
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,1358,1698,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Abstract

Children, Sport, and Character Development

David L.
              Shields


This project seeks to investigate the efficacy of sport in
              character development.  There is a surprising paucity of research evidence to
              support the widely acclaimed benefits of sports in character
              development.

The project will engage a focus group of local coaches to
              assist in refining research ideas about the moral culture of sport teams and
              the means by which the moral culture can be enhanced.  The intent is to develop
              three developmentally-tailored "guidebooks" for coaches, and this would greatly
              assist with that project.  

A second objective is to conduct in-depth
              interviews with the basketball players and coaches of 12 teams (2 male and 2
              female teams at each of three levels: junior high/youth sport, interscholastic,
              and intercollegiate).  These semi-structured, open-ended interviews will focus
              on perceptions of team moral culture and will provide one source of in-put for
              the further development of the Team Culture Questionnaire (TCQ). 

The
              project will also consult with the leadership of three major training programs
              for coaches:  Michigan State's Youth Sports Institute, the Positive Coaching
              Alliance at Stanford University, and Maine's Center for Coaching Education. 
              These programs were selected because they regularly train large numbers of
              volunteer and part-time coaches through workshops and seminars.  They represent
              the types of organizations, through which most youth sport coaches will be
              trained, if they are trained at all.  It is worth noting that of the 21
              graduate programs that offer degrees in coaching, none have required course
              that focus on the coaches' role in character education, and only three - Ohio
              University, Smith College, and Western Michigan University - have required
              courses in sport ethics.  The purpose of these consultations is to identify and
              evaluate the ways in which character education is integrated into these select
              institution's coach training methods.  These activities, taken together, will
              help to develop a research agenda.


