Title       : Margins: Workshop on Modeling of Subduction Zone Dynamics and Thermal Structure
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0111459

Award Number: 0111459
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: David Fountain                          
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $20735              (Estimated)
Investigator: Peter E. van Keken keken@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1572      TECTONICS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Theoretical modeling of subduction zone provides an essential complement to
              observational and experimental approaches and a fundamental tool to test
              conceptual models of the dynamics of convergent margins. Despite large advances
              in numerical techniques and increasing computational capacity, major obstacles
              exist in the road to full integration of accurate and consistent modeling into
              subduction zone research. Large uncertainties about the dynamical controls on
              subduction initiation and evolution remain. This is in part due to important
              assumptions that have to be made about the rheology and composition of the slab
              and mantle wedge, and the dynamics of the seismogenic zone and overriding
              plate. In addition, we lack a systematic investigation into the influence of
              various numerical techniques or rigorous solution tests. An overview of
              recently published results shows that large discrepancies remain in our
              understanding of the thermal structure of subduction zones.
 
Major tasks for
              the modeling community are to benchmark and evaluate existing numerical
              approaches, to guide the use of increasing computer power and improving
              numerical techniques, and to further the integration of numerical modeling into
              experimental and observational studies. A focused, technical workshop held at
              the University of Michigan in Ann Arbor, MI addresses these issues. The
              workshop format is collaborative and hands-on, with an audience consisting of
              subduction zone modelers, experts from observational and experimental
              disciplines, and a number of graduate students.

To maximize discussion, the
              workshop is limited to 25 participants and has limited time allocated to formal
              presentations. The goals of the workshop include:
1) a numerical benchmark of
              standard cases;
2) an overview of technical improvements and limitations;
3)
              a survey of the parameters that are fundamental in controlling the dynamics of
              the slab-wedge environment;
4) a set of base models for use in the wider
              community;
5) information exchange and knowledge transfer between
              specialties;
6) increased collaboration, including code and resource
              sharing.

