Title       : Collaborative Research: Substantive and Methodological Innovations for the Study
               of Temporal Dynamics in International Conflict
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 8,  2001       
File        : a0111328

Award Number: 0111328
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: James S. Granato                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 1,  2001       
Expires     : September 30,  2002  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $35760              (Estimated)
Investigator: Janet M. Box-Steffensmeier jboxstef+@osu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1371      POLITICAL SCIENCE
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This award funds a project that contributes to our understanding of
              international relations in two broad ways.  First, from a theoretical
              standpoint, it addresses empirically what scholars have understood in principle
              for decades: that temporal factors such as history, sequence, and perceptions
              of the future are critical to any complete understanding of international
              interactions. 

The investigators' work tests a number of central theories of
              conflict, including propositions linking democratization, economic
              interdependence, and uncertainty to war.   Their proposal emphasizes that the
              inferences we draw about political dynamics are necessarily conditioned by both
              the recognition and satisfaction of one's model's assumptions, and on a close
              correspondence between that model and the process generating the data examined.
              Neither model assumptions (e.g. that of temporal stability in covariate
              effects) nor basic substantive facts about the phenomenon of study (such as the
              repeated nature of conflict in the international arena) are innocuous;
              different methodological treatments of prior disputes, for example, imply
              fundamentally different understandings of the effects of those disputes on
              current conflicts. 

In this vein, this project examines a series of related
              issues:

1. Do conflicts beget future conflicts? They develop two hypotheses
              on this question, one from a rationalist perspective and the other from a model
              rooted in neorealism and social psychology. They test these competing theories,
              using innovative techniques that account for the influence of past conflicts
              between two states (that is, repeated events) on the likelihood of a future
              dispute. 

2. They examine an assertion implicit in all existing quantitative
              studies of international conflict, that observations are exchangeable. The
              investigators assert that this assumption is incorrect on both theoretical and
              empirical grounds.  Culture and exogenous shocks clearly affect the probability
              of conflict. Such heterogeneity is a form of model misspecification, making the
              conclusions drawn using standard statistical approaches suspect.  They use
              mixture models to address unmeasured heterogeneity, and show how such models
              conform closely to our understanding of international disputes and provide
              superior assessments of the causes of those disputes. 

3. Finally, they
              determine whether the effects of certain influences on conflict have varying
              effects over time. A host of theoretical work suggests that the affect of those
              factors, which have been shown to foster or inhibit international conflict,
              vary over time. The substantive implications bear fundamentally on the validity
              of different theoretical perspectives in international relations, and have
              substantial policy implications for decision makers in the international arena.
               Conventional analyses do not and cannot allow for the effects of such factors
              on disputes to change over time.

In sum, the investigators will further
              improve the study of international relations by paying greater and more
              explicit attention to the connection between a number of general theoretical
              expectations regarding time and conflict and the kinds of statistical tools
              used to model and test those expectations.

