Title       : RUI: Acquisition Of An Environmental Scanning Electron Microscope (ESEM) And
               Energy Dispersive Spectrometer (EDS)
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : EAR 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0111471

Award Number: 0111471
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Russell C. Kelz                         
	      EAR  DIVISION OF EARTH SCIENCES              
	      GEO  DIRECTORATE FOR GEOSCIENCES             
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $233622             (Estimated)
Investigator: Steven J. Hageman hagemansj@appstate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Ellen A. Cowan  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Frank K. McKinney  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Richard N. Abbott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              B. Charlotte Schreiber  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Appalachian State Univ
	      
	      Boone, NC  28608    704/262-2000

NSF Program : 1580      INSTRUMENTATION & FACILITIES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,1189,9141,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              0111471
Hageman

This grant, made through the Major Research Instrumentation
              Program, supports the acquisition of an Environmental Scanning Electron
              Microscope (FEI-Phillips XL30 ESEM-TMP) and Energy Dispersive Spectrometer
              (EDAX CDU-UT), to be housed in the Electron Microscopy Laboratory of the
              College of Arts and Sciences at Appalachian State University. This instrument
              will significantly improve and expand research opportunities for faculty and
              undergraduate students in Earth Science at Appalachian State, other departments
              in the College, and the regional community. The new ESEM will provide the
              following new capabilities not currently available from our 16 year old
              conventional Hitachi S570 SEM. (1) imaging of uncoated specimens; (2) elemental
              analysis and mapping with digital stage; (3) imaging of hydrated specimens; (4)
              wide angle imaging of large specimens; (5) imaging and analysis under cathode
              luminescence; (6) high magnification in both secondary and backscattered
              electron modes; (7) production, storage, and network distribution of high
              resolution digital image files for publication and image analysis; (8) windows
              driven operation for easy access by a diverse user population. The ESEM will
              support five primary researchers in the Department of Geology, who have had
              previous NSF support. Initial projects supported by this proposal include (1)
              Bryozoan Colonial Growth Habits: Macroevolutionary Patterns in Morpho-ecospace
              (S.J. Hageman); (2) Ultra High Pressure and Temperature Metamorphic Rocks (R.N.
              Abbott); (3) Climatic Variation and Source of Glacio-marine Sediments (E.A.
              Cowan); (4) Eastern North American Cretaceous Bryozoans (F.K. McKinney); and
              (5) Cement Stratigraphy in Carbonate Mud-mounds (B.C. Schreiber). The
              instrument will also be used in research and course work by faculty, graduate
              students and undergraduates in the departments of Geology, Biology, Chemistry,
              Physics, Anthropology and Criminal Justice. This instrument will provide an
              excellent focus for community outreach because its products are visual,
              tangible and derived from state-of-the-art technology. 
***

