Title       : Gas Phase Chemistry of Radicals and Charged Radicals
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : September 17,  2001 
File        : a0111128

Award Number: 0111128
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $222000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Chrys Wesdemiotis wesdemiotis@uakron.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Akron
	      302 East Buchtel Avenue
	      Akron, OH  443250001    330/972-7666

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
              Chrys Wesdemiotis, of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Akron,
              is studying the gas phase chemistry of radicals and charged radicals.
              Neutralization-reionization mass spectrometry is employed to obtain
              experimental data regarding the stabilities and unimolecular reactions of
              radicals related to amino acids, peptides, and nucleobases. Focus is placed on
              the alteration of stability and reaction chemistry caused by the replacement of
              acidic hydrogen atoms with metal ions. The synthesis and characterization of
              distonic radical cations containing a metal ion and an organic radical site are
              also under investigation. These metal ion-containing (and hence, charged)
              radicals will be used as templates for the investigation of free radical
              chemistry by tandem mass spectrometry. Solvated charged radicals will be
              utilized to derive thermochemical data about amino acid and peptide-based
              radicals.

Molecules and ions containing unpaired electrons ("radicals") play
              central roles in many chemical and biochemical processes. Development of a
              detailed understanding of the structure and reactivity of these elusive species
              remains a key focus of modern chemical research. With the support of the
              Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Chrys Wesdemiotis, of
              the Department of Chemistry at the University of Akron, is generating and
              studying radicals related to amino acids, proteins, and nucleic acid bases.
              Through these studies, Professor Wesdemiotis is gaining a fundamental
              understanding of the chemistry of these important species, implicated as key
              intermediates in the oxidative damage of proteins and nucleic acids.
