Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Processing Techniques for Improving Mechanical
               Properties of Biodegradable Polymers
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 13,  2001    
File        : a0111334

Award Number: 0111334
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25000              (Estimated)
Investigator: James E. Mark james.mark@uc.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cincinnati
	      Mail Location 627
	      Cincinnati, OH  45221    513/556-6000

NSF Program : 5976      AFRICA, NEAR EAST, & SO ASIA
Fld Applictn: 0106000   Materials Research                      
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0111334
Mark

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between Dr. James E. Mark, Department of Chemistry, University of Cincinnati,
              Cincinnati, Ohio and Dr. Mohammed Sharaf, Department of Chemistry, Helwan
              University, Helwan, Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to devise new techniques for
              processing polymer chains into high-performance materials.  Specifically they
              plan to: identify polymeric chains of sufficient stiffness to give
              liquid-crystalline, anisotropic phases, either homopolymers or block copolymers
              consisting of stiff and flexible sequences, cross-linking the chains, either by
              peroxide thermolysis, chemical regents, or high-energy radiation, in the
              presence of solvent.  The cross links confer sufficient solidity for the
              polymer to remain in a deformed state for any length of time, and the solvent
              prevents the premature ordering of the stiff chains, deforming the swollen
              network uniaxially or biaxially to induce segmental orientation, and removing
              the solvent, at constant length or at constant force, causing a first-order
              transition, and thus yielding a single-phase, homogeneous, and highly ordered
              material.  These techniques will be applied to polymers having a desired level
              of biodegradability.  This control of molecular ordering will be used
              simultaneously to optimize mechanical properties and environmental
              degradability.

Scope: The project supports collaboration between two
              well-known scientists who have complementary expertise and resources to
              investigate an important material and environmental problem.  Their past
              collaboration has been productive.  The project is a combination of strengths
              of the PIs, and issues related to molecular orientation and strength in
              polymers with the challenges associated with biodegradable polymers.  There
              will be opportunities for interaction with industrial scientists in Egypt to
              test the impact of this collaboration.  Two US graduate students will
              participate in the project.  This project meets the INT objective of supporting
              collaborative research in areas of mutual interest. 

