Title       : Dissociating Affect and Deliberation in Choice Processes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 5,  2002       
File        : a0111941

Award Number: 0111941
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Robert E. O'Connor                      
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $141586             (Estimated)
Investigator: Ellen Peters empeters@oregon.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Decision Sci Res Inst
	      1201 Oak Street
	      Eugene, OR  974013519    503/485-2400

NSF Program : 1321      DECISION RISK & MANAGEMENT SCI
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Although many of the most important issues of our time (e.g., cleaning up a
              nuclear waste site or choosing a medical procedure) involve thoughts and
              feelings about decision options, relatively little is known about how affect
              (feelings or emotional evaluations) and deliberation interact in such human
              judgment and decision processes, particularly among older adults. 

In the
              proposed research, we use a new perspective to examine how thoughts and
              feelings interact in decision making.  Human decision making is a complex
              phenomenon involving multiple components that may change with age.  By
              examining how older and younger adults make decisions in different ways, we can
              build better theories of how our judgment and decision making might change as
              we age.  We suggest that the judgments and decisions of older adults (compared
              to younger adults) may be influenced less by deliberation and more by affect. 
              As a result, older adults may produce different decisions than younger adults
              (sometimes better, sometimes worse). 

Funding from this grant will allow us
              to pursue experiments that build on recent findings about the role of affect
              and deliberation in the judgment and decision-making processes of older and
              younger adults. This research will add to the growing body of knowledge
              concerning how affective and deliberative ways of thinking may interact and
              follow particular developmental paths. Studying the judgment and decision
              processes of older adults has strong practical implications since the quality
              of the decisions that older adults make impacts the quality of life that they
              experience. Improving our understanding of older adult decision making will
              undoubtedly provide great practical benefits by pointing the way toward aiding
              and improving decisions.  In addition to these practical benefits, coordinating
              decision-making research with studies of age-related changes in memory, affect,
              and other psychological processes may produce important scientific insights
              into the mechanisms that underlie the judgments and decisions of older and
              younger adults.

