Title       : Estimating Earnings and Labor Supply Responses to Income Taxation with RCS Data
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 22,  2002       
File        : a0111865

Award Number: 0111865
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $240611             (Estimated)
Investigator: Robert A. Moffitt moffitt@jhu.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : NBER
	      1050 Massachusetts Avenue
	      Cambridge, MA  021385317    617/868-3900

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The labor supply response to income taxation is a venerable topic in labor
              economics and public economics. It has experienced a revival in the last decade
              with a literature that has refocused attention on responses in earnings rather
              than hours of work, and with a focus on high-income individuals rather than the
              full distribution of workers. Generally speaking, somewhat higher elasticities
              for high-income earners have been .fund than were .apparent from the older
              hours-ofwork literature for the workforce as a whole.

A major methodological
              issue that has emerged in the newer literature relate, to the intersection
              between difference-in-difference (DID) methods and panel versus repeated cross
              section (RCS) data. The recent literature has used DID methods for the most
              part because there is no plausible cross-sectional identification for assessing
              the effects of the federal income tax, which applies equally to all individuals
              in the country at a point in time. DID methods compare changes over time, from
              before to after a change in marginal tax rates, for high-income taxpayers to
              changes for taxpayers at lower levels of income. While these methods face some
              difficulties when applied to panel data, they face greater difficulties when
              applied to RCS data because income itself is an endogenous, time-varying
              variable. Forming "treatment" groups and applyingWaldtype estimators to groups
              defined by income leads in principle to inconsistent estimates. This is a
              serious problem because RCS data are far more common than panel data in this
              area of research and are a major continuing database for tax analysis.

The
              research outlined in this proposal will investigate methods for the estimation
              of federal income tax effects on earnings and labor supply with RCS data. The
              starting point for the research is based on the P.I.'s own work on RCS methods.
              The P.I.'s research has sought to clarify and delineate the identification
              conditions for consistent estimation with RCS methods and to propose
              alternative estimation methods. The p.rs work has also made clear the central
              importance of age ami cohort in the use of kCS methods--that is, following
              cohorts of individuals from one cross-section to another as they age--a focus
              which is missing from existing tax analysis with RGS data. The research will
              also be based on the P.L's :_~~'.= in the tax effects area using panel data,
              work which has sought to clarify the identification conditions for DID methods
              in general.

The project will investigate the estimation of tax effects with
              several cross-sections of the Survey of Consumer Finar.z:s (SCF), used in
              common in some parts of the analysis with several crosssections of SOI
              microdata tax files as well as several cross-sections of SOI microdata tax
              files. Some comparative analysis will be conducted with a 1983-1989 panel of
              the SCF as well.


