Title       : Chiral Nucleophiles in Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : January 13,  2003   
File        : a0111424

Award Number: 0111424
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: George M. Rubottom                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : January 1,  2002    
Expires     : December 31,  2004   (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $412500             (Estimated)
Investigator: Edwin Vedejs edved@umich.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Michigan
	      3003 S State St. RM 1062
	      Ann Arbor, MI  481091274    734/764-1817

NSF Program : 1950      METHODOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Edwin Vedejs in the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Michigan is supported by the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program for
              his development of methods to synthesize chiral molecules with high
              enantioselectivities using chiral phosphabicyclooctane (PBO) catalysts.  One of
              the applications which will be studied is parallel kinetic resolution (PKR)
              using a polymer-bound PBO catalyst with a lipase catalyst to give two
              quasi-enantiomeric products, which can be converted into the two enantiomeric
              compounds.  The synthesis of PBO catalysts with improved stability and
              selectivity will also be pursued.

Many organic compounds exist as mixtures
              of equal amounts of mirror images, related to each other in much the same way a
              right hand is related to a left hand.  These "right-handed" and  "left-handed"
              components are referred to as enantiomers.  Many natural products and
              pharmacologically active substances exist in one enantiomeric form.  With the
              support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor Vedejs
              is developing new phosphorus-containing catalysts which are used to react
              selectively with either the "right-handed" or "left-handed" enantiomer of
              certain organic compounds.  In a process called parallel kinetic resolution,
              one catalyst reacts selectively with the "right-handed" component of a compound
              A to convert it into a product B and another catalyst reacts selectively with
              the "left-handed" enantiomer to produce a product C.  Compounds B and C are
              then separated and transformed back to A, thus leading to an efficient
              separation of the two enantiomers of A.   The ability to prepare
              enantiomerically pure versions of drugs is important for the pharmaceutical
              industry and would represent a potentially useful application of this
              methodology.  
