Title       : The Double Irony of Citizenship: A Comparative/Historical Approach to Studying
               Naturalization in Advanced Industrialized Countries
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 28,  2001      
File        : a0111450

Award Number: 0111450
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Patricia White                          
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $181402             (Estimated)
Investigator: Thomas Janoski tjanos@pop.uky.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Kentucky Res Fdn
	      109 Kinkead Hall
	      Lexington, KY  405060057    859/257-8311

NSF Program : 1331      SOCIOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              SES-0111450
Thomas Janoski
University of Kentucky

	Naturalization rates
              vary considerably from country to country with rates in the United States and
              Australia being high, the United Kingdom and France being moderate, and Japan
              and Germany being very low. Naturalization rates not only measure the number of
              new citizens in a society, but also measure the extent to which states and
              societies formally integrate minorities into their realm. As such,
              naturalization rules and rates will have a large influence on: the quality of
              life of immigrants and their children, on ethnic conflict and social
              solidarity, on attempts at social control, and on the recent efforts at
              transnational unification (e.g., European Union citizenship and the possibility
              of North American citizenship). Given the importance of these issues, why do
              some countries willingly integrate and others block the transformation of
              strangers into full-fledged citizens? This proposal uses a political economy
              and institutional framework to explain naturalization rates in 20 countries,
              and collects new data on naturalization rates and innovative explanatory
              variables.

	Naturalization rates are explained using three methodological
              approaches-comparative/historical analysis of law and institutions; four case
              studies; and pooled time series analysis. First, from a comparative historical
              analysis of law and institutions, it is hypothesized that experiences with
              colonization and settlement cause high naturalization rates, while
              non-colonizers have no particular reason to integrate strangers into their
              country. The main explanatory factors are: colonization from 1855-1955,
              indigenous population decline from 1800-1920 as a measure of settler country
              labor supply, and a barrier index to naturalization constructed from national
              laws. Cross-national regression procedure will be used to explain a major part
              of the variance in naturalization rates from 1970-95. Controls are used for
              economic, demographic, cultural, and other variables, and arguments are made
              against the impact of immigration itself as an explanation of
              naturalization.

	Second, in four case studies using Millsean methods, pairs
              of culturally similar countries are examined to identify the institutional
              mechanisms that affected multi-cultural approaches to naturalization. In a
              comparison of the primary colonizers of France and the UK, the effects of the
              method of colonization and the elite decisions to pursue citizenship for a
              larger empire are examined. A documentary and time-series analysis of Germany
              and Austria show Germany as a non-colonizer developed into a mono-cultural
              empire hostile to naturalization and Austria as a European colonizer
              transformed itself into a multi-cultural empire that was more friendly to
              naturalization. Another documentary analysis of culturally similar countries
              shows that the Netherlands, as an early and extensive colonizer, has a much
              more liberal naturalization regime than Belgium, which was a late and reluctant
              colonizer. And the final comparative case study is of three Anglo-Saxon settler
              countries where the impact of differential treatment of indigenous peoples on
              naturalization will be examined. Throughout the case studies, the emphasis is
              on demonstrating the how elites made open or restrictive decisions about
              naturalization.

	Third, in a pooled time-series and cross-sectional
              analysis, the unit of analysis is the "yearcountry" (i.e., 20 countries from
              1970-95 with about 500 cases). This allows a year-to-year analysis of political
              party power, unemployment, demographic changes, and other factors that are
              purported to influence naturalization.

	 Zolberg's approaches to
              immigration) and will challenge previous economic, demographic and cultural
              theories of naturalization. It embeds cultural institutions within a larger
              political economy framework of colonization and emphasizes that theories of
              naturalization are clearly distinct from theories of immigration.



