Title       : Bond Coupled Electron Transfer Reactions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 30,  2002     
File        : a0111319

Award Number: 0111319
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Tyrone D. Mitchell                      
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : October 1,  2001    
Expires     : September 30,  2004  (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $327000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joshua L. Goodman jlg@goodman.chem.rochester.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Rochester
	      
	      Rochester, NY  14627    585/275-4031

NSF Program : 1942      UNIMOLECULAR PROCESSES
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Professor Joshua Goodman of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
              Rochester, with the support of the Organic Dynamics Program, explores detailed
              mechanistic studies on different aspects of electron transfer reactions. The
              proposed research is centered on the concept that coupling the electron
              transfer processes to bond breaking and bond making events can increase the
              efficiency of electron transfer reactions. The research plan deals exclusively
              with the competition between return electron transfer (RET) and dissociative
              return electron transfer (DRET). The former is an energy-wasting decay process
              that has been widely studied in both singlet and triplet radical ion pairs. The
              latter is a rather specialized process that occurs only for triplet radical ion
              pairs under highly restrictive conditions for a limited set of substrates.
              Extensions of the scope of the DRET process will be of interest to specialists
              in the field of photoinduced electron transfer.

Bond coupled electron
              transfer (BCET) reactions have the potential to drive chemical reactions. This
              project seeks to investigate several of these reactions. Professor Goodman will
              focus primarily on DRET reactions that involve cleavage of (1) C-C bonds in
              disubstituted cyclopropanes and diarylethanes, (2) Si-Si bonds in disilanes,
              and (3) C-halogen bonds in substituted benzylic halides. An improved
              understanding of RET processes in photoinduced electron transfer reactions may
              eventually lead to the ability to drive chemical reactions using light. For
              example, it may be possible one day to employ polymerizations induced by light
              in imaging applications. The proposed investigation on disilanes may have an
              impact on developing lithographic resists, nonlinear optical materials, and
              one-dimensional conductors.

