Title       : Electron Transport at Nanostructured Semiconductor Interfaces
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 20,  2002       
File        : a0111051

Award Number: 0111051
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Janice M. Hicks                         
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Mark C. Lonergan lonergan@darkwing.uoregon.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Oregon Eugene
	      5219 University of Oregon
	      Eugene, OR  974035219    541/346-5131

NSF Program : 1972      ELECTROCHEMISTRY & SURFACE CHE
Fld Applictn: 0512004   Analytical Procedures                   
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The Analytical and Surface Chemistry program supports the project by Professor
              Mark Lonergan of the University of Oregon on fundamental studies with
              current-sensing atomic force microscopy of nanostructured semiconductor/polymer
              interfaces.  Well-defined nanostructures will be fabricated using e-beam
              lithography to imbed an array of gold metal dots into an n-InP | polypyrrole
              interface.  Electron transfer barrier heights and transmission coefficients
              will be measured in and around the nanostructures with probe microscopy.  The
              goals of this work include: (1) to understand charge depletion and charge
              transport at laterally nanostructured interfaces, (2) to evaluate the efficacy
              of barrier inhomogeneity models in explaining classic anomalies, and (3) to
              develop current-sensing atomic force microscopy as a characterization tool for
              buried semiconductor interfaces.

The project addresses a long-standing
              problem in the understanding of metal-semiconductor contacts, namely, the
              failure of models to adequately describe electron transfer, a key feature of an
              electronic device, semiconductor electrochemistry, and semiconductor/metal
              contacts.  Model failure may be due to surface heterogeneity.  Experiments are
              proposed to create well-defined nanostructures at a semiconductor interface,
              and then to measure the electron transfer rate and its temperature dependence
              across the nanostructure.  The results will be used to assess and correct
              models of the semiconductor interface, accounting for nanoscopic features at
              the interface.

