Title       : State-Resolved Photodissociation Dynamics of Small Free Radicals: Structure,
               Energetics, and Photochemical Reactivity
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : February 27,  2003  
File        : a0111635

Award Number: 0111635
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Francis J. Wodarczyk                    
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $323000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Jingsong Zhang jingsong.zhang@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1962      SPECTROSCOPY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              Dr. Jingsong Zhang of the University of California Riverside is funded for his
              research on state-resolved photodissociation dynamics of small free radicals,
              structure, energetics, and photochemical reactivity by the Physical Chemistry
              Program of the Chemistry Division.  Fundamentally new insigts and quantitative
              understanding of photochemical reactivity of small prototypical free radicals
              will be generated experimentally uisng laser excitation, laser probing, and
              time of flight mass spectroscopy.  Laser spectroscopy and state-resolved
              photodissociation dynamics will be used to fully characterize prototypical
              reactive intermediates and small alkyl, unsaturated aliphatic, alkoxy, and
              aromatic radicals, as well as the HOCO radical.  These systems will also be
              examined at a high level of theory (electronic and dynamic) with little or no
              approximation.  Detailed mechanisms involving dissociation and nuclear
              rearrangement will be generated.  Open-shell electronic states, structures and
              multiple potential energy surfaces of free radicals and their influences on
              photodissociation and unimolecular reactions will be deduced.  Competitive
              dissociation pathways and decomposition mechanims of free radicals and product
              energy disposal will be mapped.  Free-radical electronic states,
              thermodynamics, and energetics will be tabulated.

The energetics and
              dynamics of small free radicals are important areas of physical chemistry and
              have practical importance in combustion and atmospheric chemistries.  The
              experimental and theoretical analyses by Dr. Zhang will provide detailed
              advances in our understanding of important carbon-based radicals and the
              hydrogen extraction chemistry of these radicals.  In addition, important
              teaching and training will be provided students at one of our nation's most
              culturally diverse universities.  Multi-disciplinary approaches, for example,
              connections between fundamental molecular-level knowledge and practical
              atmospheric and combustion chemistry, as well as those between modern
              techniques and scientific advances, will be stressed.
