Title       : Comparative Political Economy
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 10,  2002       
File        : a0111729

Award Number: 0111729
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $226303             (Estimated)
Investigator: David P. Baron baron_david@gsb.stanford.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Stanford University
	      651 Serra Street
	      Stanford, CA  94305    650/723-2300

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research program focuses on the development of comparative theories of
              public policy from a political economy perspective where policies are chosen
              within institu-tions embedded in a political system. The principal comparisons
              are between presidential and parliamentary systems and between public and
              private politics and institutions. The policy focus is on the influence of
              organized and unorganized interests on choices by public and private
              officeholders. In the context of public politics, interests attempt to
              influence both the choice of government and government in office. In private
              politics. activist and interest groups attempt to affect economic activity
              without reliance on public institutions by pressuring firms to change their
              practices, such as environmental protection policies or working conditions in
              factories in developing countries.

The research program has three principal
              components. The first is a comparative study of parliamentary and presidential
              systems with an emphasis on the dynamics of policy choice. The model of
              parliamentary systems includes a proportional representation electoral system,
              government formation, and policy choice. The model of a presidential system
              includes a geography-based electoral system and a legislature with
              supermajority features arising from a presidential veto override and a
              legislative supermajority, as in the case of the filibuster in the U.S. Senate.
              One objective is to incorporate political parties as reputation carriers in
              these institutional settings. The principal focus is on the stability of
              governments and their policy responsiveness to economic shocks.

The second
              component is the study of the influence of interest groups on the policies
              chosen in political systems. The research generalizes existing common agency
              and vote buying theories to incorporate forms of influence in addition to
              contributions; e.g., the grassroots mobilization of constituents. This interest
              group theory is then related to the first component of the research program by
              studying constituency and interest group influence in proportional
              representation and geography-based representation systems. This incorporates
              influence both on the choice of government and government in office.

The
              third component of this research is on private politics; e.g., pressure applied
              directly to firms by activist groups seeking to change the practices of those
              firms. This pressure may take the form of an organized consumer boycott or
              public exposure of practices such as the working conditions in overseas
              factories. The game of private politics includes firms and activists as
              players, and the equilibrium can correspond to the establishment of a private
              institution to mitigate commitment, coordination, information, and free-rider
              problems. The research on endogenous private institutions is extended to the
              private law of firms that organize electronic markets.

