Title       : Conformational Dynamics and Enzyme Catalysis
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0111068

Award Number: 0111068
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kamal Shukla                            
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2006     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $550000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Joseph A. Adams   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1164      MOLECULAR BIOPHYSICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              To facilitate chemical transformations, enzymes must possess sufficient
              flexibility to accommodate substrate and reaction intermediates while
              maintaining adequate structural rigidity.  How enzymes perform this delicate
              balancing act is critical for a meaningful understanding of catalysis and
              recognition.  This attribute is brilliantly expressed in the enzymes that
              catalyze protein phosphorylation in the cell,  the protein kinases.  These
              enzymes have been crystallized in many forms that differ by movements  in the
              amino acid backbones comprising the essential three-dimensional structure. 
              While it is believed that these motions are important for function, little is
              known about the nature and catalytic relevance of these conformational changes
              in solution.  In this project, equilibrium- and pulsed- hydrogen deuterium
              exchange coupled with MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry will be used to understand
              the solution conformation of an essential protein kinase-cAMP-dependent protein
              kinase [PKA].   The goal is to determine what types of structural transitions
              occur when nucleotides, substrates and inhibitors bind to the enzyme.  Once
              identified, the time frame for the structural transitions will be established
              and correlated with the catalytic mechanism for the enzyme.  The long-range
              goal is to determine whether structural changes limit substrate phosphorylation
              and, if so, which regions of the enzyme are involved in these events.  
