Title       : The Private Equity Premium Puzzle
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 6,  2001     
File        : a0111795

Award Number: 0111795
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $42713              (Estimated)
Investigator: Annette Vissing-Jorgensen vissing@uchicago.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Chicago
	      5801 South Ellis Avenue
	      Chicago, IL  606371404    773/702-8602

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Both asset pricing and investment theory rely critically on our understanding of
              investors' portfolio choices.  One of the most studied puzzles in financial
              economics is that, given the returns and volatility of publicly traded equity,
              investors seem to allocate too little wealth to stocks.  That is the premium
              demanded for holding equity appears too high given observed investment in the
              stock market. However, while most of the literature has focused on publicly
              traded equity, this project analyzes the holdings of households in privately
              held firms. The private equity market is at least as large  as the public
              equity market.   Thus, it is equally important to understand investment
              behavior and the risk-return trade-off in this market.  The project analyzes
              both the risk of private equity as a whole as well as the cross-sectional
              distribution of realized private equity across households, using data from the
              Survey of Consumer Finances and the Flow of Funds Accounts and supplementary
              sources.  Preliminary results show that most private equity is held by
              households who have a large proportion of their wealth invested in a single
              non-publicly traded company; the average returns on private and public equity
              are similar, but investing in a single private company is substantially riskier
              than investing in an index of publicly traded equity. Together these facts
              imply that the typical owner of private equity faces a much worse risk-return
              trade-off than could be obtained by investing in an index of publicly traded
              equity. 

The second part of the project explains the puzzle of poor risk
              -return trade-off for owners of private equity.   The project examines theories
              of moral hazard due to partially unobservable entrepreneurial effort and
              theories of asymmetric information in which entrepreneurs are better informed
              about firm prospects than potential outside investors. making it difficult for
              entrepreneurs to obtain a fair value when selling equity.  The project uses
              previously unexploited data on hours worked by entrepreneurs as well as
              alternative measures of ownership to provide evidence on the theory of moral
              hazard. To test theories of asymmetric information, the investigators have
              obtained data for pre- and post-IPO ownership shares for shareholders in about
              400 initial public offerings. 

Rational entrepreneurs should realize based
              on observing the large average ownership shares of current entrepreneurs, that
              they would need to hold large undiversified positions in their companies
              conditional on entry. Given the poor risk-return trade-off oil private equity,
              it is puzzling why, entrepreneurs then decide to enter. Low entrepreneurial
              risk aversion. non-pecuniary benefits, and over optimism and misperceived risk
              are possible explanations.  The project provides evidence to rule out low risk
              aversion, leaving the distinction between alternative explanations for future
              work.

