Title       : Theoretical and practical issues in estimation of nonlinear panel data models
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 10,  2002     
File        : a0111342

Award Number: 0111342
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $194760             (Estimated)
Investigator: Bo E. Honore honore@princeton.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Princeton University
	      
	      Princeton, NJ  08544    609/452-3000

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              
Panel data sets play an important role in empirical work in almost all areas
              of economics. Formally, panel data sets are data sets where there is more than
              one observation for each unit of observation. Typically, this is because the
              data set consists of observations for the same individual over a period of
              time, but the methods for dealing with panel data are equally applicable to
              situations where the unit of observation is firms, municipalities, etc. This
              project develops new econometric methods for dealing with nonlinear panel data
              models, including duration models. The project also develops software to
              implement these methods.

      The advantage of panel data is that by
              following an individual over time, it is possible to investigate an
              individual's dynamic behavior while controlling for that individual's
              characteristics. It is easiest to illustrate the importance of this by
              considering the following simple example. Suppose, as is often the case, that
              one observed that individuals, who use a certain social program in one period,
              are also more likely to use it the next period. This ``persistence'' could be
              observed because some characteristic of the individual makes him or her more
              likely to use the program. If that characteristic does not change much over
              time, then the same people will tend to use the program in different time
              periods. On the other hand, the persistence is also consistent with a situation
              in which using the program causes the individual to be more likely to use the
              program in the future (for example, because the individual learns about the
              program by using it). Being able to distinguish between these explanations of
              the persistence is important because under the second explanation, a policy
              that changes the availability of the program in a single period will also have
              an indirect effect on participation in the program in future periods. This
              project develops econometric tools for dealing with panel data in situations
              like this one, although the tools are more generic and hence applicable in many
              other empirical situations as well.

