Title       : Cloning and Functional Characterization of an Avian Pituitary Gland Vasotocin
               Receptor
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : IBN 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 16,  2002       
File        : a0111006

Award Number: 0111006
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Christopher Platt                       
	      IBN  DIV OF INTEGRATIVE BIOLOGY AND NEUROSCIE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : June 1,  2002       
Expires     : April 30,  2007      (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $508909             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lawrence E. Cornett cornettlawrencee@uams.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Nawab Ali  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              John D. Kirby  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Wayne J. Kuenzel  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Dennis A. Baeyens  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Arkansas Med Science
	      4301 West Markham
	      Little Rock, AR  722057101    501/661-5454

NSF Program : 1193      NEUROENDOCRINOLOGY
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 1096,9183,BIOT,
Abstract    :
                 The hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in vertebrate animals is important for
              regulation of responses to stress, chiefly by release of adrenocorticotropic
              hormone (ACTH) from the pituitary, which in turn stimulates release of steroid
              glucocorticoids from the adrenal glands.  In birds, the peptide compound
              arginine vasotocin (AVT), which regulates water balance and reproduction, may
              be a major factor regulating ACTH release from the pituitary gland, though this
              function has not yet been well defined in birds.  This project tests the
              hypothesis that a novel VT receptor molecule is expressed by certain cells in
              
the pituitary, and mediates the stimulatory effect of AVT on ACTH release.  A
              
collaborative team with complementary skills will use molecular, cellular,
              biochemical and behavioral approaches in a uniquely integrative, comparative
              study to clone and characterize this novel receptor, to localize the cells
              expressing the receptors, and to establish the physiological role for the VT
              receptors. 
  Results will be important in neuroendocrinology for
              understanding comparative aspects of pituitary function in vertebrates other
              than mammals; for an integrated understanding of molecular, cellular and
              behavioral mechanisms for stress regulation; and for general aspects of poultry
              reproduction.  It will also have a broader impact on bird physiology, on
              general vertebrate endocrinology and reproductive behavior.  There is also a
              strong impact on scientific infrastructure because the project has a training
              component 
including graduates and undergraduates, and involves three campuses
              in an EPSCoR 
state.


