Title       : Identifying New Open Reading Frames Involved in Redox Regulation and Photosystem
               II Assembly in Thylakoid Membranes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : June 4,  2002       
File        : a0111058

Award Number: 0111058
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Susan Porter Ridley                     
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Willem F. Vermaas WIM@ASU.EDU  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Arizona State University
	      Box 3503
	      Tempe, AZ  85287    480/965-9011

NSF Program : 1156      MICROBIAL GENETICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              With the availability of ever increasing amounts of genomic sequence
              information, the old adage "the more we know, the more we know that we don't
              know" rings true. Of the thousands of genes in prokaryotes, close to half code
              for proteins of as yet unknown function.  Whereas some of these may code for
              structural proteins, many unidentified open reading frames are expected to
              encode important regulatory proteins involved with assembly or stabilization of
              functional protein complexes. Surprisingly, over the past years it has become
              clear that many of these putative proteins of unknown function do not have
              easily recognizable counterparts even in relatively closely related organisms. 
              Yet the functional identification of proteins involved in regulation or
              stabilization of physiological processes is of major importance in
              understanding the molecular physiology and metabolism of an organism as a
              function of its genomic information.  Fairly comprehensive cosmid interruption
              libraries that each contain 30-45 kb fragments of genomic DNA from the 
              yanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 into which transposons have been
              integrated at random sites will be used to identify new genes involved in
              photosynthesis. Such transposon interruption libraries are available for about
              90 different cosmids, together covering more than 80% of the Synechocystis sp.
              PCC 6803 genome.  Synechocystis strains lacking photosystem I, the major sink
              for electrons in the plastoquinone pool in the thylakoid membrane, will be
              transformed with these interruption libraries and transformants will be
              screened for high-light tolerance. Photosystem I-less strains are
              light-sensitive because over-reduction of the plastoquinone pool in the
              thylakoid membrane, which occurs at high light intensity, apparently is lethal.
               A second approach will use pseudorevertants (second-site mutants restoring a 
              particular phenotype that can be selected for positively). The two approaches
              (random inactivation of genes in a relatively small region of the genome
              resulting in positively selectable phenotypes, and pseudorevertant mapping
              using genomic restriction maps) together provide an excellent way to link
              specific open reading frames to specific functions. As this approach uses the
              appearance of specific phenotypes as the first selection criterion and as
              identification of the affected gene is a simple second step, this project
              provides a powerful means to identify unknown open reading frames affecting
              electron flow around the plastoquinone pool in thylakoid membranes. Because a
              clear phenotype exists, work on mutants that do not segregate wild-type and
              mutant genome copies or that do not show a phenotype (often a source of
              frustration in targeted reverse-genetics approaches) is essentially eliminated.
              This project will contribute significantly to the identification of new open
              reading frames whose products are involved in processes such as redox
              regulation of the plastoquinone pool or assembly and stability of photosystem
              II.  It is anticipated that the function of a number of unidentified genes
              relating to photosynthesis will be found that have not been identified by other
              means.
