Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Interfacial Chemistry Analysis of Wastepaper
               Deinking Processes with Fatty Alcohol Ethoxylates
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 14,  2001    
File        : a0111248

Award Number: 0111248
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2003     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $24852              (Estimated)
Investigator: Jan D. Miller jdmiller@mines.utah.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : University of Utah
	      1471 Federal Way
	      Salt Lake City, UT  84102    801/581-7200

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0313040   Water Pollution                         
Program Ref : 5944,9186,EGCH,
Abstract    :
              0111248
Miller

Description: This award is to support a collaborative project
              between Dr. Jan D. Miller, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, University
              of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah and Dr. Ahmed Yehia, Mineral Benficiation
              Department, Central Metallurgical Research and Development Institute, Helwan,
              Cairo, Egypt.  They plan to study the fundamental aspects of wastepaper
              deinking in the presence of modern surfactants, fatty alcohol ethoxylates.  The
              adsorption of these compounds on the surfaces involved in wastepaper processing
              will be studied at the molecular scale using soft-contact atomic force
              microscopy.  Understanding of interaction forces between wastepaper components
              in the presence of fatty alcohol ethoxylates, necessary for further improvement
              in deinking technology, will be achieved by colloidal probe atomic force
              microscopy study.  These results will be correlated with agglomeration tests,
              microcolumn flotation and bench-scale flotation of wastepaper pulp in a
              Denver-type cell.  Also the relationship between molecular structure of the
              fatty alcohol ethoxylates and the conditions necessary for optimization of
              industrial deinking processes will be established.

Scope: The project
              supports collaboration between two very active groups in the area of materials
              processing and beneficiation.  The University of Utah team is well qualified
              and has high-tech instrumentation facilities that are needed for the project,
              while the Egyptian team will conduct flotation experiments using model
              components and real wastepaper pulp, as well as analysis of fiber brightness,
              recovery and yield during flotation.  Dr. Yehia also has the means to test the
              developed technology in the industrial setting in Egypt.   The results will be
              helpful in dealing with the problem of wastepaper.  It is likely to have more
              economic impact in countries with few pulp resources such as Egypt.  The
              proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative research in areas
              of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under the US-Egypt Joint
              Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and engineers in both
              countries to carry out these cooperative activities. 

