Title       : Estimation of Spatial Autoregressive Econometric Models with Continous and
               Limited Dependent Variables
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : March 26,  2002     
File        : a0111380

Award Number: 0111380
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Daniel H. Newlon                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : July 15,  2001      
Expires     : June 30,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $212990             (Estimated)
Investigator: Lung-Fei Lee   (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Ohio State Univ Res Fdn
	      1960 Kenny Road
	      Columbus, OH  432101016    614/292-3732

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              The field of spatial econometrics is concerned with the use of statistical and
              econometric techniques to handle spatial effects in multiregional economic
              models and economic interaction of agents located in space. Proper spatial
              econometric models need to be developed to empirically validate modern spatial
              economic theories.  Further empirical developments are motivated by the growing
              importance of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) in regional and urban policy
              analyses.   This project develops econometric methodologies for the estimation
              and testing of complex spatial econometric models including spatial models with
              limited dependent variables. This project proceeds in several directions. 
              Statistical properties of some popular estimation methods in the literature are
              often assumed without detailed investigation into possibly distinctive features
              of a spatial econometric model.  While some claims are correct under certain
              spatial scenarios, they might not be so in others. The existing literature on
              spatial econometrics has mainly focused on models with small group interaction
              but models with large group interaction have many interesting potential
              applications.   This project continues the investigation of statistical
              properties of popular estimators for spatial autoregressive models with large
              group interaction.   Estimators for spatial models with large group interaction
              have quite different statistical properties from those of models with small
              group interaction.   This project explores alternative models to capture social
              interaction effects and addresses issues of random sample and possible
              incomplete spatial interactions in spatial models.  In addition, statistical
              procedures are developed for distinguishing spatial models from social effect
              models.

Spatial models with agents making interactive discrete choices are
              useful for research on innovation diffusion processes. The estimation of a
              discrete choice model with spatial interaction can be quite challenging as its
              likelihood function involves high dimensional integral. The dimension of
              integration can be as large as the number of sample observations.  In order to
              develop these models to their full capacities, computationally tractable
              methods must be developed. This project develops estimation methods based on
              simulation estimation methodologies. The effectiveness of various simulation
              estimation methods, which include the method of simulated maximum likelihood,
              the method of simulated EM algorithm, the method of simulated scores, and the
              Gibbs sampler, are investigated.   Statistical properties of those estimators
              are studied. In addition to estimation, test statistics for spatial
              correlations and diagnostics are also developed.  This project develops
              computationally tractable generalized method of moments for the estimation of
              spatial autoregressive models of any finite order with or without the presence
              of exogenous variables.   Asymptotic properties of such estimators are
              investigated.

Dynamic discrete choice models capture various notions of
              dynamic effects, state dependence, heterogeneity, and spurious correlation in a
              panel data setting.   This project generalizes existing models to incorporate
              possible contemporaneous and intertemporal spatial interaction effects. Spatial
              dynamics in discrete choices are of special interest.  Special attention is
              paid to the specification and estimation of such panel data models. Even though
              the development of econometric methods is the main focus of this project,
              empirical studies with panel data from developing countries illustrate the
              useful of the new models and the feasibility of the methodologies.


