Title       : Prosecuting Crimes Against Humanity in the International Criminal Tribunal for
               the Former Yugoslavia
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 10,  2001    
File        : a0111755

Award Number: 0111755
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $149960             (Estimated)
Investigator: John L. Hagan jhagan@abfn.org  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : American Bar Foundation
	      750 North Lake Shore Drive
	      Chicago, IL  606114403    312/988-6513

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This research will study the Office of the Prosecutor (OTP) of the International
              Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), the first truly
              international court for the prosecution of war crimes, genocide, breaches of
              the Geneva Conventions, and crimes against humanity. The research will use a
              structural theory of social movements to explain the emergence and evolution of
              the ICTY by focusing on political opportunities, mobilization structures, and
              cultural framing through human agency. Particular emphasis is placed on the
              tenure of Louise Arbour, the Chief Prosecutor, as she contributed elements of
              human agency and cultural reframing that were essential in utilizing
              opportunities presented by the post-cold war period and in mobilizing the
              organizational potential of the Tribunal. The research will involve archival
              work and two panel survey waves and in-person interviews with about 200
              respondents randomly sampled from 320 employees of the OTP. The survey and
              interviews will provide a demographic profile and ethnographic picture of how
              the Tribunal was established and how the investigation and trial teams operate
              as mobilizing structures in building personal commitment to organizational
              goals. The surveys and interviews is to provide a stringent test of the thesis
              that intense interpersonal exposure to mobilizing structures, in this case
              through the Tribunal work teams, is a key source of commitment to Tribunal
              goals involving the successful prosecution of war crimes and other crimes
              against humanity. The theme of this work is ultimately that the collective
              benefit of human agency is dependent on the way in which the leadership of
              figures such as Louise Arbour can be translated into the everyday and
              collective commitment of individuals like those who make up the investigation
              and trial teams of The Hague Tribunal. This is the first study to focus on the
              actual institutionalization and operation of the ICTY as "living law," that is,
              as "law in action."
