Title       : Community and Policing
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : July 23,  2001      
File        : a0111274

Award Number: 0111274
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Paul J. Wahlbeck                        
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2002       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25994              (Estimated)
Investigator: Steve K. Herbert skherb@u.washington.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Washington
	      3935 University Way NE
	      Seattle, WA  981056613    206/543-4043

NSF Program : 1372      LAW AND SOCIAL SCIENCES
Fld Applictn: 0116000   Human Subjects                          
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              This project examines the definitions of "community" that are mobilized by both
              urban neighborhood residents and by police in efforts to implement community
              policing. This contemporary reform movement seeks to reduce crime through more
              constructive interactions between citizens and the police. However, community
              policing assumes that there is a coherent "community" that can be organized in
              the name of crime control. In urban neighborhoods, this assumption is
              questionable.  Specifically, this research will explore four critical tensions
              inherent in community politics: tensions of difference, scale, obligation, and
              interaction. To try to organize community is to implicitly ask: Who is included
              and excluded? At what scale does the group organize? What obligations can
              individuals be asked to assume? And how does the community interact with other
              agencies of power? This project will study how these questions are addressed in
              a neighborhood in Seattle through intensive qualitative research with both
              residents and officers. The resident data will include in-depth interviews,
              focus group discussions, and observation of community group meetings. The
              police data will include ride-alongs and informal interviews with all officers
              with any responsibility for the study neighborhoods. Analysis of these data
              will reveal the implicit assumptions about community that shape how both
              residents and officers interact with one another. It will also reveal how the
              central tensions of community organizing are addressed and potentially resolved
              in these interactions.
