Title       : Molecular Mechanisms for Polar Growth in Pollen Tubes
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 15,  2002       
File        : a0111082

Award Number: 0111082
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Ronald M. Weiner                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 15,  2001 
Expires     : August 31,  2005     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $592000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Zhenbiao Yang zhenbiao.yang@ucr.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal Riverside
	      Office of Research Affairs
	      Riverside, CA  925210217    909/787-5535

NSF Program : 1132      CELLULAR ORGANIZATION
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 9109,BIOT,
Abstract    :
              The mechanisms by which cell polarity arises are fundamental to development and
              morphogenesis of multicellular organisms, particularly of plants because their
              cells are non-motile.  The goal of this project is to use tip-growing pollen
              tubes as a model system to elucidate how polarity arises during plant growth
              and development.  Work from prior NSF funding has demonstrated that a
              plant-specific Rho family GTPase, Rop, acts as a central switch to control
              polar growth in pollen tubes.  This switch is controlled by a positive feedback
              loop of Rop activation and recruitment at the plasma membrane that is initiated
              locally and amplified laterally by unknown mechanisms.  This feedback loop is
              inhibited globally by Rop GTPase activating proteins and guanine nucleotide
              dissociation inhibitors to generate a tip-focused gradient of active Rop at the
              plasma membrane.  Recent findings indicate that the active Rop specifies the
              apical plasma membrane domain for tip growth and then activates growth via the
              regulation of both dynamic tip F-actin and tip-focused cytosolic Ca2+
              gradients.  Two active Rop interacting proteins (ARIPs) have been identified
              that may link Rop to tip actin and Ca2+, respectively.  These advances have
              relied heavily on biochemical and cellular Rop signaling assays such as a
              fluorescence-based Rop activity assay, actin imaging, and complementary
              Arabidopsis and tobacco pollen tube systems that are suited for a multifaceted
              functional approach that includes genetics, transient expression of proteins,
              and microinjection.  This research will continue to use a similar approach but
              also develop new assays and methods to address several significant outstanding
              questions regarding Rop-dependent mechanisms for polar growth in pollen tubes:
              1) What is the functional interplay between Rop, Ca2+ and actin?  2) How does
              Rop regulate Ca2+  and actin?  3) What is the molecular basis underlying the
              Rop positive feedback loop?  Specific experiments will include identification
              of Rop effectors and potential factors that may activate and recruit Rop at the
              plasma membrane using interactive cloning and mutant isolation, alteration of
              specific components in Rop signaling using genetic and chemical methods, and
              analysis of changes in Rop recruitment and activation and in signaling targets
              such as tip actin and Ca2+.  This work should uncover key components and
              mechanisms in Rop-dependent signaling to pollen tube growth and may lead to new
              insights into how cells control development, polar growth and morphogenesis.
              


