Title       : US-Egypt Cooperative Research: Design, Fabrication, and Intelligent Control of
               Nanopositioning Devices
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : INT 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 29,  2001    
File        : a0111263

Award Number: 0111263
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Osman Shinaishin                        
	      INT  Office of Internatl Science &Engineering
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $25080              (Estimated)
Investigator: Sabri Cetinkunt scetin@uic.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Illinois Chicago
	      1737 W. Polk Street
	      Chicago, IL  60612    312/996-7000

NSF Program : X764      STATE-MOD 6
Fld Applictn: 0107000   Operations Research                     
Program Ref : 5944,9161,AMPP,
Abstract    :
              0111263
Cetinkunt

Description: This award is to support a collaborative
              project between Dr. Sabri Cetinkunt, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
              University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois and Dr. Magdy Abdelhameed,
              Design and Production Engineering Department, Ain Shams University, Cairo,
              Egypt.  The goal is to develop new control systems for a nano-positioner
              mechanism (piezoelectric tool post) used in high precision machining, specially
              when machining brittle materials such as mirrors, silicon wafers and ceramics. 
              The performance of control systems used in controlling the motion of a
              nano-positioner is crucial in maintaining a stable and accurate trajectory
              tracking.  These investigators will develop new control algorithms based on
              neural network architectures.  Specifically they will use Cerebellar Model
              Articulation Controller (CMAC) neural network architecture to improve the
              dynamic control performance.  They will also design and implement a hardware
              setup  for the mechatronics control system at the laboratory at Ain Shams
              University.  This will include a Nano-positioner mechanism, sensing system,
              power amplifier of the PZT actuator and the real time controller.

Scope: The
              project supports collaboration between two experienced investigators.  The
              laboratory at the University of Illinois at Chicago has the required
              facilities.  Dr. Cetinkunt has experience using neural net-based controllers
              for nanomachining and fast tool post machining operations.   The Egyptian
              collaborator has an active research program in the dynamic and control of
              manufacturing systems, and an active research program in mechatronics. The
              project will include exchange of graduate students between the two
              universities.  The proposal meets the INT objective of supporting collaborative
              research in areas of mutual interest.  This project is being supported under
              the US-Egypt Joint Fund Program, which provides grants to scientists and
              engineers in both countries to carry out these cooperative activities. 

