Title       : RUI: The Use of Anion Inhibitors to Investigate the Role of Chloride in Oxygen
               Evolution by Photosystem II of Higher Plants
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : MCB 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : April 7,  2003      
File        : a0111356

Award Number: 0111356
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Parag R. Chitnis                        
	      MCB  DIV OF MOLECULAR AND CELLULAR BIOSCIENCE
	      BIO  DIRECT FOR BIOLOGICAL SCIENCES          
Start Date  : September 1,  2001  
Expires     : August 31,  2004     (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $330000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Alice Haddy aehaddy@uncg.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of NC Greensboro
	      P.O. Box 26170
	      Greensboro, NC  274022465    336/334-5878

NSF Program : 1166      MOLECULAR BIOCHEMISTRY
Fld Applictn: 0510301   Structure & Function                    
Program Ref : 9178,9229,SMET,
Abstract    :
              The importance of chloride for the formation of molecular oxygen by higher
              plants will be investigated in this project.  Oxygen, which is required by all
              respiring life forms, is evolved as a byproduct of the conversion of light
              energy into chemical energy during photosynthesis.  The production of oxygen is
              therefore among the most important biochemical reactions for the support of
              life on earth.  Oxygen is formed by the oxidation of water at a cluster of
              manganese ions in Photosystem II, a membrane-bound protein complex.  Chloride
              is required as a cofactor for this catalysis.  The approach to be taken in this
              project will be to characterize the action of anions that inhibit oxygen
              evolution activity by competing with functional chloride.  Inhibitor studies
              are valuable in pointing out the characteristics of normal function.  Using
              photosystem II-enriched membranes from spinach, the effects of anion inhibitors
              such as F-, N3-, I-, NO2-, and NO3- on the enzyme kinetics of oxygen evolution
              activity will be analyzed.  These results will be compared with the effects of
              the anions on the electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra of the
              manganese cluster and other redox active centers.  Studies will also be
              undertaken to characterize some of the anions as activators of oxygen evolution
              along with chloride itself and bromide. These experiments will facilitate the
              interpretation of the effects of the anion inhibitors at a molecular level. 
              Since this project will be carried out at a primarily undergraduate university,
              this project will provide beginning researchers with laboratory experience,
              which is expected to influence their career choices.
