Title       : Combining Many Forecasts with General Loss Functions
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : SES 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : May 2,  2002        
File        : a0111238

Award Number: 0111238
Award Instr.: Continuing grant                             
Prgm Manager: Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong                 
	      SES  DIVN OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC SCIENCES    
	      SBE  DIRECT FOR SOCIAL, BEHAV & ECONOMIC SCIE
Start Date  : August 1,  2001     
Expires     : July 31,  2003       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $301413             (Estimated)
Investigator: Halbert L. White hwhite@ucsd.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
              Clive W. Granger  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Graham Elliott  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
              Allan G. Timmermann  (Co-Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : U of Cal San Diego
	      9500 Gilman Drive, Dept. 0934
	      La Jolla, CA  920930934    858/534-0246

NSF Program : 1320      ECONOMICS
Fld Applictn: 
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Economic time series are often difficult to predict and as a result different
              forecasters, faced with predicting the same economic variable, often come up
              with very different answers, reflecting their use of separate forecasting
              models, information sets and estimation methods. It is very rare for any
              individual forecast to systematically dominate the others. Many studies have
              found that a simple equal-weighted combination of forecasts produces better
              predictions than those generated by individual models. This project develops
              both theoretical tools and empirical techniques for explaining why simple
              equal-weighted forecasts do so well in practice and compares these with wider
              classes of combinations. 
      The research project develops estimation and
              forecast combination methods that can compete with the equal-weighted forecast
              combination. We establish conditions under which our proposed methods can be
              expected to produce improved forecast. The research project also considers the
              performance of different forecast combination methods under a host of economic
              circumstances, including prediction of economic variables in the near, medium
              and distant future, prediction of the entire probability distribution of an
              economic variable and prediction with loss functions that are tailored to
              individual policy makers or economic decision makers. The proposal also
              investigates the possibility of letting the forecast combination weights vary
              over time since some models may work better in some situations (e.g. when the
              economy is in a recession) and others may prove to be better in different
              circumstances (e.g. an expansion state).
      Forecast combination techniques
              have already been found to be useful in practical situations. This proposal
              provides further understanding of why this is so and explores various
              alternative approaches both theoretically and in practice, particularly when
              many forecasts are involved, and expands the approach in new ways. The interest
              in developing these methods is in part driven by practical concerns of the
              Principal Investigators that has come through interaction with the various
              Federal Reserve banks and other international organizations such as the IMF and
              through considering their needs and requests.  We expect to continue strong
              relations with these and other organizations through the grant period.


