Title       : Statistical Mechanics of Supercooled Liquids and the Glass Transition
Type        : Award
NSF Org     : CHE 
Latest
Amendment
Date        : August 9,  2001     
File        : a0111152

Award Number: 0111152
Award Instr.: Standard Grant                               
Prgm Manager: Celeste M. Rohlfing                     
	      CHE  DIVISION OF CHEMISTRY                   
	      MPS  DIRECT FOR MATHEMATICAL & PHYSICAL SCIEN
Start Date  : August 15,  2001    
Expires     : July 31,  2004       (Estimated)
Expected
Total Amt.  : $306000             (Estimated)
Investigator: Grzegorz Szamel szamel@lamar.colostate.edu  (Principal Investigator current)
Sponsor     : Colorado State University
	      
	      Fort Collins, CO  805232002    970/491-1101

NSF Program : 1956      STATISTICAL AND SIMULATIONS
Fld Applictn: 0000099   Other Applications NEC                  
Program Ref : 0000,OTHR,
Abstract    :
              Grzegorz Szamel of Colorado State University is supported by the Theoretical and
              Computational Chemistry Program to explore the fundamental statistical
              mechanical descriptions of the glass transition.  First, a novel computer
              simulation technique will be implemented to test the general theory of the
              glass transition proposed by Parisi and collaborators, which assumes that the
              glass transition is associated with the vanishing of one component of the
              supercooled liquid's entropy, the so-called configurational entropy.  Second,
              theoretical understanding of the glass transition will be advanced by
              elucidating the connection between mode-coupling theory and the Parisi
              approach.  In addition, a new extended mode-coupling theory will be developed
              that is applicable to systems with stochastic (Brownian) dynamics such as
              colloidal suspensions. 

Many useful polymer materials are flexible at room
              temperature.  Cooling these plastics below their glass transition temperature
              causes them to become brittle like glassy, amorphous materials with structures
              similar to that of a liquid but with some profoundly different properties.  
              Among the most interesting unsolved problems in physical chemistry are a theory
              for the glass transition and the nature of the glassy state.  The outcomes of
              this research project are expected to lead to new insights into glass behavior,
              which could have broad technological implications in advanced materials
              processing.
